Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 2 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1888)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclop02wilsuoft): the 1888 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 2 of 6 (Crane–Grimshaw), ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through END OF VOLUME II.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APPLETONS'

CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY


VOL  II.
CRANE-GRIMSHAW


tgyCisZL


A  P  P  L  E TONS


CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN
BIOGBAPHY


EDITED 11

JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN F I  S  K  I :


As  it  is  the  commendation of a  good  huntMnan  to  find  game  in a  widi wood,
ck>  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  Plato.


VOLUME  II.

CRANK-CIilMSll.WY


N  E  W Y  ()  H  K

D. APPLKTON AM) COMPANY

1,  8  and  5  BOND  8TBKF.T
1  8  9  9


Copyright,  1887,
By  D.  APPLETON AND  COMPANY.


LIST  OF PORTRAITS  ON  STEEL.


ARTurr

ENGRAVER

PAM

Grant,  Ulysses  S.

Wurtz

Hall

Front\

i  -J,trrt

Dix,  John  Adams

Bogardua

Ritrhie

Ami  !v<

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo

Munroe

Hall

M

Farraqut.  David  Glasgow

Brady

Hullyer

III

Fillmore,  Millard

Baker

Hall

m

Franklin,  Benjamin

Huplessis

Hall

M

Fulton,  Robert

West

Hall

M

Garfield,  James  Abram

Sarony

Hall

M

Greeley,  Horace

Bogardua

Hall

784

GREENE, tfATHANAEL

Trumbull

Hall

;.*>

SOME  OF  TUE  CHIEF  0ONTREBUTOB8
to  APPLETON81  CYCLOP.KIHA  OF  amkkk  an BIOGRAPHY.


Adams,  Charles  Kendall,

President  of  Cornell  University.

Agassiz,  Alexander,

Author  mid  Professor.

Allibone,  S.  Austin,

Author  "  Dictionary  of  Authors.  '

Amory,  Thomas  C,

Author  •'  Life  of  (ieneral  Sullivan."  etc.

Bancroft,  George,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."
Barrett,  Lawrence,

Author  "  Life  of  Edwin  Forrest."

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.

Bigelow,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Franklin,"  etc.

Boker,  George  H.,

Poet,  late  Minister  to  liussin.

Botta,  Mrs.  Vincenzo,

Author  and  Poet.

Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.
Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "Sermons  in  English  Churches."

Carter,  Franklin,

President  of  Williams  College.
Champlin,  John  Denison,

Author  "Cyclppedia  of  Painters  and  Paintings  ,"

Chandler,  William  E.,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Clarke,  James  Freeman,

Author  "'IVii  (inat  Keligions,"  etc.

Cooper,  Miss  Susan  Fenimore,

Author  ••  Rural  Hour*,"  etc.

Conway,  Moncure  D.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Coppee,  Henry,

Professor  in  Lehigh  University,  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.

Courtenay,  William  A.,
Mayor  of  Charleston,  s  r

Cullum,  Gen.  George  W.,

Author  "  HsglaCar  of  West  Point  tiradoatea,"  etc.

Curry,  Daniel,

Author  and  Kilitor.

Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  "  L'fe  of  James  Buchanan,"  ale.


Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.

Custer,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.,

Author  "  Boot*  and  Saddles."
Daniel,  John  W.,

United  States  Senator  from  \  irgula.

De  Costa,  Benjamin  F.,

Historical  Writer.

De  Lancey,  Edward  F.,

Kx-Presidcnl  Ueuealugical  and  Biographical  Soctetv.

Didier,  Eugene  L,

Author  '•  Life  of  Edgar  Allan  I

Dix,  Morgan,

Hector  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York.

Doane,  William  C,

I' K  Btohop  of  Albany.

Drake,  Samuel  Adams,

Author  "  Historic  Personages  of  Boston,"  etc.
Draper,  Lyman  OL,

•i.in  Historical  Sochrtv

Dupont,  CoL  Henry  A.,

of  Delaware,  late  U.  S.  Army.

Fiske,  John,

Aiitln-r  uiid  l*rofe«»OT.

Frothingham,  Octavius  B.,

Author  "Life  of  Qeorga  Kipley  "

Gayarre,  C.  E.  A  ,

Author  "  History  of  I<outsiana."

Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

MemlM-r  of  New  York  Bar.

Oilman,  Daniel  C,

I*resldent  of  Johns  Hopkins  Unlversttr

Goodwin,  Daniel,  Jr.,
Hsjsber  «>f  Illinois  Bar
Greely,  Gen.  A.  W.  TJ.  S.  A..

Author •  Time  Y«-sr»  of  Arrtk-  Service.  '

Green,  William  Mercer,

Lata  P.  K Bishop  of  Mississippi.

Greene,  Capt.  Francis  Vinton,

United  Stati-s  Engineer  Corjw

Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  ••  Franklin  in  France."  etc

Hay,  Col.  John,

Author  ' UN  af  Lincoln

Henry,  William  Wirt,

of  the  Virginia  Historical  Sortsry.

Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."  *•*


vm


SOME  OP  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Hilliard,  Henry  W.,

Late  Milliliter  to  Brazil.
Hoppin,  Professor  James  M.,
Of  Yale  College.

Howe,  Mrs.  Julia  Ward,

Author  "  Later  Eyries,"  etc.

Huntington,  William  R,

Rector  of  Grace  Church,  New  York.

Jay,  John,

Late  Minister  to  Austria.

Johnson,  Gen.  Bradley  T.,

Member  of  Murylund  Bur.

Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812,"  etc.
Johnston,  William  Preston,

President  of  Tulane  University.

Jones,  Horatio  Gates,

Vice-President  of  Pennsylvania  Historical  Society.

Jones,  J.  William,

Secretary  of  Southern  Historical  Society.

Jones,  William  Alfred,

Author  "  Character  and  Criticism,"  etc.

Kobbe,  Gustav,

Musical  Editor  of  New  York  "Mail  and  Express."

Lathrop,  George  Parsons,

Author  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne,"  etc.

Lincoln,  Robert  T.,

Ex-Secretary  of  War.

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  "  Life  of  Hamilton."

Long,  Col.  Charles  Chaille,

Late  of  the  Egyptian  Army.

Lowell,  James  Russell,

Late  Minister  at  Court  of  St.  James.

MacVeagh,  Wayne,

Ex-Attorney-General,  U.  S.

Mathews,  William,

Author  "  Orators  and  Oratory,"  etc.

McMaster,  John  Bach,

Author  "  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."

Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor,"  etc.

Norton,  Charles  Eliot,

Professor  in  Harvard  University.

O'Neal,  Edward  A.,

Governor  of  Alabama.

Parker,  Cortlandt,

Member  of  New  Jersey  Bar.

Parkman,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac,"  "  French  in  Canada."  etc.

Phelan,  James,  M.  C,

Editor  Memphis  "Avalanche,"  Tenn.

Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Pierrepont,  Edwards,

Ex  Attorney-General  United  States.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.


Porter,  Gen.  Horace,

Late  of  Gen.  Grant's  Staff.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  J.,

Author  and  Poet.

Puron,  Dr.  Juan  G.,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.
Read,  Gen.  J.  Meredith,

Late  Minister  to  QfWQS,

Reid,  Whitelaw,

Editor  of  New  York  "  Tribune."
Ricord,  Judge  Frederick  W.,

New  Jersey  Historical  Society.

Robinson,  Ezekiel  G.,

President  of  Brown  University.

Romero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  the  United  State**.

Sanborn,  Miss  Kate,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Schurz,  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Shea,  John  Gilmary,

Author  and  Editor.

Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  United  States  Army.

Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  Press."

Spencer,  Jesse  Ames,

Author  and  Professor.

Stedman,  Edmund  C,

Author  •'  Poets  of  America,"  etc.
Stiles,  Henry  R.,  M.  D.,

Author  "  History  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y."

Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,

Author  "Songs  of  Summer,"  etc.

Stone,  William  L,

Author  "  Life  of  Red  Jacket,"  etc.

Strong,  William,

Ex-Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Stryker,  William  S.,

Adjutant-General  of  New  Jersey.

Tucker,  J.  Randolph,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.

Waite,  Morrison  R.,

Chief  Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,
Author  and  Editor.

Washburne,  Elihu  B.,

I.nte  Minister  to  France.

WeUing,  James  C,

President  of  Columbian  University.

Whitman,  Walt,

Author  "  Leaves  of  Grass,"  etc.
Wilson,  Gen.  Jas.  Grant,

President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic.

Winthrop,  Robert  C,

Ex-United  Suites  Senutor.


To  the  aboce  list  other  names  will  be  added  as  the  work  progresses.


Amonq  the  Contributor,  to  the  *<co„d  vol„m<  of  «  ,|/7,/,w  iyeL>j.<,dia  of  American  Diogrm-

phy  "  are  the  follnting


8.  Austin  Allibone,  LL.  D.,

Author  Of  "  Dictionary  of  Authors."
Kvi:i!i;i •■!'. Al.KXANDER II.,
KVKRKTT,  K D WARD.

Oen.  Christopher  C.  Andrews,

Member  of  the  Minnesota  Bur.
GlLFILLAN,  .Iamks,

Goodrich,  Aaron.

Lawrence  Barrett.
Forbest,  Edwin.

Marcus  Benjamin,

Fellow  of  the  Chemical  Society.
Drapkr.  John  William,
Gibbs.  Geoboe,
and  other  articles.

Bev.  Beverley  R.  Betts,

Editor  "New  York  Genealogical  nccorJ."
Eioe.vbrodt  Family,
Glass,  Francis.

Arthur  E.  Bostwick,  Ph.  D.
Emmet,  Thomas  Addis,
Girard,  Stephen,
and  other  articles.

James  C.  Brogan.
Articles  on  Roman  Catholic  Clergymen.

Mrs.  Isa  Carrington  Cabell.
FLOYD,  John  Hivhanan,
Fries.  John.
and  other  articles.

John  D.  Champlin,  Jr.,

Author  of  "Cyclopaedia  of  Painters  and  Paintings.
Articles  on  American  Painters.

William  E.  Chandler,

K\-S.rntury  of  the  Navy.
Gilmobe,  Joseph  A.

Titus  M.  Coan,  M.  D.,

Authoi.

Articles  on  American  .Missionaries.

Moncure  D.  Conway,
Author.
DAB**?,  Viroinius,
Daniki..  John  .Moncure.

William  A.  Courtney,

Mayor  of  (*hnrl<-»ton.  S.  C.

De  Saussube,  William  G.


Rev.  Daniel  Curry,  D.  D.,

Author  and  Editor.
ArtI.II. on BlMMttOT  THE  METUODIM
COPAL  Cm  it n.

Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.  Custer,

Author  of ■  |t,„.t.  nnd  Saddle.."
CUSTER,  QftOBOl  Abjutbi

Maturin  L.  Delafield.

AbTICLSBOJI  thi.  DbLAFIBXO  Family.
Edward  F.  De  Lancey,

Plwkbal  V-«  Wit  (Jcnealogical  SocJrlr

Thk  [>i  Laxch  Pamily,

Thk  Floyd  and  Ployd-Jobbi  Family.

Eugene  L  Didier,

Author,
Garrett,  John  Work,
Gibbons,  .1  ibbs,  Cabdival.

Bev.  Morgan  Dix,  D.  D.,

Rector  >»f  Trinity  Church.  New  York
I);x,  John  Adams.

Col.  Henry  A.  Du  Pont.

I»l PoMT  Dl  NrMOVBS,

Dv  I'o.M.  Samuel  Francis.

Ellsworth  Eliot,  M  D.
Rliot,  Ret.  John.
Eliot,  Rev.  Jared.

John  Fiske,

Author  and  IVofewor.

Thk  Faibpax  Family,

Franklin.  Kknjamin,
Pulton,  Robebt,

GaUE,  THOM  it

ami  oilier  «rti( •!«■«.

Bev.  Octavius  B.  Froth  ingham,

Author  of  •■  Life  <>f  (u»r,T  Hiplcr."
Pi  i.i.i  k.  SaBAU  Makoakkt.

Capt.  Francis  V.  Greene,  U.  S.  A.,

Author  of Tli'-  Yuk»t>urg  Campaign."
Franklin.  Willi  a

A  P.  C.  Griffin,

of  i he  IV-ton  niblk  Library
I'ki.m  IV,  I'lliMP.
(BY,  Ei.itRHMiE.

Jacob  Henry  Hager,

.J..iiriuii'»i  ninl  Traind-v
D KINSON, DaNII  I.  M'r.vBNB,

i »nn  FoiNitt.xTEB,
an. I  Other  art  i.


z


I  "NTUIBUTORS  TO  THE  SECOND VOLUME.


Henry  W.  Hilliard,

Late  U.  S.  Minister  to  Brazil.

Fitzpatrick,  Benjamin.

Prof.  James  M.  Hoppin.
Foote,  Andrew  Hull.

Mrs.  Julia  Ward  Howe.

Crawford,  Thomas.

Frank  Huntington.
Cushman,  Charlotte  Saunders,
Dallas,  Alexander  James,
and  other  articles.

Oliver  Johnson,

Author  of "Sketches  of  the Anti-Slavery Move-
ment."

Garrison,  William  Lloyd.

Rossiter  Johnson,

Author  of  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812  "

Farraout,  David  Glasgow,
Giddinos,  Joshua  Reed,
and  other  articles.

Horatio  Gates  Jones,

Member  of  the  Philadelphia  Bar.

Graff,  Frederick,

Grant,  William  Kobertson.

Rev.  J.  Ryland  Kendrick,  D.  D.(

Ex-President  of  Vassar  College.

Articles  on  Baptist  Clergymen.
Samuel  A.  King,

Afironaut

Donaldson,  Washington  H.

Gustav  Kobbe,

Musical  Editor  of  the  New  York  "Mall."
Articles  on  Musicians.

George  Parsons  Lathrop,

Author  of  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne."
Dana,  Richard  Henry,
Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo.

Josiah  Granville  Leach,

Member  of  the  Philadelphia  Bar.
Articles  on  Pennsylvanians,

Neil  Macdonald.

Elgin,  James  Bruce.  Earl  of,
Galt,  Alexander  Tilloch,
and  other  Canadian  statesmen.

Rev.  S.  E.  Ochsenford.
Articles  on  Lutheran  Clergymen.

Francis  Parkman,  LL.  D.,

Author  of  "The  French  in  Canada."
Frontenac,  Louis,  Count,

William  Walter  Phelps,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Garfield,  James  Abram.

Admiral  D.  D.  Porter.
Decatur,  Stephen.


Gen.  Horace  Porter,

Formerly  of  (Jen.  Grant's  Staff

Grant,  Ulysses  S.
Juan  G.  Puron,  M.  D. ,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.

Articles  on  South  and  Central  Americans.
Whitelaw  Reid,

Editor  of  the  New  York  "Tribune."
Greeley,  Horace.

Frederick  W.  Ricord,

Librarian  of  the  New  Jersey  Historical  Society.

Edwards,  John,
Frelinghuysen,  Frederick  T..
Frelixghuysex,  Theodore.

Rt.  Rev.  Edmund  de  Schweinitz,

Moravian  Bishop.

Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Moravian  Church,

Miss  Esther  Singleton.
Damrosch,  Leopold,
Gorges,  Sir  Ferdinando,
and  other  articles.

Rev.  Jesse  Ames  Spencer,  D.  D. .

Author  of  "  History  of  the  United  States."
Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal Church.

Henry  R.  Stiles,  M.  D.,

Author  of  "  History  of  Brooklyn ."
Ellsworth,  Oliver,
glllmore,  quincy  adams.

WiUiam  L.  Stone,

Author  of  "  Life  of  Brant."
Fraser,  SlMOX,
Gates,  Horatio.

Charles  Burr  Todd,

Author  of  "  Life  of  Joel  Barlow."
Dwight,  Timothy.

Charles  Dudley  Warner,

Author  and  Journalist.

Fiske,  Daniel  Willard.

John  W.  Weidemeyer.
Cushing,  Caleb,
Fry,  William  Henry,
and  other  articles.

Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson,

Author  and  Editor.

Dana,  Richard  Henry,  Jr..
Drake,  Joseph  Rodman,
Fillmore,  Millard,
Grant,  Anne,  of  Laggan,
and  other  articles.

John  Laird  Wilson,

Author  and  .lotmialist.

Frobishf.r,  Martin,
Gaines.  Edmund  Pendleton,

and  other  articles.

Robert  C.  Winthrop,

Ex-U.  S.  Senator  from  Massachusetts
Granger,  Fran<  is,
Granger,  Gideon.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


CRANK


CRANE,  Anne  Monrtire  (SeemCller),  author,
b.  in  Baltimore,  7  Jan.,  1888;  d.  in  Stuttgart.  tier-
many.  10  Dec..  1872.  In  1869  she  married  August
Seemilller,  of  New  York,  and  in  1871  went  to  iJer-
maiiy.  hoping  to  derive  benefit  from  the  medicinal
waters  there,  but  did  not  live  to  return.  Her  first
novel,  "  Emily  Chester"  (Boston,  1864),  was  anony-
mous. She  subsequentlv  published  "  Opportunity"
(1867),  and  "  Reginald  Archer  "  (1871).  She  wrote
lor  periodicals,  and  a  collection  of  her  miscellane-
ous essays  was  published  in  1873.

CRANE,  Bruce,  painter,  b.  in  New  Vork  in
1857.  He  studied  under  A.  H.  Wyant  in  New
York,  where  he  first  exhibited  in  the  National
academy  in  1879.  His  studio  is  at  Summit,  N.  J.
His  principal  works  are  "  Old  Mill- Pond  on  Long
Island"  (1879);  "On  Shrewsbury  River,"  "After
the  Rain  "  (1880) ;  "  Moor  in  Nantucket."  "  Inlet
on  the  Jersey  Shore"  (1881);  "Suburban  Road  at
Easthampton,"  "  Blossom  Time  "(1882) ;  "  Winter  "
(1888);  "The  Waning  Year,"  "Indian  Summer"
(1885) ;  "  Land  Near  the  Sea"  "  November
Woods,"  "Summer "(1886).

CRANE,  Ichabod  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey;
d.  in  Port  Richmond,  Staten  Island,  N.  Y,  5  Oct.,
1857.  He  was  appointed  second  lieutenant  of  ma-
rines in  January,  1809 :  captain  of  3d  artillery  in
April,  1812 ;  brevet  major  in  November,  1813 ;  major
in  the  4th  artillerv  in  September,  1825 ;  lieutenant-
colonel  in  2d  artillery,  3  Nov.,  1832;  colonel  in  1st
artillery,  27  June,  1843;  and  governor  of  the  Mili-
tary asylum  at  Washington  in  May,  1*51,  in  which
latter  capacity  he  acted  till  November,  1853.— His
son.  Charles  Henry,  surgeon-general,  U.  S.  A.,  b,
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  19  July,  1825 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  10  Oct.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1844,  and  studied  medicine  at  Harvard  medical
school.  In  1847  he  passed  the  examination  as  act-
ing assistant  surgeon,  and  was  at  once  ordered  to
Mexico,  and,  after  attaining  the  full  grade  of  as-
sistant surgeon,  served  with  the  army  of  invasion
till  July,  1S4H.  During  the  ten  years  that  followed
he  was  stationed  in  almost  every  state  ami  terri-
tory of  the  Union,  and  was  repeatedly  in  the  Bald
with  expeditionary  forces  against  the  Indian-,  nota-
bly that  against  the  Rogue  river  trilie  in  1858.  Be
was  promoted  surgeon, -Jl  May.  1881,  and  in  Feb-
ruary, 1868,  was  assigned  to  duty  as  medical  direc-
tor, department  of  Key  West.  On  30  June  he  was
appointed  medical  director.  Department  of  the
South,  In  September,  ]*tM.  ha  was  placed  on  duty
in  the  surgeon-general's  office  in  Washington,  anil
vol.  »i. — 1


became  assistant  surgeon-general,  with  the  rank  of
colonel.  88  July.  1888 <m  the  retirement  ,,f8utg>
Gen,  Barnes.  :{  July.  18*2.  |,r  U.-ame -
eral  of  the  l*.  S.  army. He  received  btereta
dude  the  rank  of  bngadler-fOUetul in  the  regular
service  at the  close  of  the  civil  war.
most noteworthy characteri»ti<-s  *fj the  facility
with  which  he  managed  the  complicated  roul
his  office,  and  the  good  judgment  that  he  brought
to  bear  in  reconciling  the  often  conflicting  interests
of  the  army  medical  corps  when  it  was  at  its  nu-
merical maximum  during  the  civil  war.

CRANE,  Jonathan  Tnwnley,  clergvman.  h.  in
Connecticut  Parma,  near  Kliiahrrth  N. .)..  18  Jnaa
1819;  d.  in  Port  Jenrfc,  N.  V..  1«;  Pel...  1880.  Ha
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1M:{.  in  IH44  was
licensed  to  preach,  and  was  admitted  t<>  t!
Jersev  annual  conference  of  the  Methodist  1
pal  church  in  1845.  In  1846  he  was  stationed  aa
pastor  at  Hope,  Warren  co..  N.  .1.,  and  in  If
Bel viderv  ill  the  same  state.  In  l*-!*-'!*  he  preached
at  Orange,  N.  .1..  and  in  June,  1k4<»,  whs  .
president  of  the  Conference  seminary  at  IN-nuing-
ton.  N.  J.,  which  ofliee  he  resigned  in  \>OH  to  as-
sume the  pastorate  of  Trinity  church,  JatSM  Citv.
In  1868-'72  ha  was  pmatding  alder  of  the  Newark,
N.  J.,  district.  Dr.  Crane  was  a  delegate  to  the
genera]  oonf erenoes of  ihhi.  1881  186$  and  ISA
lie  was  an  able  preacher,  contributed  largely  to
the  periodical  literature  of  hfej  church,  and  pasV
haheaMBam7  on  Duneine;"  (1848);  "The  itight
Wav,  or  Practical  Lauturai  OB  the  Decalogue"
(1858);  "Popular  Amusements"  (1869):  "Arts  of
Intoxication  **  (1870);  "Holiness  the  Birthright
of  all  God's  Children"  <1S74);  and  "Methodism
and  it-  Methods"  (1878}

CRANE.  William,  merchant,  h.  in  Newark.  N.
J..  6 May.  171HI;  d.  in Baltimore. Md
1866. In  Richmond.  Va..  where  he  resided  from
1HU  till  1884)  he  was  distinguished  f,.r  hi*  zeal  in
promoting  the  religious  welfare  of  the  colored  peo-
plt, He  ».v  the  Bounder  of  the  Richmond  Afri-
can Baptist  missionarv  society  which  sent  out  I>ott
Cary  to  Liberia,  and  he tangh!  the  first  acb
hlack-  in  Richmond,  -md was  one  of  the  origina-
tor- <.f  Richmond  ooDasja.  giving  to  it  fjljOOO
benefactions  to  other  religious  ol  •  large,

111-  ion,  William  (arev,  clergyman.  1>.  ii
BOnd, Va.. 17 Manli.  1816;  d.  ill Indepen  •:

•7  Pefx,  1886.  «ua  graduated  st  Coluinhian
college  and  at  Hamilton  theological  seminary.  He
was  ordained  in  1838  and  was  pastor  of  a  Baptist


CRANE


CRAVEN


church  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  from  1839  till  1842,
and  afterward  pastor  of  various  other  churches  in
IfiasiafippJ  and  Texas.  He  has  been  president  of
Kiariasippi  female  college,  of  Semple  Broad  us  col-
lege, of  Mount  Lebanon  college,  and  of  Baylor
university,  Independence.  Texas,  to  which  he  was
called  in  lS(i:{,  retaining  the  place  till  his  death.
Upon  the  removal,  in  1885,  of  the  names  of  Baylor
university  and  Baylor  female  college  to  Waco  and
Belton,  respectively,  the  property,  buildings,  etc.,
were  left  at  Independence,  and  were  thenceforth
called  "  Crane  college  "  in  honor  of  Dr.  Crane.  He
was  regarded  as  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  schol-
arly divines  of  his  denomination.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Literary  Discourses,"  a  "  Life  of  Sam
Houston,"  and  other  works.

CRANE,  William  Montgomery,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  1  Feb.,  1776;  d.  in
Washington,  18  March,  1846.  He  was  a  son  of
Gen.  William  Crane,  an  officer  in  the  Revolutionary
army,  who  was  wounded  at  Quebec,  and  died  in
1814.  William  Montgomery  entered  the  navy  as
a  midshipman  in  1799,  became  lieutenant  in  1803,
commander  in  1813,  and  captain,  22  Nov.,  1814.
While  in  command  of  the  brig  "  Vixen  "  he  distin-
guished himself  in  the  attack  on  Tripoli.  He  was
in  the  "  Chesapeake "  when  she  was  attacked  by
the  "  Leopard.  In  July,  1812,  while  in  command
of  the  brig  "  Nautilus,  he  was  captured  by  the
frigate  "  Southampton,"  and,  on  being  exchanged,
was  ordered  to  the  lakes,  where,  in  command  of
the  "  Madison  "  and  "  Pike,"  in  Chauncey's  squad-
ron, he  served  until  the  end  of  the  war.  In  1827,
in  the  flag-ship  "  Delaware,"  he  commanded  the
Mediterranean  squadron,  acting  as  joint  commis-
sioner with  Mr.  Offley,  U.  S.  consul  at  Smyrna,  to
open  negotiations  with  the  Ottoman  government.
He  was  appointed  navy  commissioner  in  1841,  and
in  1842  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ordnance  and  hy-
drography. He  died  by  his  own  hand.

CRANEIELD,  Edward,  governor  of  New
Hampshire,  d.  in  England  in  1704.  He  was  select-
ed by  Robert  Mason  to  become  governor  of  New
Hampshire  in  1682,  and  gave  up  lucrative  employ-
ment in  England  with  hopes  of  bettering  his  for-
tune. In  the  administration  of  his  office  he  was
exceedingly  arbitrary,  and  in  his  greed  for  money
he  attempted  to  tax  the  people  without  their  con-
sent. This  action  was  strongly  resented,  and  com-
plaints referred  to  the  board  of  trade  were  decided
against  him.  Associations  were  formed  for  mu-
tual support  in  resisting  the  collection  of  illegal
taxes.  At  Exeter,  the  collector  was  driven  off
with  clubs,  and  fanners'  wives  threatened  to  scald
the  officer  if  he  should  attempt  to  attach  prop-
erty in  the  house.  Gov.  Cranfield  forbade  the
usual  exercise  of  church  discipline,  and,  in  his
efforts  to  intimidate  the  clergy,  prosecuted,  con-
demned, and  imprisoned  the  Rev.  Joshua  Moody.
Religious  worship  was  almost  entirely  broken  up
in  the  colony.  In  1685  he  returned  to  England,
and  afterward  became  collector  of  Barbadoes.

CRANSTON,  Henry  Young,  lawyer,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  9  Oct..  1789;  d.  there,  12  Feb.,  1864.
He  received  a  limited  education,  and  after  follow-
ing a  trade,  studied  law,  and  in  1809  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  From  1818  till  1833  he  was  clerk  of
the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  he  was  a  member
of  the  state  conventions  held  for  framing  and  im-
proving the  constitution  of  Rhode  Island.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature  from  1827
till  1843,  and  was  repeatedly  elected  its  presiding
officer.  Subsequently  he  was  sent  to  congress  and
served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,  1847,  after
which  he  was  again  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-


ture and  for  three  years  its  speaker,  lie  retired
from  public  life  in  1854,  but  continued  his  n-si-
dence  in  Newport  until  his  death. — His  brother,
Robert  Bonnie,  b.  in  Newport.  R.  I.,  14  Jan.,
1791 ;  d.  there,  27  Jan.,  1873,  received  a  public-
school  education  and  later  was  employed  in  the
collection  of  internal  revenue.  For  a  time  he  was
sheriff  of  Newport,  and  then  was  elected  as  a  whig
to  congress,  serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3
March,  1843.  He  was  a  banker  for  several  years,
was  postmaster,  and  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-
ture, serving  for  one  term  as  speaker.  Subse-
quently he  was  sent  to  congress  as  a  "  law-and-
order  whig,"  and  served  from  6  Dec.,  1847,  till  3
March,  1849.  Later  he  was  elected  mayor  of  New-
port, but  declined  the  office.  He  bequeathed  $75,-
000  to  those  poor  of  Newport  "  who  are  too  honest
to  steal  and  too  proud  to  Deg."

CRANSTON,  John,  president  of  Rhode  Island,
d.  12  March,  1680.  He  appears  to  have  had  some
knowledge  of  law,  and  was  for  many  years  attor-
ney-general of  the  colony,  first  holding  this  office
under  Nicholas  Easton  in  1654.  In  1672  he  be-
came deputy-governor,  and  continued  in  that  ca-
pacity until  his  election  as  governor  in  1678,  in
which  office  he  remained  until  his  death.  During
King  Philip's  war  he  was  selected  to  command,
all  the  militia  of  the  colony,  and  he  was  the  first
that  ever  held  the  rank  of  major-general  in  the
colony.  —  His  son,  Samuel,  president  of  Rhode
Island,  d.  in  1727.  He  became  governor  in  1698,
and  was  thirty  times  successively  chosen  to  that

glace,  holding  the  office  until  his  death.  Gov.
ranston  held  his  place  probably  longer  than  any
other  man  that  has  ever  been  subjected  to  the  test
of  an  annual  election.  He  also  held  the  highest
military  office  that  it  was  possible  to  occupy  in  the
colony,  and  his  great  firmness  in  times  of  unex-
ampled trial  is  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  his
great  popularity  and  successful  administrations.

CRAFO,  Henry  H.,  governor  of  Michigan,  b.  in
Dartmouth,  Mass.,  24  May,  1804 ;  d.  in  Flint,
Mich.,  23  July,  1869.  He  early  removed  to  New
Bedford,  where'  he  resided  until  1857,  when  he  set-
tled in  Michigan.  For  many  years  he  was  exten-
sively engaged  in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  lum-
ber, and  also  held  important  political  offices.  He  was
elected  mayor  of  Flint,  subsequently  served  in  the
state  senate,  and  was  twice  chosen  governor  of  the
state,  holding  that  office  from  1864  till  1868.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  rendered  important  services
to  the  cause  of  the  Union.

CRAVEN,  Charles,  colonist,  d.  in  1754.  He
was  secretary  of  the  proprietors  of  South  Carolina,
and  governor  of  the  colony  from  1712  till  1716.
During  1712  he  was  ordered  to  sound  Port  Royal
river,  and  it  is  supposed  that  he  then  founded
Beaufort.  Three  years  later  all  of  the  Indians
from  Cape  Fear  to  St.  Mary's  river  combined  un-
der the  leadership  of  the  Yemassees  for  the  pur-
pose of  destroying  the  colony  on  Ashley  river.
Gov.  Craven  at  once  proclaimed  martial  law,  laid
an  embargo  on  all  ships  to  prevent  the  departure
of  men  or  provisions,  and  at  the  head  of  1,200
men,  part  of  whom  were  faithful  blacks,  met  the
Indians  in  a  series  of  desperate  encounters  and
finally  drove  them  beyond  the  Savannah*

CRAVEN,  Thomas  Tingev,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Dec.  1808 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  88  Aug.,  1887.  He  was  the  oldest  son  of
Tunis  Craven,  of  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  his  wife,
Hannah  Tingey,  daughter  of  Com.  Thomas  Tingev,
also  of  the  U.  S.  navy.  Young  Craven  attended
school  until  1822,  when  he  entered  the  navy,  and
from  1823  till  1828  served  in  the  Pacific  squadron


i  1;  \


I


on  tin-  "United  State*"  mid  on  the  "iv.-icock."
In  1828  1k«  joined  the  "Erie,"  of  the  West  India
■quadrat),  m  sailing-master,  and  took  part  in  the
capture  "f  tin-  pirate  ••  FederaL"  After  being
commissioned  lieutenant  in  i s:;o.  he  neat  three

i in  orniaing  on  the M Boxer,  and  m  iv
was  attached  to  the  receiving-ship  at New  York,
after  whieli  he  joined  the  "John  Adams." In
he  eoiiinianded  the  " Vinoennea,"  ('apt.  Wi'

-hip  in  theantarotic  exploring  expedition.  Me
then  served  on  the  "  Iioxer. '  ••  Fulton."  "  Monroe,"
"Macedonia,"  and  "Porpoise,"  principally  in  the
Afrioan  squadron,  after  whieli,  during  lH4<i,  lie  was
attached  to  the  naval  rendezvous  in  New  York,  lie
then  served  on  the  "Ohio,"  in  the  Pacific  sqnad-
108,  and  on  t ho  "  Independence,"  in  the  Mediter-
ranean squadron,  returning  home  in  January,  1850.
In  the  following  July  ho  was  made  commandant
of  midshipmen  in  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  An-
napolis. l>eeoming  commander  in  December,  1808,
and  remaining  at  the  academy  until  June,  1855.
After  commanding  the  "  Congress,"  of  the  Mediter-
ranean squadron,  for  several  vears,  he  was  ordered
to  resume  his  post  at  Annapolis.  In  October,  1860,
he  was  detached  from  this  place,  and,  after  a  short
time  spent  in  recruiting-service  in  Portland,  Me.,  was
commissioned  captain  in  June,  1861,  and  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  Potomac  flotilla.  In  the
autumn  of  1H(>1  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
••  Brooklyn,"  participating  in  the  capture  of  New
Orleans  and  subsequent  operations  on  the  Missis-
sippi. He  was  made  commodore  in  July,  1862,
ana  during  the  subsequent  years  of  the  civil  war
commanded  the  "  Niagara,"  on  the  coast  of  Eng-
land and  France.  In  September,  1866,  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  navy-yard  at  Mare  isl-
and. Col.,  where  he  received,  in  October  of  the
same  year,  his  commission  as  rear-admiral,  and
continued  there  until  August,  1868,  when  he  as-
sumed command  of  the  Pacific  squadron.  In  De-
cember, 1869,  he  was  retired,  but  continued  on  duty
in  Sari  Francisco  until  that  office  was  dispensed
with.  He  afterward  resided  at  Kittery  Point,  Me.
— His  brother,  Alfred  Wingate,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  20  Oct.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Chis-
wick,  England,  29  March,  1879,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1829,  studied  law  and  then  civil  en-
gineering. In  1887  he  was  associated  with  Gen.
George  b.  Greene  on  important  professional  work
near  Charleston  and  elsewhere.  He  was  a  SUCOSSB-
ful  railroad  engineer  and  manager,  and  rapidly
rose  to  the  first  rank  in  his  profession.  Mr.  <  'raven
berame  engineer  commissioner  to  the  Croton  water
board  of  New  York  on  its  organization  in  1849.  and
continued  in  that  capacity  until  1868.  Awning  the
many  works  projected  and  carried  out  during  these
years  under  his  supervision  were  the  building  of  the
large  reservoir  in  Central  park,  the  enlargement
of  pipes  across  High  Bridge,  and  the  construction
of  the  reservoir  in  Hoyd's  Corners.  Putnam  BO,
He  also  caused  to  be  made  an  accurate  survey  of
Croton  valley,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining  its  capa-
city for  furnishing  an  adequate  water-supply,  and
was  largely  instrumental  in  securing  the  passage
of  the  first  law  establishing  a  general  sewerage
system  for  New  York  city.  Later  he  was  associated
with  Allan  Campbell  a<  a  commissioner  in  the
work  of  building  the  underground  railway  extend-
ing along  4th  avenue  from  the  Grand  osntral

ile|H.t  to  Harlem  river. He  was  one  of  the  original

members  of  the  American  society  of  civil  engineers,
a  director  for  many  years,  and  its  preeidenl  from
November, 1888,  tili November,  187L— Another

brother.  Tunis  Augustus  Mucrioiiotnrli.  naval
officer,  i».  In  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  11  Jan..  isi:{;  d.  in


Mobile  bay.  .\ hi..  :,  Aug*  1864. lie  entered  the  V
S.  imw  as  B  midshipman  in  Kebruai
until  1887  served  in  different  reseekv

he  was  at  his  own  request  attach.  .|  •

survey. In  imi  be  wr*  mode  ,t  and

served  in  the  "Falmouth"  until  1848,  vfo

was  transferr.il  to  the  -North  Carolina."
years  later  he  was  connected  with  the  I'
ron  as  lieutenant  of  the  "Hah."  and  participated
in  theconouest  of  California.  In  1M49  he  returned
net  and  for- some  time  afterward  was  saarmlaled
in  the  work  of  the  coast-sun  ci.  having  command
of  various  vessels  attached  to  this  l.un-au. He  com-

mended  the  Atrato  expedition  which  left  New
York  in  October,  1857.  for  the  purpost
ing  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  by  way  of  the

river  for  a  ship-canal. Later  hs  command.-d  the

"  Mohawk,"  stationed  off  the  enact  ofOnba  to  inter-
cept slavers, on  one  ooonehm  hs  oaptarcd  a  brig

containing  5<M»  negroes,  who  wen-  afterward  BUM  t.
Africa  and  Unerased. He  also  saved  tin  i
a  Spanish merchant
vessel,  for  which  he
was  presented  by  the

queen  <»f  Spain  with  a
gold  medal  and  a  di-
ploma About  the
same  time  the  New-
York  board  of  un-
derwriters presented
Mrs.  Craven  with  a
silver  sendee  of  plate
for  the  efficient  serv-
ices rendered  to  mer-
chant vessels  while  at
sea  by  her  husband.
At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  was  .

placed in  command y,
of the "Crusader."
and  was  instrumental
in preserving  for  the  Union  the  fortress  at  Key
\Ve>t. In  April.  1861,  be  was  made  a  commander,

and  ordered  to  the  charge  of  the  "Tuscan**,

in  search  Of  Confederate  cruisers.  While  so  oc-
cupied he  succeeded  in  blockading  the  "  Sumter."
so  that,  after  it  hod  U-eii  kept  a  close  prisoner
for  two  months  in  Gibraltar,  the  officer*  and
deserted  her.  <»n  his  return  home,  he  was
command  of  the  monitor  "Tecnmssh,"  and  di-
rected to  join  the  James  river  flotilla.  A  few
months  later  he  was  attached  t<>  Admiral  Far-
ragut's  squadron,  then  collected  for  the  attack  <>n

Mobile, In  the  subsequent  battls  the  "Teoumsefa  "

was  given  the  post  of  honor,  and  on  the  morning
..f  :>  Aug..  leading  the  Beet,  she  Ired  the  first  shot
at  6.47  a.  M. The  general  Otden to the  various

commanders  directed  them,  in  order  to  avoid  the
line  of  torpedoes  at  the  sntranos  of  the  l«y,  to  pass

east  wan!  of  a  certain  red  buov  and  directly  under
the  u'uns  of  1'ort Morgan. The  Confederate  nun
-Tennessee"  was  on  ti"'  [»ort  In-am  of  tin
cunisch,"  inside  of  the  line  of  torpedoes,  and  Cra-
ven, in  his  eagerness  to  engage  the  mm.  passed  to

-i  of  the  buoy,  when  suddenly  the  monitor
reeled  and  sank  with  almost  SVCjn  one  on  l«*rd,
fleet H lied  by  a  torpedo. As  the  "Teem

going  down,  Com.  Craven  and  his  pilot,  Jol

lins,  nut at the foot of  the ladder  leading  to  the

top  of  the  turret. Craven,  knowing  it  was  tl

no  fault  of  the  pilot,  hut  by  his  own  command,  that

ital  change  i"  hat  coons  had  been  made,

stepped  hack,  saving:  "After  you.  pilot."  There
was  no  "after"  for  him.  When  the  pilot  reached
the  top  round,  the  vessel  seemed  "to  drop  from


**,.;*


CRAWFORD


CRAWFORD


under  him,"  and  no  one  followed.  A  buoy  that
swings  to  and  fro  with  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the
tide  marks  the  scene  of  Cora.  Craven's  bravery  and
<>f  his  death,  .ind  beneath,  only  a  few  fathoms  deep,
lies  the  "Tecumseh."  He  has  been  called  the
"Sydney"  of  the  American  navy.— Charles  Hen-
derson, naval  officer,  son  of  Thomas  Tingey,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  30  Nov.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1863,  promoted  to  ensign,
and  served  in  that  capacity  in  the  South  Atlantic
blockading  squadron  until  1865.  He  participated
in  many  of  the  engagements  in  the  vicinity  of
Charleston  and  Savannah  during  1863-'4,  and  was
attached  to  the  "  Housatonic  "  when  she  was  blown
up  in  February,  1864.  During  1865-'7  he  served
in  the  European  squadron  on  the  "  Colorado,"  and
was  commissioned  lieutenant-commander  in  No-
vember, lx'iti.  He  then  served  on  the  "Warupa-
noag,"  and  was  made  lieutenant-commander  in
March,  1868.  after  which  he  was  attached  to  the
Pacific  squadron.  Subsequently  he  served  on  shore
duty  at  Mare  island,  Cal.  In  1874  he  became  ex-
ecutive officer  of  the  "  Kearsarge,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron,  and  later  of  the  "  Monocacv."  He  was
detached  from  duty  in  June,  1879,  broken  down  by
over- work,  and  was  retired  in  Mav,  1881. — Henry
Smith,  another  son  of  Thomas  Tingey,  civil  en-
gineer, b.  in  Bound  Brook,  N.  J.,  14  Oct.,  1845,
studied  in  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.,  and
later  in  the  scientific  department  of  Hobart,  but
was  not  graduated,  as  he  entered  the  army  shortly
before  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  He  obtained  em-
ployment on  the  Croton  works  in  New  York  city,
nut  in  1866  went  to  California  and  became  secre-
tary, with  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  to  his  father,  then
commanding  the  North  Pacific  squadron,  and  in
1869  was  appointed  assistant  civil  engineer  of  the
navy-yard  at  Mare  island.  This  office  he  resigned
in  1872,  and  then  practised  his  profession  in  San
Francisco  until  1879.  He  was  commissioned  civil
engineer  in  the  U.  S.  navy  during  the  latter  year,
and  ordered  to  Chester,  Pa.,  where  he  was  occupied
with  the  construction  of  the  iron  floating  dock
then  building  for  the  Pensacola  navv-yard.  Later
he  was  ordered  to  the  navy-yard  at  League  island,
Pa.,  and  in  July,  1881,  was  sent  to  the  navy-yard
at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  and  in  September,  1882,  as-
signed to  special  duty  at  Coaster's  harbor  training-
station.  He  was  granted  leave  of  absence  in  1883,
and  took  charge  of  the  construction  of  the  new

Croton  aqueduct
in  New  York,  up
to  March,  1886.
He  is  the  inventor
of  an  automatic
trip  for  mining-
buckets  (1876),
and  of  a  tun-
nelling machine
(1883).  Mr.  Cra-
ven was  given  the
honorary  degree
of  B.S.  by  Hobart
in  1878,  and  is  a
member  of  the
American  society
of  civil  engineers.
CRAWFORD,
George  Wash-
ington, lawyer,
b.  in  Columbia
county,  Ga.,  22
Dec,  1798;  d.  in
Richmond  county,  Oa.,  22  July,  1872.  He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1820,  and  after  studying


law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  L8fiS>  He  was
appointed  attorney-general  of  Georgia  in  1827,  and
continued  in  that offloe until  1831.  Fnun  1887  till
1842  lie  iraa  ■  member  of  the  legislature  from  Rich-
i id  enmity,  with  the  exception  of  one  year.  He-
then  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  whig  to  fill  t ho
vacancy  caused  bv  the  death  of  Richard  W.  Haber-
sham, and  served  from  7  Feb.,  1843,  till  ;i  March
of  the  same  year,  during  which  he  was  also  i
governor  of  Georgia,  and  re-elected  in  1845.  Later
he  held  the  office  of  secretary  of  war  in  President
Taylor's  cabinet,  serving  from  7  March,  184!>.  till
15  Aug.,  1850.  On  the  death  of  the  president  Mr.
Crawford  resigned  his  portfolio,  and  subsequently
spent  some  time  in  travel  abroad,  after  which  he
returned  to  Georgia,  where  he  resided  in  retire-
ment at  Bel-Air,  his  home  in  Richmond  county.

CRAWFORD,  Martin  Jenkins,  lawyer,  b.  in
Jasper  county,  Ga.,  17  March,  1820;  d.  in  Colum-
bus, Ga.,  22  July,  1883.  He  was  educated  at  .Mer-
cer university,  and,  after  studying  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1839.  For  a  while  he  followed
his  profession,  but  the  death  of  his  father  caused
him  to  give  his  attention  to  planting.  From  1845
till  1847  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature,
and  in  1850  was  a  delegate  to  the  southern  con-
vention held  in  Nashville  during  May.  In  1853  he
was  made  judge  of  the  superior  courts  of  the  Chat-
tahoochee circuit,  and  held  that  office  until  his
election  to  congress  as  a  democrat,  where  he  served
from  3  Dec.,  1855,  until  his  withdrawal  on  23  Jan.,
1861.  He  was  then  elected  by  the  convention  of
Georgia  a  delegate  to  the  Confederate  provisional
congress,  serving  from  January,  1861,  till  Febru-
ary, 1862,  and  subsequently  was  appointed  one  of
the  three  commissioners  sent  to  treat  with  the  au-
thorities in  Washington  for  a  peaceful  separation
of  the  states.  During  1862  he  raised  the  3d  Georgia
cavalry,  and  after  a  year's  service  was  transferred
to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Howell  Cobb,  with  whom  he
continued  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  then  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  in  1875
was  appointed  judge  of  the  superior  courts  of  the
Chattahoochee  circuit,  to  which  office  in  1877  he
was  reappointed  for  a  term  of  eight  years.  In
1880  he  was  appointed  associate  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Georgia,  to  fill  the  unexpired  term
of  Logan  E.  Bleckley,  on  the  completion  of  which
he  became  his  own  successor  by  appointment  from
the  state  legislature.

CRAWFORD,  Samuel  Wylie,  soldier,  b.  in
Franklin  county,  Pa.,  8  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1846,
after  which  he  studied  medicine,  and  in  1851  be-
came an  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  He
served  in  various  forts  in  the  southwest,  principally
in  Texas,  until  1860,  when  he  was  stationed  at  Fort
Moultrie  and  later  at  Fort  Sumter,  being  one  of  the
garrison  of  that  fort  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  having  command  of  a  battery  during  the
bombardment.  From  that  time  till  August,  1861,
he  was  at  Fort  Columbus,  New  York  harbor.  He
then  vacated  his  commission  of  assistant  surgeon
by  accepting  the  appointment  of  major  in  the  18th
infantry,  and  in  1862  was  commissioned  a  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  Gen.  Crawford  served
with  distinction  in  the  Shenandoah  campaign,  being
present  at  the  battles  of  Winchester  and  Cedar
Mountain,  losing  one  half  of  his  brigade  in  the  last-
named  action.  At  the  battle  of  Antietam  he  suc-
ceeded Gen.  Mansfield  in  command  of  his  division,
and  was  severely  wounded.  Early  in  1863  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  Pennsylvania  reserve-,
then  stationed  about  Washington,  and  with  thaw
troops,  forming  the  3d  division  of  the  5th  army


«  i;  \\\  lORD


(HAW


corps',  he  wit  engaged  at  Qettyel  ng  with

rt  In  ibsequently  he  participated  in  nil

operations  <>f  the  Army"  of  tin- Potomac  until
••of  the  war. He  was  bn'vettedesjooeBjhejhr
from  colonel,  in  1888.  u|i  to  major-general  in  lHitt,
for  conspicuous gallantry in the buttles of the
Wilderness,  Spotteylrania,  Petersburg,  Fire  Forks.

and  other  engagements, tieii.  Crawford  M inn--

land  out  of  the  volunteer  en  viae  in  I860,  end  then
served  with  l > i  —  wejwn^  in  the  south,  ht^wifag
eolonel  of  the  18th  infant rv  In  February,  181

later  of  the  8d  infantry,  lit-  continued  in  the  ser-
vice until  February,  1*7:1,  when, owing  todleebUity
reuniting from wounds, be  was retired with the

nuik  of  brigadier-general.

l  i:\\\HII!l).  Thomas  sculptor,  b.  in  New
York  citv.  81  Miirch.  1814;  <l.  in  London,  I80ot,
lie  was  of  Irish  parentage.  Of  his  early
years  we  only  know  tlmt  he  was  at  school  with
Page,  the  artist,  ami  that  liis  proficiency  in  hit
studies  was  hindered  bv  the  exuberance  of  liis
(MOT,  which  took  form  in  drawings  and  carvings.
His  love  of  art  led  him,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  to
enter  the  studios  of  Fra/.erand  Launitz,  artists  and
artificers  in  marble,  well  known  to  the  New  York
of  that  day.  In  is:{4  he  went  abroad  for  the  pro-
motion of  artistic  studies,  and  took  up  his  residence
in  Home  for  life,  as  it  proved.  The  celebrated  sculp-
tor, Thorwaldsen,  became  his  master  and  friend.
Under  this  fortunate  guidance  he  devoted  himself
to  the  study  both  of  the  antique  and  of  living
models.  His  first  ideal  work  was  a  group  of  ••  I  >i  -
pheus  and  Cerberus,"  executed  in  1889,  and  pur-
chased, some  years  later,  for  the  Boston  athemeum.
This  was  followed  by  a  succession  of  groups,  single
figures,  and  bas-reliefs,  whose  rapid  production
bore  witness  to  the  fertility  as  well  as  the  versatili-
ty of  his  genius.  Among  these  are  ••  Adam  and
five"  and  a  bust  of  Josiah  Quincy,  now  in  the  Bee-
ton  athenaeum;  "  Hebe  and  Ganymede,"  presented
to  the  Boston  art  museum  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Perkins,  and
a  bronze  statue  of  Beethoven,  presented  by  tin-  same
gentleman  to  the  Boston  music  hall:  "Babes  in
the  Wood,"  in  the  Lenox  library;  "Mercury  and
Psyche";  "Flora," now  in  the  gallery  of  the  late
Mrs.  A.  T.  Stewart;  an  Indian  girl":  "Dancing
.letinv,"  modelled  from  his  own  daughter;  and  a
statue  of  James  Otis,  which  adorns  the  chapel  at
Mount  Auburn,  Cain1>ridge.  In  1849,  while  on  a
visit  to  this  country,  he  received  from  the  state
of  Virginia  an  order  for  a  monument  to  be  erected
in  Richmond.  He  immediately  returned  to  Home
and  began  the  work,  of  which  the  design  was  a
star  of  live  rays,  each  one  of  these  bearing  a  statue
of  some  historic  Virginian.  Patrick  Henry  ■!  1
Thomas  Jefferson  among  the  number.  The  work
i>  surmounted  by  a  plinth,  on  which  stands  an
equestrian  statue  of  Weebingl  on.  These  statues,
modelled  in  Rome,  were  cast  at  the  celebrated  Mu-
nich foundry,  where,  as  elsewhere,  their  merit  was
much  appreciated  Mr.  Crawford's  most  important
works  after  these  were  ordered  bv  the  national  <:<>\  -
eminent  for  the  oapito]  at  Washington.  First
among  these  was  a  marble  pediment,  bearing  life-
size  figures  symbolical  of  the  progress  of  American
civilization;  next  in  order  came  a  bronze  figure  of
Liberty,  which  surmounts  the  dome;  and  last  of
these, end  <>f  his  life-work,  was  a  bronze  door  on

which  are  modelled  various  scenes  in  the  public  life

of  Washington.  Prominent  among  Mr.  Crawford's
works  was  also  his  statue  of  an  Indian  chief  much

admired  by  the  Bngiiah  sculptor  Gibson,  whopro-

|M»ed  that '  ii  bronze  copy  of  it  should  l»-  retained
in  Home  as  a  lasting  monument.  Mr.  <  "rawford's
health  failed  under  the  pressure  of  the  great  public


works  hem  enumerated.  In  1<!6  he  wan  suddcnlr
afllioted  with  blindness  censed  bye  cancerous  ■/•
w  above  middle  height,  well  formed
and  athletic,  with  a  clear  eye.  ruddr  complexion,
and  energetic  temperament/ I  lie  wm  a

liberal,  m  religion  a  Protestant,  m  character  gen.
e roim  and  kindly,  and  adverse  to  discords,  profee*
sioual  or  social.'— His  SOU,  I'ranrN  X alien, au-
thor. I>.  in  Bagni  di  Lucca,  Italy.  2  Aug.,  1854,  has
lived  chiefly  abroad,  lb'  has  published  novels,  in-
eluding  "Mr.  Isna<  forfc. 1882);  MDec-

tor  Claudius"  (I  «q);

"To  Leeward"  (l*s|,: "All  A:

ister"  (1885);  "Tale  of  a  lonely
Parish  "(lHMj,:  and  ••  Sarecineeca  "  (1888).

CKA  WFOKII.  Thomas  Hartley,  lawyer,  b  in
ChamUrsburg,  Pa..  II  Nov..  17sj;:  d.  in  Washing-
ton. I',  i '..  tn  iML, 1888, lb-  wut  graduated  st
Princeton  in  1804,  studied  law,  was  admit-
bar  in  1807,  and  began  to  prnetiei  m  GkasjaV

burg.  loiter  he  was  altOted  as  a  JsAksOBJ  democrat
to  congress,  and  was  re-elected,  nerving  from  7
Dee*,  1889,  till  |  March.  1888,  I »u ring  1883  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  and  in  1836  was
appointed  a  commissioner  to  ■ alleged

trends  In  the  purchase  of  the  reeerrets

land  Of  the  (reek  Indians. Kn-in lKtst  till [£

be  held  the  office  of  comndsaionsrof  Indian  affairs.
In  184o  he  was  appointed  Judge  of  the  criminal
court  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  continued  as
such  until  his  death.

CRAWFORD.  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Bsrfcsley

county.  Va..  in  1789;  d.  in  Wyandot  OOUnty,  Ohio,
11  June,  1788.  He  wits  a  ntfrejor.  and  the  asso-
ciate of  Washington,  under  whom  be  served.  At
the  beginning  01  the  French  and  Indian  war  he  be-
came an  ensign  in  the  Virginia  rinemen,  end  tsj
with  (ten.  Breddock  in  the  expedition  sgainst  Fort
DuQuesne.  He  continued  in  the  MrTiee  until  1781,
having  been  promoted  to  the  grade  of  contain  on

the  recommendation  of  Washington.  He  again
served  during  the  Pontine  war  from  17«sl  till  1

and  in  17<>7  settled  in  western  Pennsylvania, where
he  purchased  land  and  became  a  justice  of  the
peace.  Sn.n  after  the  beginning  oi  the  Revolu-
tionary war  he  raised  a  company  of  Virginians  and
joined'  Washington's  army.  In  1778  M  W1B  msde
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  5th  Virginia  regiment,  nnd
later  beoame  colonel,  resigning  from  the  ann>  in
17S1.  He  was  at  the  battM  "f  Long  Island,  in  the
sulistHpient  retreat  across  Mew  Jersey  end  ovsrthe
Delaware.  partWpetfd  in  the  Utiles  of  Tnnt.-n  and
Princeton.  an<l  afterward  was  engaged  around  Phila-
delphia. In  1778  he  was  assigned  so  frontier  duty.
ami  during  the  following  years  was  ouwipfad  in
suppressing  the  Indian  attacks  on  As  -ttlers.
After  his  resignation  he  retired  to  his  farm,  in  the
bops  of  spending  the  remainder  of  his  days  with
his  familv.  baring  alrea.lv  given  nearly  twenty-five
vears  of  his  life  to  the  service  of  his  country  j  but
in  Mav.  ITS'2.  at  the  urgent  request  of  (ieiis.  Wash*
ingtoii  and William In  inc.  he  accepted,  though

with  great  reluotenee,  the  command  of  on  expedi-
tion egoinel  theWyendot  and  Delaware  Indians  on

the  banks  of  the  Muskingum. The  Indian  -

red  "ii  4  June,  and  an  engagement  ensued.
in  which  Crawford's  troops  were  surrounded  in  a
grove  called Battle  island  by  a  1
Than  Ins  own. For  two  days  tl
tinned,  when,  lading  themeelrss  hemmed  in,  «»>«■>■
decided  to  cut  their  wag  out In  the  ret  rvat  that
followed,  the  soldiers  wen'  separated. and  Col
ford  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Indian-
end  days  of  cruel  exiierienee,  during  which  he  wee
suhj.vt'.-d to horrible torture,  he  wss  burned  to


6


CHAW  FORI)


CKKKiUTON


death. The  storv  is  told  l.y  N.  X.  Hill,  Jr.,  in  the
"Magazine  of  Western  History"  f<»r  May,  1885,
under  1 1 k -  title  at  "Crawford's  Campaign. *'
CRAWFORD,  William  Harris,  statesman,  1».

in  Amherst  county,  Ya..  21  Fcl».,  1772;  d.  in  Elbert
county,  Ga.,  15  Sept.,  1834.  His  father,  who  was
in  reduced  eironmstanoes,  removed  first  to  South
Carolina  and  then  to  Columbia  county,  Ga.  After
teaching  school  at  Augusta  the  boy  studied  law,
began  practice  at  Lexington  in  1799,  and  was  one
of  the  compilers  of  the  first  digest  of  the  laws  of
Georgia.  He  became  a  member  of  the  state  senate
in  1802,  and  in  1807  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  to
fill  a  vacancy.  The  political  excitement  of  the
period  led  him  to  engage  in  two  duels,  in  one  of
which  his  opponent  fell,  and  in  the  second  of
which  he  was  himself  wounded.  He  was  re-elected
in  1811,  acquiesced  in  the  policy  of  a  U.  S.  bank,
and  in  1812  was  chosen  president  pro  tern,  of  the
senate.  He  was  at  first  opposed  to  the  war  with
Great  Britain,  but  eventually  gave  it  his  support;
and  in  1813,  having  declined  the  place  of  secretary
of  war,  accepted  that  of  minister  to  France,  where
he  formed  a  personal  intimacy  with  Lafayette. In

1816,  on  the  re-
tirement of  Mr.
Dallas,  he  was
appointed  sec-
retary of  the
treasury.  He
was  prominently
urged  as  a  can-
didate for  the
presidency,  but
remained  at  the
head  of  the  treas-
ury department,
whereheadhered
to  the  views  of
Mr.  Jefferson,
and  opposed  the
federal  policy  in
regard  to  in-
ternal improve-
ments, then  sup-
?orted  by  a  considerable  section  of  his  own  party,
'his  position  on  the  great  question  of  the  time  sub-
jected him  to  virulent  hostility  from  opponents  of
his  own  party ;  and  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  was  one  of
these  opponents,  became  a  dangerous  rival  for  the
democratic  nomination  for  the  presidency,  to  suc-
ceed Monroe.  Crawford,  however,  as  the  choice  of
the  Virginia  party,  and  the  representative  of  the
views  of  Jefferson,  secured  the  nomination  of  a  con-
gressional caucus  in  February,  1824;  and  in  the
election  that  followed  he  received  the  electoral  votes
of  Virginia  and  Georgia,  with  scattering  votes  from
New  York,  Maryland,  and  Delaware — in  all,  41.  No
choice  having  been  made  by  the  electoral  college,  the
election  reverted  to  the  house  of  representatives,
where  John  Quincy  Adams  was  elected  over  Jackson
and  Crawford,  through  the  influence  of  Henry  Clay,
the  fourth  candidate  before  the  people,  who  brought
his  friends  to  the  support  of  Adams.  The  result
was  also  due,  in  a  measure,  to  the  confirmed  ill
health  of  Mr.  Crawford,  and  perhaps  to  imputa-
tions brought  against  his  conduct  of  the  treasury
department!  These  charges  hejairomptly  refuted,
and  a  committee  that  included  Daniel  Webster  and
John  Randolph  unanimously  declared  them  to  be
unfounded.  Hut  his  health  rendered  it  impossible
for  him  to  continue  in  public  life;  and,  although
he  recovered  his  strength  partially,  he  took  no  part
after  this  date  in  politics.  Returning  to  Georgia.
he  became  circuit  judge,  which  office  he  continued


^*~&0r<»y£r*<-


to  fill  with  great  efficiency,  by  successive  elections
in  1828  and  1831,  until  nearly  the  end  of  his  life.
He  had  no  connection  with  tne  nullification  move-
ment, to  which  he  was  opposed :  and  his  last  days
were  spent  in  retirement.  Personally  he  was  a
man  of  conspicuous  social  gifts,  an  admirable
conversationalist,  religious  in  his  views  and  feel-
ings, and  a  supporter  of  Baptist  convictions.  At
his  home  he  dispensed  a  hearty  republican  hospi-
tality, and  his  name  is  eminent  among  the  illus-
trious citizens  of  Georgia. — His  son,  Nathaniel
Macon,  educator,  b.  in  Oglethorpe  county,  Ga.,  22
March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Walker  county,  Va.,  27  Oct.,
1871,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Georgia
in  1829  with  the  first  honor.  At  the  age  of  twen-
ty-five he  was  elected  to  a  professorship  in  Ogle-
thorpe college,  at  Milledgeville,  Ga.  He  had  been
a  Presbyterian,  but  changed  his  views  and  entered
the  Baptist  ministry.  In  1846  he  accepted  the
chair  or  theology  in  Mercer  university,  and  ten
years  later  was  elected  to  the  presidency,  but  soon
retired  to  accept  the  professorship  of  moral  philoso-

Ehy  in  the  University  of  Mississippi  In  1857  he
ecame  professor  of  theology  in  Georgetown,  Ky.,
but  returned  to  Georgia  again  as  president  of  Mer-
cer university,  where  he  remained  for  seven  years.
At  the  close  of  the  war,  in  1865,  he  accepted  the
presidency  of  Georgetown  college,  Ky.,  and  con-
tinued to  fill  this  office  until  near  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  the  author  of  a  volume  entitled
u  Christian  Paradoxes."

CRAZY  HORSE,  Indian  chief,  b.  about  1842.
He  was  an  Ogallalla  Sioux,  brother-in-law  of  Red
Cloud,  and  one  of  the  principal  chiefs  of  the  hos-
tile Indians  that  for  several  years  defied  the  au-
thority of  the  U.  S.  government  in  the  northwest-
ern territories.  He  left  Fort  Laramie,  and  went
to  war,  after  the  murder  of  his  brother  in
1865.  He  soon  established  a  reputation  as  a  brave
and  cunning  leader,  and  gathered  a  strong  band,
whom  he  ruled  with  despotic  rigor.  With  Sitting
Bull  he  surprised  and  destroyed  Gen.  Custer's  com-
mand on  the  Little  Big-Horn  river,  25  June,  1876.
He  was  pursued  by  Gen.  Terry  into  the  Black  Hills,
and  the  following  spring  Gen.  Crook  conducted  an
expedition  against  him  and  forced  him  to  surren-
der, with  900  followers,  at  the  Red  Cloud  agency.

CREERY,  William  Rufus,  educator,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  9  May.  1824;  d.  there,  1  Mav,  1875.
He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,
Pa.,  in  1842,  and  at  once  began  teaching  in  the  pub-
lic schools  of  Baltimore,  continuing  in  this  occu-
gation  until  1854,  when  he  became  professor  of
elles-lettres  in  Baltimore  city  college.  In  1859  he
was  chosen  president  of  the  Lutherville  female
seminary,  where  he  remained  until  1862,  when  he
renewed  his  teaching  in  the  public  schools  of  Bal-
timore. Five  years  later  he  was  elected  city  super-
intendent of  public  instruction  for  a  term  of  lour
years,  and  in  1872  was  re-elected.  In  conjunction
with  Prof.  M.  A.  Newell  he  prepared  the  Maryland
series  of  school-books,  which  includes  "  Primary-
School  Spelling-Book  " ;  "  Grammar-School  Spell-
ing-Book  " ;  a  series  of  six  "  Readers,"  and  "  Cate-
chism of  United  States  History."

CREIGHTON,  John  Orde,  naval  officer,  h.  in
New  York  city  about  1785;  d.  in  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y..
13  Oct.,  1838.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman
in  June,  1800,  served  under  Preble  before  Tripoli,  be-
came a  lieutenant,  24  Feb.,  1807,  and  was  attached
to  the  frigate  "  Chesapeake,"  in  June,  1807,  when
she  was  attacked  by  the  "  Leopard."  He  was  af-
terward attached  to  the  "  President."  and  was  first
lieutenant  in  her  action  with  the  "  Little.  Belt."  16
May,  1811. lii  1813  he  commanded  the  brig  •■  K;i'-


I  REIGHTON


with  the  rank  ol  i  mandant,

tad  whs  matin  rnirtff".  97  April,  isi<;. in  iv„>i>-,80

be  commanded  t h»-  squadron  on  the  oomI  of  Itrazil.

(  i;i  M.ii  ion.  Johnston  Blakeley,  naval  offl-

<rr,  b.  iii  Rhode  [aland,  12  Sot.,  1822;  d.  in  Mor-

aii,  N.  .1..  19  Nor.,  1889, ll' entered  the

us  ii  midshipman,  in  Feb.,  \KiH,  I  mm  •nine  a
lieutenant,  !•  Oct.,  1858,  commanded  tin-  steamer
"  ( Mtawa,"  <>f  the  SOUtfa  Atlantic  blockading  KJUad-
run,  in  1862,  commissioned  as  commander,  '-''»
Sept.,  1869,  was  on  special  duty  in  1NM,  and  in
immander  of  the  steamer  "  Mahaska,"  of
the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  which  was
engaged  in  the  bomhardmenl  of  Forts  Wagner
and  txiegg  in  August,  1869,  Be  ffll  transferred  to
the  "Mingo,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  ami  commanded  that  steamer  till  the
of  the  war.  He  was  commissioned  captain
on  99  Nov..  1S68,  and  became  a  commodore  on  it
Nov.,  1874  He  was  commandant  of  the  Norfolk
navy-yard  in  1879,  and  was  retired  with  the  rank
of  rear-admiral  in  1889.

<  REHJHTON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1796;  d.  in  Tarrvtown.  N.  V..  99
April,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1819,  studied  theology,  and  took  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  during  a  great
part  of  his  earlier  ministry,  1816-'36,  was  rector  of
St.  Mark's  in  New  York  city.  During  the  suspen-
sion of  Bishop  Onderdonk  he  was  elected  provisional
bishop  of  the  diocese  of  New  York,  but  declined
the  office.  He  presided  in  the  diocesan  convention
for  nine  years,  and  in  the  lower  house  of  the  gen-
eral convention  of  the  P.  E.  church  during  its  ses-
sions of  1853,  1856,  and  l&M).  Se  was.  from  1836
until  1865,  rector  of  Christ  church,  Tarrytown.

CKKLE,  Joseph,  centenarian,  !>.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  in  1725;  d.  in  Caledonia,  Wis.,  27  Jan..
1866.  The  date  of  his  birth  is  established  l»y  the
record  of  his  baptism  in  the  French  Catholic
church,  Detroit.  He  was  married  in  1755  at  New
Orleans,  and  a  few  years  afterward  settled  at
Prairie  du  Chien.  He  lx>re  arms  at  Braddock'a
defeat,  and  before  the  Revolution  was  employed
in  earning  letters  between  Prairie  du  Chien  and
Oreen  Bay.  He  settled  in  Wisconsin  during  the
Revolutionary  war.  The  later  years  of  his  life  were
passed  with  a  daughter  by  his  third  marriage.  born
when  he  was  sixty-nine  years  old.  He  enjoyed  ro-
bust health  up  to  within  two  vears  of  his  death,
and  was  able  to  walk  several  miles  without  fatigue
and  to  chop  wood  for  the  familv.

CRENSHAW,  Anderson,  'jurist,  b.  in  South
Carotin*,  99  Hay,  17*:*:  d.  in  Alabama  in  1*47.
He  was  graduated  in  1806  from  the  College  of  Co-
lumbia, S.  C,  being  the  first  graduate  of  the  insti-
tution, became  a  successful  lawyer,  removed  to
Alabama  about  1819,  and  held  the  offices  of  judge
of  the  circuit  court  from  1H21  to  1898,  being  also,
until  1832.  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  ami  chan-
cellor of  the  southern  division  of  the  state  from
the  organization  of  a  separate  court  of  chancery  in
1838  till  his  death.  Though  a  Whig  in  politics,
he  waselected  to  the  judicial  pOStS thai  lie  helil  by  a

Democratic  legislature.— His  son,  Walter  Henry,

b.  in AbU'ville  district.  S.  < '..  7  July.  1817;  d.  in
Alabama  in 1S7S. He  was  graduated  at  the  du-
ty of  Alabama  in  1884,  and  was  from  1888  till
im'>7  ii  member  of  either  the  upper  or  lower  house

of  the  Alabama  legislature,  officiating M  Bleaker  of

the  house  in  l*'H  -*•">.  and  prcsidenl  of  the  «  sate  In
1865-*7.  In  1986  he  was  a  member  of  the  Constitu-
tional convention.  He  was  afterward  lodge  of  the
Rutler  county  criminal  court,  and  with  two  other
commissioners  codified  the  laws  <,f  the  state,


<  I:  I  8  IP,  Michael,  tra<l.r  ami Indian  fighter,
i>.  m  Alleghany

emigrated  from  Yorkshire, BngUi

western  Man  land,  ami  win  n  memt.  r  •  f ••  . n|,,

company  in  1752. His  son  n

head,  of  Philadelphia,  while  yet  a  minor,  became  a

men  hunt,  re rod to  the  Ohio  in  tie-  spring  of

1 77  J.  an.!  establiahi  .1 a  settlement
in::. He  took  command  of  the  pioneers,  who
I  wired  for  an Indian  war.  and.  after Dr.  Coonoflj
had  warned  him  of  a  general  Indian  war,  made  *
declaration  of  hostilities  on  M  April  and  •!■  U  ated
,  a  parly  of  Indians  in  a  skirmish  OBJ  '

otmr  party  of  white*  tresctMronslj  ma— mil

I  family  of  the  chief  Logan  on  Feu
gan,  who  had  U-cti friendly to  ll  ar-

oused Cresap.  as  the  leader  of  the  white  men  In
that  region,  of  committing  the  crime,  and  v
a  pathetic  BneSOft,  attribute*!  to  Lojma  and  pre-
served in  Jefferson's  ••  Notes,*1  the  deed  attn.
his  memory,  until  his  son-in-law.  J.  J.  Jacob,  and
later  Ilrantz  Mayer,  proved  that  he  was  in  Mary-
land at  the  time  of  the  occurrence.  QoT.  Immiion-
gave  him  the  commission  of  captain  of  tin-  llam|»-
shire  count v  militia  in  Virginia,  After  tl<
elusion  of  tfie  Duninon- exjHilition  he  returned  to
Maryland,  but  again  went  to  <»hi<>  the  foUowfaej
spring,  and  penetrated  simoal  to  the  Kentucky
wilderness.  On  his  return  he  leaned  that  he  had
been  oomniissioned  by  the  Continental  congreas  as
captain  of  a  company  of  Maryland  riflemen.  He
went  with  hi*  company  to  Jioston  and  joined  the
army  of  Washington:  but.  having  bssa  afflicted
with  his  final  illness  liefnre  he  took  the  command,
and  finding  himself  growing  wor„-.  he  left  for
home,  and  died  on  the  way.  in  New  York,  when  he
was  buried  with  military  honors  in  Trinity  chun  h-
vard. S-e  "  Biographical  Sketch  of  the  Iji!

Mi«ti«jJ  Cresap, by  J.  J.  Jaool

with notes, by Bra'ntz Mayer.  Cincinnati. 1HU6),

See.  also.  Mayer's  discourse  in  vindication  of  Cn-
sap.  delivered  before  the  Maryland  historical  so-
ciety in  May.  1861,  published  under  the  title
••  Tagah-jute.  OT  Logan  the  Indian,  ami  Captain
Michael  Cresap'1  (Nee  York,  181

CRESPEL,  Emanuel,  clergyman,  b. b
gium about  17<m>. He  arrived  m  Quebec  ii
where  be  finished  hb  ecclesiastical  shadies,  and  was
ordained  in  K'-'ti. Be  accompanied,  as  cheplnm.
the  expedition  of  Lignenr  against  th. I
was  then  sin  i actively  stationed  at Niagara,  Fn -n-
tenao,  and  Crown  Point. living  recalled  to  Franc*,
be  sailed  from  Quebeoin  1789,  but  hi*  nsssLth*
"Iji  Renommee, was  driven  on  Anticosti  island
and  wrecked. Fifty-four  of  the  |w%seengers  escaped.
The remainder, including Father  Creeps!,  at-
tempted to  reach  Hlngan  in  two  b

which  was  lost. The survivor.  Wen  hemmed  m
by  ice  and forced  t<»  remain  till  spring I
Crespel  escaped  to  an Indian  itinn,  and l
fbund his  way  to  I French  |»>st,  froinwlmh  he
s,nt assistance  to  hi*  companions. Only  tl
then  wen  found  alive. When  I  I  fn-m

his  ■ufflsringi  be  went  toOnsbseaad  ««.»  appointed
pastor  of  Sotsflsm  Hereturned  to  Europe  in  1738.
lie  wrote  a  series  of  letters  describing  nsa«s>
tuns,  which  appeared  in  French  (Frankfort,
and  were  shortly  afterward  published  in  (ierman
(English  translation.  1  i  .....

CRFSSON.  Elliott,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia.  2 Manh. 1796;  d. thei
fjnui  lusmhor  of  the  nitnirt]  of  Fri«  -

.  ssful  merchant  in  Philadelphia,  and  drvoied
ii  to  Unevohnt  objecta,  especially  the


8


CRESSON


CREVAUX


promotion  of  the  welfare  of  the  Indians  and  ne-
BOM  in  tlif  I'nited  States.  He  conceived  the  in-
tention of  becoming  a  missionary  among  the  Semi-
noles  of  Florida,  but  afterward  gave  his  mind  to
the  scheme  of  colonizing  American  negroes  in
Africa,  engaged  in  establishing  the  first  colony  of
liberated  slaves  at  Bassa  Cove,  on  the  Grain  coast,
became  president  of  the  Colonization  society.  MM
labored  as  its  agent  in  New  England  in  the  winter
of  1838-'9,  in  the  southern  states  in  1839-'40,  and
in  Great  Britain  in  1840-'2  and  1850-'3.  He  left
in  his  will  $122,000  to  various  benevolent  institu-
tions, and  a  lot,  valued  at  $30,000,  for  a  home  for
superannuated  merchants  and  gentlemen.

CRESSON,  John  Chapman,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1806 ;  d.  there  in  1876.
He  was  educated  at  a  Friends'  academy,  attended
lectures  on  agriculture  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  then  became  a  farmer,  but  sold  his
farm  in  1834,  and  engaged  in  business  in  Philadel-
phia. He  was  then  made  superintendent  and  en-
gineer of  the  Philadelphia  gas-works,  and  held  the
office  for  twenty-eight  years.  He  was  given  the
chair  of  mechanics  and  natural  philosophy  in
Franklin  institute  in  1837,  and  in  1855  was  made
its  president.  He  also  held  a  similar  chair  in  the
Philadelphia  high-school  for  two  years.  He  was
for  many  years  a  manager  and  one  of  the  vice-
presidents  of  the  Pennsylvania  institution  for  the
blind,  and  was  connected  with  many  other  charita-
ble institutions.  He  was  also  manager  of  the
Schuylkill  navigation  company,  president  of  the
Mine  HUl  and  Schuylkill  Haven  railroad  company
in  1847-76,  and  one  of  the  original  Fairmount
park  commissioners,  afterward  becoming  chief  en-
gineer of  that  park.

CRESWELL,  John  A.  J.,  statesman,  b.  in  Port
Deposit,  Cecil  co.,  Md.,  18  Nov.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Elkton,
Ind\,  23  Dec,  1891.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson
college,  Pa.,  and.  was  admitted  to  the  Maryland  bar.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1860
and  1862,  and  assistant  adjutant-general  for  Mary-
land in  1862-'3.  He  was  elected  to  congress,  and
served  from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,  1865 ;  and,
having  distinguished  himself  as  an  earnest  friend
of  the  Union,  was  elected  as  a  republican  to  the  U.
S.  senate  in  March,  1865,  to  fill  the  unexpired  term
of  Thomas  H.  Hicks.  On  22  Feb.,  1866,  he  de-
livered, at  the  request  of  the  House  of  represen-
tatives, a  memorable  eulogy  of  his  friend  and  col-
league, Henry  Winter  Davis.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Baltimore  convention  of  1864,  the  Philadel-
phia loyalists'  convention  of  1866,  the  Border  states
convention  held  in  Baltimore  in  1867,  and  the
Chicago  republican  convention  of  1868.  In  May,
1868,  he  was  elected  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  senate,
but  declined.  On  5  March,  1869,  he  was  appointed
by  President  Grant  postmaster-general  of  the
United  States,  and  served  till  3  July,  1874.

CRESWELL,  Julia  (Pleasants),  author,  b.  in
Huntsville,  Ala.,  21  Aug.,  1827;  d.nearShreveport,
La.,  9  June,  1886.  Her  father.  Col.  James  J.
Pleasants,  of  Virginia,  removed  to  Alabama,  be-
came secretary  of  state,  and  married  a  daughter
of  Gov.  Bibb."  The  daughter  was  educated  by  a
superior  teacher  from  the  north,  and  was  encour-
aged by  her  father  to  write  verses.  In  1854  she
married  David  Creswell,  a  lawyer  and  planter,  who
was  a  district  judge  of  Alabama.  Her  cousin,
Thomas  Bibb  M.  Bradley,  a  young  poet  of  promise,
who  died  soon  afterward,  induced  her  to  publish  a
selection  of  her  poems  with  some  of  his  own.  The
volume  appeared  in  1854,  before  her  marriage,  un-
der the  title  "  Apheila,  and  other  Poems,  by  two
Cousins  of  the  South  "  (New  York). After  the  war


Mrs.  Creswell  taught  a  village-school,  while  her
husband,  who  had  lost  his  large  estate,  resumed  the
practice  of  law.  She  has  published  an  allegorical
novel  entitled  "Callamura"  (Philadelphia,  1868),
and  left  many  unpublished  poems  to  be  issued  in  a
posthumous  volume.

CRETIN,  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Lyon*
France,  in  1800;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  in  1857.
He  studied  in  his  native  diocese,  and  became  a
priest,  with  the  intention  of  devoting  himself  to
the  foreign  missions.  In  1838  he  volunteered  for
the  diocese  of  Dubuque,  and  reached  that  city  in
1839.  He  was  appointed  vicar-general  and  pastor
of  the  cathedral.  In  1843  he  took  up  his  residence
at  Prairie  du  Chien  among  the  Winnebagoes.  He
was  requested  by  them  to  build  a  church  and
school-house,  but  was  prevented  from  doing  so  by
the  Indian  agent.  Father  Cretin  continued  among
the  Winnebagoes  till  1848,  when  he  was  expelled
by  the  government  officials,  and  the  tribe  removed
to  Long  Prairie.  He  then  returned  to  Dubuque.
In  1849  the  seventh  council  of  Baltimore  recom-
mended the  erection  of  Minnesota  into  a  diocese,
with  the  title  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  appointment  of
Father  Cretin  to  the  new  see.  He  proceeded  to
France  in  order  to  secure  priests  for  his  diocese,
and  there  received  episcopal  consecration  at  the
hands  of  the  bishop  of  Belley.  He  returned  to
America  in  1851,  accompanied  by  several  priests,
and  began  his  work  at  St.  Paul.  Before  the  end
of  the  year  he  was  enabled  to  substitute  a  building
of  stone  for  the  little  log  cabin  in  which  he  minis-
tered, and  to  establish  a  school  and  seminary.  At
this  period  there  was  an  immense  influx  of  popula-
tion into  Minnesota,  and  Bishop  Cretin  was  soon
organizing  Catholic  parishes  in  every  direction.
In  1853  the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph  were  introduced
into  the  diocese,  and  placed  in  charge  of  an  acade-
my for  young  ladies,  and  of  the  parochial  schools.
Bishop  Cretin  also  erected  a  hospital,  an  asylum,
and  novitiate,  which  he  confided  to  their  care.  He
revived  the  mission  among  the  Winnebagoes,  who
had  been  removed  to  Long  Prairie.  He  stationed
a  pastor  and  opened  a  school  among  them,  which
was  managed  by  the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph.  He  also
established  missions  among  the  Ojibways,  and  sta-
tioned priests  and  founded  churches  at  Crow  Wing,
Mill  Lake,  Sandy  Lake,  Saux  Rapids,  and  Fond  du
Lac,  as  well  as  promoting  the  nourishing  Indian
settlements  on  the  British  border.  In  1855  he  gave
the  Brothers  of  the  Holy  Family  charge  of  his
schools  for  boys,  and  established  a  novitiate  of  the
order  in  St.  Paul.  He  founded  a  house  of  the  Sis-
ters of  the  Propagation  of  the  Faith  at  Pembina
for  the  instruction  of  the  Indians.  Through  his
agency  a  convent  of  the  Benedictine  order  was
erected  at  St.  Cloud,  which  has  grown  into  a  great
school  and  abbey.  He  also  founded  a  convent  of
Benedictine  nuns.  Bishop  Cretin  did  much  to  de-
velop the  resources  of  Minnesota  by  the  interest  he
took  in  immigration.  His  letters  addressed  to  in-
tending emigrants,  published  in  the  New  York
journals,  and  copied  into  the  newspapers  of  Eu-
rope, had  the  effect  of  determining  many  to  settle
in  his  adopted  territory.  When  he  was  appointed
bishop,  there  were  in  his  diocese  one  log  church
and  three  priests :  in  a  few  years  there  were  twenty
priests,  twenty-nine  churches,  and  thirty-five  sta-
tions, and  the  Catholic  population  had  increased  to
more  than  50,000.  He  built  the  cathedral  of  St
Paul  at  a  cost  of  $70,000.

CREVAUX,  Jules  Nicolas,  French  explorer,
b.  in  Lorquin,  Lorraine,  1  April,  1847;  killed  in
Bolivia,  24  April,  1882.  He  studied  medicine  at
Strasburg  and  in  the  Naval  medical  school  at  Brest,


CRITTKXDRH


became  assistant  surgeon  in  the  French  navy  on  34

3,  whs  attached  to  the  marines  at  the  be-

gfuaing  <>f  tht  war  of 1*?<».  Itecamc  a  surgeon  of

the  second  class  in  Is?:!.  sained  the  otom  of  the

lagton of honor  in 1S7<> for  devotion U) \ellow-

brrer  patients  in  the  Salui  islands,  and,  after  n--

ering  from  an  attack  of  the  disease,  ascended

Maroui  river  fan French  Guiana,  explored  tin*  Tu-

nrao-Humac  mountains,  and  desoanaad  tin  Yuri  to

the  Amazon.  He  afterward  ascended  tin-  Ovapock
■gain,  mill  daaoondai  the  Payou  to  the  Amazon,
anil  then  explored  Tapoura  river.  Altera  visit  to
Frame.  I>r.  Orervau  returned  to  Booth  America,

made  a  voyage  on  the  Orinoco,  and  in  lssi  set  out
from  Buenos  Ayrm  with  a  number  of  oompanioai

to  ascend  the  Paraguay  ami  cross  over  to  the  Ama-
zon by  the  Tapajos  and  the  Zingu.  The  expedi-
tion roachod  the  confluence  of  the  Pilaya  ami  Pil-
comayo,  ami  embarked  in  three  boats;  hut.  in  the
Btfloa  of  the  Teyo,  Dr.  Crevaux  and  all  his  com-
panions save  two  were  treacherously  murdered  by
the  Tapeti  Indians.

CUEVECCEl'R.  Jean  Hector  St.  John  de,
author.  I),  in  Caen.  Normandy,  in  1781  ;  d.  in  Sar-
celle.  near  Paris,  in  1813.  After  studying  in  Eng-
laud  he  emliarked  for  America  in  1754.  Be  pur-
ohtMed  an  estate  near  New  York,  and  married  the
daughter  of  an  American  merchant.  Daring  the
wars  of  the  Revolution  his  farm  was  frequently
ravaged,  and  he  himself  forced  to  seek  safety  in
flight.  In  17S0,  as  his  affairs  in  Europe  required
his  presence,  he  obtained  permission  from  the  Brit-
ish commander  to  cross  tne  line  of  the  army,  and
entered  New  York  with  one  of  his  sons,  from  which
city  he  was  about  to  sail.  But  the  unexpected
appearance  of  a  French  squadron  led  to  his  being
susiMicted  of  having  entered  New  York  as  a  spy,
ana  he  was  cast  into  prison.  After  a  detention  of
three  months,  he  was  released  by  two  prominent
merchants  becoming  security  for  him.  He  then
embarked  on  a  vessel  sailing  for  Dublin,  and
reached  France  in  17*'.?.  About  this  time  he  in-
troduced the  culture  of  the  American  potato  into
Normandy.  He  had  previously  published  in  Eng-
lish his  "Letters  of  an  American  Farmer."  Be
now  translated  those  letters  into  French  and  had
them  published  in  Paris.  He  then  returned  to
New  \ork.  where  he  was  appointed  1'ivnch  consul.
Nil  sooner  had  he  landed,  in  November,  17*3.  than
he  learned  that  his  house  had  been  burned  and  his
farm  ravaged  by  the  savages.  His  wife  had  died  a
few  weeks  before,  and  he  could  learn  nothing  of  his
children.  He  discovered  them,  however,  in  the
charge  of  an  English  merchant  named  Flower.
who,  through  gratitude  for  Crevecoeur's  kindness
to  the  English  prisoners  in  Normandy,  had,  at
great  risk,  re-cued  them.  The  appointment  of
Cn'veccpur  was  agreeable  to  the  American  govern-
ment, and  Washington  gave  him  particular  proofs
of  his  esteem.  He  accompanied  Franklin  m  the
journey  that  the  latter  took  in  1787  to  Lancaster
to  lay  the  first  stone  of  the  college  which  he  had
founded.  The  "Lettrcs  d'un  cultivateur  Aimri-
cain"  £  vols.,  Paris,  1784)  gives  an  elaborate  de-
scription of  the  United  States  and  Canada.  It  was
so  laudatory  of  the  climate,  productions,  etc.  that
more  than  "five  hundred  families  left  France  00
the  faith  of  Crevecceur's  statement-,  and  settled
on  the  Ohio,  where  most  of  them  perished  Be
also  wrote  "La  culture  des  |>onimcs  de  terrv"  and
••  Voyage  dans  la  haute  Peii-vlvanie  et  dans  lY-tat
de  New  York"  (2  vol's..  Paris  1801).

CRIADO  l>E  CA8TILLA,  Aiuuso  (cre-ah'-do
ilav  nastncil  -yah),  Spanish  governor  of  Guatemala
from 131)8  till Pill. During  his  administration


peace  and  order  nhjMi  in  every  section  i
country,  a*  the  nlilm-tertng  s«naflt4aM  headed  »-t
Drake  hud  been  successfully  npelled  before  he  en-
tered ofliec. !)•■  fotiiidetl the town  and  port  of
Santo  ToimU. on  the  harUr  ..f  Camilla

I  BINNON,  Pater «  rancls,  Canadian  R.  c.
bishop,  b.  m  cuilen,  ...tinty  Louth,  Ireland,  m

1.  in  Jacksonville,  Fin.,  in 1*K>. He  cam*
to  Canada  when  a  Uiv,  and  SJM  oninined  in  To-
ronto in  1064 He  was  then  typointed  tn  misskm
ary duty in Lmdon. Ontario, lb- elected  St.

church  in  Stratford. He  became  bishop  of
Hamilton  in  1*74. During  hi-  admu
the  diocese  the  nnmher  of  <  aihHke  *a*  doubled.
CRISPIN,  Silas,  s..i.iier.  b.  m  r«  Mil  i  earn

alx>ut  Ikiii.  He  was  appointed  to  the  I'.  S,  mili-
tary academy  in  1H4I1.  and  at  graduation  ranked
thinl  in  his  class.  Assigned  to  duty  at  the  arwnal
at  Watervliet,  N.  Y..  he  numim-d  ther
and  then  served  successively  at  the  arsenals  at
Alleghany,  Pa..  St.  Louin  M<>..  and  the  I^eaveo-
worth  onlnance  de|Mit  in  Kan-ax.  In  1800  he  be-
came assistant  in-jKH-tor  of  arsenal*.  He  was  pro-
moted captain  of  ordnance,  :t  ftfjg  Ifltl.  SSsfl  in
that  grade  served  through  the  Oivfl  war,  liar ing
charge  of  different  dejiots  for  the  onlnance depart-
ment.  He  received  snocesstve  broveti  to  include
that  of  colonel  in  the  regular  army  at  the  eloae  of
the  civil  war.  but  did  not  receive  hi-  precaution  a*
major  of  ordnance  until  7  March,  1807.  <  >n  14
April,  1878,  lie  eras  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,
and  colonel  88  Aug-  1861.

CHITTENDEN,  John  Jordan,  statesman,  b.
in  Woodford  oounty,  Kv..  i<»  SepC,  l>7:  d  near
Frankfort.  Ky.,  80  July'.  1808.  Ilis  father  served
in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  with  the  rank  of
major.  The  son  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  college  in  1*07.  and  entered  upon  the  prac-
tice of  the  law  in
his  native  coun-
tv,  but  after  a
snort  time  re-
moved to  I/Ogan
county,  border-
ing on  Tennessee,
a thinly settled

Fart  of  the  state.
n  1H<K)  Gov.
Ninian  Edwards
appointed  him
attorney-general
of  the  territory
of  Illinois.  Be
served  for  a  short
time  as  a  volun-
teer in  the  war
..f  1818,  was  aide
to  Gen.  Shelby  in
1818,  and  served
with  Adair  and  Barry  in  the  Canada  campaign.
After  leaving  the  army  he  n-iiiii.il  the  i>n».
hi-  pioftaainn.  soon  attaining  a  high  place  st  the
bar  In  1810  llS  was  elected  to  the  legislature,
when  he  at  once  toot  a  high  rank.  Tie
vear  he  was  elected  to  the  V.  s.  senate,  but  after
three  vear-'  service  he  ssfhrnod  hi-  sssA  and  in
Ok  up  his  n-idenee  in  Frankfort.  Hera
he  soon  rose  to  eminence  in  the  legal  P*?*""*00]
c-|h<  iallv  as  a  criminal  law> .  rved  ssvoral

term-  in  the  legislatun  I  hi  f"  "!

,,1 |,v Pre-ident Adam- V.  S  t attorney.

i.ut on the  sneaeatea  of  Gem  Jackson  t»  the

preside.ii  v in 1S29. he was  removed. He  was

: again  to  the C  S.  senate  in 1885.  and
served  a  full  term. In  the  remarkable  cam


Jj/VScUt**\s*^*~


10


CRITTENDEN


CRITTENDEN


1840  Mr.  Crittenden  took  an  active  part  in  favor
of  Gen.  Harrison.  He  was  n  elected  to  the  senate
at  the  expiration  <>f  his  term,  but  resigned  his  scat
to  accept  the  appointment  of  attorney-general  in
Harrison's  cabinet.  On  the  death  of  Harrison,
and  the  accession  of  Mr.  Tyler,  Mr.  Crittenden's
views  of  national  policy  not  being  in  harmony
with  those  of  the  new  president,  he  retired  from
the  cabinet.  Mr.  Clay  having  decided  to  retire
from  the  senate  in  1842,  Mr.  Crittenden  was  ap-
pointed to  fill  the  vacant  seat ;  and  at  the  expira-
tion of  the  term  was  again  elected  for  a  full  term.
In  1848  he  was  elected  governor  of  Kentucky,  and
resigned  his  seat  in  the  senate  to  fill  that  office.
Notwithstanding  the  intimate  relations  between
Mr.  Clay  and  himself,  he  favored  the  nomination
of  Gen.  Taylor  in  1848  as  the  whig  candidate  for
the  presidency,  but  only  after  Mr.  Clav  had
assured  him  that  he  would  not  be  a  candidate.
When  the  president  died,  and  Mr.  Fillmore  suc-
ceeded him,  Mr.  Crittenden  accepted  the  port-
folio of  attorney-general  in  the  new  cabinet.  The
great  question  as  to  the  constitutionality  of  the
fugitive-slave  law  was  referred  to  him,  and  he
prepared  an  opinion  in  favor  of  it.  In  1855  he
was  once  more  elected  to  the  senate,  and  took
a  leading  part  in  the  discussions  of  the  impor-
tant questions  that  came  before  congress  in  the
course  of  the  next  five  years.  The  sentiments
uttered  by  him  were  eminently  national,  and  he
exerted  his  full  strength  in  a  patriotic  effort  to
effect  a  satisfactory  settlement  of  the  disturbing
elements  that  imperilled  the  perpetuity  of  the
Union.  He  opposed  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri
compromise,  ana,  in  expressing  his  views  of  the
questions  growing  out  or  the  Kansas  troubles,  vig-
orously opposed  the  policv  of  the  administrations
of  Presidents  Pierce  and  Buchanan.  He  favored
the  election  of  Bell  and  Everett  in  the  presidential
canvass  of  1860.  He  vehemently  opposed  seces-
.  sion,  and  supported  Mr.  Lincoln's  administration,
holding  that  it  was  the  right  and  duty  of  the  gov-
ernment to  maintain  the  Union  by  force.  He  ex-
erted his  full  power  to  effect  a  compromise  between
the  contending  parties,  but,  failing  to  accomplish
it,  took  his  stand  for  the  government.  In  the
hope  of  maintaining  the  Union,  he  proposed  an
amendment  to  the  constitution  in  December,  1860,
providing  for  the  re-enactment  of  the  Missouri
compromise,  and  the  prohibition  of  any  interfer-
ence by  congress  with  slavery  wherever  it  should  be
legally  established.  Mr.  Crittenden  had  been  six
times  elected  to  the  senate,  and  his  last  effort  in  that
body  was  to  save  the  Union.  On  4  March,  1861,
he  presented  the  credentials  of  his  successor,  Mr.
Breckinridge,  and  retired.  Returning  to  Ken-
tucky, he  urged  his  state  to  stand  by  the  Union,
and  held  it  firmly  against  the  appeals  of  the  other
states  of  the  south.  He  became  a  candidate  for  a
seat  in  congress,  and,  being  elected,  took  his  place
in  the  house  of  representatives,  where  he  was  at
once  recognized  as  a  powerful  leader.  He  offered,
on  19  July,  1861,  the  following  resolution,  which
was  adopted  with  only  two  dissenting  votes :  "  Re-
solved by  the  house  of  representatives  of  the  con-
gress of  the  United  States,  That  the  present  de-
Elorable  civil  war  has  been  forced  upon  the  country
y  the  disunionists  of  the  southern  states,  uir  in
arms  against  the  constitutional  government,  and
in  arms  around  the  capital ;  that  in  this  national
emergency  congress,  banishing  all  feelings  of  mere
passion  or  resentment,  will  recollect  its  only  duty
to  the  whole  country ;  that  this  war  is  not  waged
on  their  part  in  any  spirit  of  oppression,  or  for  any
purpose  of  conquest  or  subjugation,  or  purpose  of


overthrowing  or  interfering  with  the  rights  or  es-
tablished institution^  of  those  states,  but  to  defend
and  maintain  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution,
and  to  preserve  the  Union  with  all  the  dignity,
equality,  and  rights  of  the  several  states  unim-
paired :  and  that  as  soon  as  these  objects  are  ac-
complished the  war  ought  to  cease."  He  opposed
the  employment  of  slaves  as  soldiers,  and  he  denied
the  power  of  congress  to  organize  the  state  of
Wed  Virginia.  His  last  speech,  delivered  22  I'd...
1863,  showed  that  his  force  had  not  abated.  He
denounced  the  conscription  bill,  and  declared  that
the  war  had  been  changed  from  its  original  pur-
pose. He  was  again  a  candidate  for  congress.  I  mt
died  before  the  election.  Mr.  Crittenden's  per-
sonal qualities  were  fine.  He  made  friends  every-
where ;  there  was  cordiality  blended  with  dig-
nity in  his  manner ;  his  voice  was  musical  in  con-
versation, and  captivating  in  his  public  speeches.
By  Thomas  Corwin  and  others  of  his  compeers  he
was  esteemed  the  most  able  debater  in  the  senate.
— His  son,  George  Bibb,  b.  in  Russellville,  Kv.,
20  March,  1812 ;  d.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  27  Nov.,  1880,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1832,  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition,  though
not  at  the  seat  of  war,  and  resigned,  30  April,  1833.
He  volunteered  in  the  Texan  revolution  of  1835,
and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Meir,  on  the  Rio  Grande,
by  the  Mexicans,  who  carried  him  with  his  com-
pany to  the  city  of  Mexico,  where  he  was  confined
in  a  foul  prison  until  released,  through  the  inter-
vention of  Daniel  Webster,  nearly  a  year  after-
ward. On  one  occasion  the  Mexicans  decided  to
shoot  a  certain  number  of  the  prisoners  as  a  meas-
ure of  retaliation,  and  Crittenden,  being  an  officer,
was  one  of  the  first  to  draw  lots  to  determine
which  of  them  should  die.  He  drew  a  favorable
lot,  but  when  a  friend  who  had  a  family  drew  a
fatal  black  bean,  he  gave  to  that  soldier  his  white
bean,  and  risked  his  life  in  another  chance.  He
served  through  the  Mexican  war  as  captain  of
mounted  rifles,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gal-
lantry at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  was  one  of
the  first  to  enter  the  city  of  Mexico,  became  major
of  mounted  rifles,  15  April,  1848.  served  on  frontier
duty,  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  30  Dec.,
1856,  and  on  10  June,  1861,  resigned  and  joined
the  Confederate  service.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general,  and  soon  afterward  major-gen-
eral, and  was  assigned,  in  November,  1861,  to  the
command  of  southeastern  Kentucky  and  a  part  of
eastern  Tennessee.  On  learning  that  Gen.  Zolli-
coffer  had  moved  his  forces  across  the  Cumberland
at  Mill  Spring,  he  gave  orders  to  recross  the  river,
but  Zollicoffer  delayed  executing  the  order  until
the  rise  of  the  river  rendered  it  impracticable  to
transport  the  artillery.  When  Gen.  Thomas  ap-
proached with  a  large  force,  on  18  Jan.,  1862,  Gen.
Crittenden  ordered  an  attack.  The  Confederates
attempted  to  surprise  the  Union  troops  at  Fishing
Creek ;  but  only  two  regiments  came  up  to  begin
the  attack  in  the  morning  of  19  Jan.,  and  after  the
death  of  Gen.  Zollicoffer  the  troops  were  demoral-
ized. Gen.  Crittenden  effected  the  retreat  of  his
forces  across  the  river,  leaving  the  artillery  be-
hind. He  was  severely  censured  for  making  the
attack, was  kept  under  arrest  until  November,  and
soon  afterward  resigned  his  commission.  He  con-
tinued to  serve  as  a  volunteer  on  tin*  staff  of  Gen.
John  S.  Williams,  who  frequently  followed  his  ad-
vice and  gave  him  the  command  of  bodies  of  troops.
After  the  war  he  resided  in  Frankfort.  Ky.,  where
lie  was  state  librarian  from  1867  to  1871. — Another
son,  Thomas  Leonidas,  b.  in  Russelh  ijle.  Ky..  15
May,  1815,  studied  law  under  his  father,  was  ad-


CRoASDALF


CBOCKKK


11


mitted  t<>  Um  l>ur,  and  I  M-camc  commonwealth's  at-
torney In  Kan  tacky  in  1842.  lie  Mired  In  t  In-
Mexican  war  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  Kentucky
infantry,  and  was  volunteer  aide  t"  Qen.  Taylor  at
the  Iwittle  of  Pinna  Vista.  In  1861  li"  \\a-  ap-
|K>int«-«i  liv  President  Taylor  consul  t<>  Urerpeol,
an<l  nmd  till  1868,  then  returned  to  tin-  United

States,  resided  for  some  time  ut  Frankfort,  and
afterward  engaged  in  mercantile  business  at  Louis-
ville,  Ky.  At  the  beginning  of  tin  fllrfl  war  he  es-
poused the  national  oauss,  and  on  27  Oct.,  1861,
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteer*.  Hi
commanded  a  division  at  the  liattle  of  Shiloh.  and
was  promoted  major-general,  17  .Inly,  1NU2.  for  gal-
lant  services  on  that  Bornnion,  and  assigned  to  the
command  <>f  a  division  in  the  Army  of  the  Tennes-
see, lie  commanded  the  2d  corps,  forming  the
left  wing  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  under  Gen.
Hucll,  and  afterward  served  under  (Jen.  Boseetam
in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  and  at  Chickamauga
commanded  one  of  the  two  corps  that  were  routed.
In  the  Virginia  campaign  of  1864  he  commanded
a  division  of  the  QtO  corps.  He  resigned,  18  Deo.
1864,  but  entered  the  regular  army  as  colonel  of
the  68d  infantry  on  28  July,  UNMLwss  breYetted
brigadier-general  for  gallant  rv  at  Stone  River,  2
March,  18(17,  transferred  to  the  17th  infantry  in
lsii!»,  and  served  with  his  regiment  on  the  frontier
until  he  was  retired  on  19  May,  1881.— Thomas  T.,
a  nephew  of  John  Jordan,  l>.  in  Alabama  about
1828.  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  lieutenant  of
Missouri  mounted  volunteers,  afterward  settled  in
Indiana,  and  entered  the  volunteer  army  in  1861
as  colonel  of  a  regiment  of  three  months'  men,
with  a  detachment  of  which  he  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Philippi.  The  regiment  was  reorganized
under  his  command  at  the  expiration  of  its  term
of  service,  and  served  for  three  years.  lie  was
promoted  brigadier-general  on  28  April,  1862,  and
taken  prisoner  at  Murfreesboro  on  12  July,  and  not
released  till  October. He  resigned  5  May,  1863.

CROASDALE,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania; d.  at  Antietam,  Md.,  17  Sept..  1862.  Ib-
was  a  lawyer  in  Doylestown,  Pa.  Immediately
after  the  president's  proclamation  of  15  April,  1861,
he  volunteered  for  three  months,  and,  after  the
governor's  call  for  nine  mont  lis'  men  in  the  summer
of  1868,  raised  a  company  in  Doylestown,  and.
iijxm  the  organization  of  the  12Nth  Pennsylvania
regiment,  was  appointed  its  colonel.  After  a  few
week>'  service  in  camps  of  instruction  near  Wash-
ington, the  emergencies  of  the  invasion  of  Mary-
land required  the  services  of  the  regiment  in  the
field.  At  Antietam  it  was  assigned  an  important
position,  and  Col.  Croasdale,  baring  formed  I  i-
men  in  line,  was  Uniting  an  assault  undei  a  heavy
lire,  when  a  ball  killed  him  instantly.

<  ROCKKR.  A I  van,  capitalist,  b.  in  Leominster,
Mass.,  14  o.t..  1801;  d.  in  Pitchburg,  2i>  Deo,
l^Tl.  He  obtained  an  academic  education,  entered
a  paper-mill  at  Franklin.  X.  EL,  in  lN-<>.  removed
to  Fitehburg,  Mass.,  in  1898,  and  l>egan  to  manu-
facture papal  on  his  own  account  on  borrowed
capital.  lie  struggled  for  many  years  with  debt-,
but  gradually  extended  his  business,  and  in  1*34
laid  the  foundation  for  a  fortune  by  purchasing  all
the  land  in  the  Xa-him  valley,  in  order  to  build  a
Hew  road. He was elected to the Massachusetts

legislature  in  1835,  where  he  advocated  steam
communication  with  Mo-ton,  returned  to  the
legislature  in  1848,  and  obtained  a  chattel  for  a
railroad  between  northern  Massachusetts  and
the  seaboard,  which  was  completed  through  his
■•ion-  in  1h4">.  He  afterward  engaged  in  build-
ing the  Vermont  and  MassSfihusstta,  the  Troy  and


Boston,  and  the  Hoow  tunnel  railroad*,  and  in

-  lectured  in  UhaJf  of  It.
Hoar  in-  paper  milk  which  became  Um  largwjt  In
the  United  state-,  if  built  tn arhlne ahope  and
foundries.  He  was  the  tir-t  to  uae  cotton-warts  in
the  manufacture  of  white  VgftK,  ami  palm-leef
fibre  for  coarse  wall-pa|»-r.  II.  tv  a  member  of
the  state  senate  for  two  terms  during  the  ciril  war,
on  2  Jan..  1878,  wm  elected  to  congraw  a.  a  re^
publican  to  Mm  out  the  unexpired  term  of
William  11.  Wadiburn.  who  had  |wll  nimi\,.
■Wianut,  and  wa-  n-.].<t.-d  f..r  the  following
term,  serving  from  14  Feb.,  IM72,  until  hi-  death.

(ROCK  hit.  Charles railroad  builder,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  v..  16  8ept,  1822;  d.  m  Monterey,  GaL,

14  Am:..  1***. He had  a  fair  .-ducatioii.  and  waa
tVned  adrift by  In-  father. In 1846  ha  *
California,  engaged  in  mining,  and  "|«'iied  a  store
anient... He  ua-  elected  t<>  the  common
council in 1h.V>,  and  to  the l.gi-lature m 1800,
With  Lalaad  Stanford,  Mark  Hopkins,  and
P.  Huntington,  he  furiii-li.-d  meant  for  the  stirrer
of  a  railroad  route  aOTOSi  the  Sierra Neva<la;  ana
on  the  |iassage  of  the Pnion Pacific  railr.^wl  bill
by  congress  he  was  aasooiated  with  them  in  con-
structinu' the Central Pacific  divi-i..n. tl.
sujiplving the capital beyond the government
suioidy. He  personally  built  a  large  por*
the  nio-t  difficult  wjQHons.  ander  contrast. In
1871  he  was  elected  president  «-f the  Boutassi
Pacific  railroad  oompany,  of  California,  and  second
vice-president  of  the  Cent  ml  Pacific.  -u|«  nntend-
lug,  in  the  former  capacity,  the  eonstrucooaof  the
divisions  in  Arizona.  New  nterico,  and  Tcxa
1884  he  effected  a  consolidation  of  the  prOpertM
of  the  two  companies,  having  a  joint  oontrsl  of
s.itd.t  miles  of  railroad and steam-hip  lines,  and
soon  afterward  removed  t<>  New  Vork  city.

CROC  KKK. Hannah Mather,  author,  b. in
Boston,  Mas-.,  in  17<m; d.  in Rozoury, Mass.,  10
July, 1H47. She was  a  granddaughter  •  4
ton Mather, a daughter of tie Bi  r. Samuel

Mather,  of  Boston,  and  married  Joseph  <  i

Of  Taunton,  who  left her  a  widow. In 1*10  she
sent  to  a  newspajier  a  series  >.f  "  I..  tten  on
masonrv,"  which  were  republiehed  on  the  advice
of  the  Ber.  Dr.  Thaddeua  at  Harria.  who  wrote  a
preface  to  the  volume. She  published  afterward
H  The  School  of  Reform."  and  in 1816 I
tions  on the Rights  of  Woman."  and  wrote  »n
account  of  the  life  ..f  Madam Knight,  the  school-
mistress  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  which  i- preserved
in the library of the Antiquarian
Worcester,  Ma—.

CROCK  KR.  Marcellu-  M.. Mi.r.b.  in  Frank-
lin. Johnson  <■<•..  In-C.  »i  F- b..  I860;  ,1.  ill  Wash-
ington. I>.  c..  86  Aug.,  l^i-V He  watered  tl
militarv  academy  in 1*47.  l»«'t left  at the  I
ud  year,  studied  law,  and  practised
Moines,  Iowa, He  entered  the  national  xrviceas
major  of  the  2d Iowa  infantry  in May.  1861,  was
promoted  colonel  on  80  Deo.,  fought  with  distinc-
tion in  the  battle  of  Shiloh.  April  «  and  7,  1868,
WM  promoted  brigadier-general  on  29  N«>v.,  1888.
and  engaged  at  the  awajeof  Vicksburc.  pBOd
a  raid  in  Mississippi. After  the  re-enliatm
Ins  brigade  at  reteran  volunteers  he  f.-nght  through
rgisoaeapaign  of  Sen.  Bbonnan. wimiaaan

big  a  diM-ioii  I  pari  <>f  the  time. He  was  suffer-
ing from  consumption  during  the  w
militarv  career,  and  was  assigned  to  d

•li  account  of  sickness. The  brigade  thai
he  had  commanded  and  brought  I
discipline  waa  as  k named  •Crocker**  gi

heavily  in  the  assault  of  Raid  Hill  OatBIW


12


(ROCKER


CROCKETT


Atlanta,  on  22  July,  1M<>4.  and  in  Hardee's  attack
on  their  position  later  in  the  day  fully  half  were
killed,  wounded,  or  captured.

CROCKER.  Nathan  Bourne,  clergyman,  b.  in
Barnstable,  Mass.,  4  July,  1781 ;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  19  Oct.,  1865.  He  prepared  for  college  at
Sandwich  academy,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1802,  studied  medicine,  and  then  theology,  took
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1803,
and  was  elected  rector  of  St.  John's  church  in
Providence,  over  which  he  presided  until  his  death,
with  the  exception  of  a  lew  years,  during  which
his  health  prevented  his  preaching.  He  was  sec-
retary of  the  corporation  of  Brown  university  from
1837  till  1843.  The  ministerial  life  of  Dr.  Crocker
was  identified  with  the  history  of  the  Episcopal
church  of  Rhode  Island,  which  contained  but  four
churches  of  that  denomination  when  he  assumed
his  pastorate.  Some  of  his  sermons  and  occasional
addresses  and  lectures  were  published.

CROCKER,  Uriel,  publisher,  b.  in  Marblehead,
Essex  co.,  Mass.,  13  Sept.,  1796;  d.  in  Cohasset,
Mass.,  19  July,  1887.  He  went  with  his  father
to  Boston  in  1811,  and  was  apprenticed  to  Samuel
T.  Armstrong  to  learn  the  printer's  trade.  Two
months  later,  Osmyn  Brewster,  a  son  of  Dr.  Brew-
ster, of  Worthington,  entered  the  same  office.  Mr.
Armstrong's  store,  No.  50  Cornhill,  was  formerly
occupied  by  Paul  Revere,  and  is  now  173  and  175
Washington  street.  In  1814  Mr.  Crocker  was  made
foreman  of  the  printing-office,  and  in  1818  taken
into  partnership  bv  Mr.  Armstrong,  with  his  asso-
ciate Brewster.  Mr.  Armstrong  withdrew  in  1825,
and  the  firm  of  "Crocker  &  Brewster"  was  contin-
ued until  they  retired  from  active  business  in  1876.
At  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  their  copartnership
Mr.  Crocker  said :  "  Mr.  Brewster  and  I  first  met
in  the  year  1811,  as  apprentices  of  the  late  Samuel
Y.  Armstrong.  It  was  in  the  old  building  which
stood  on  the  same  lot  where  we  spent  fifty-four  of
the  fifty-seven  years  that  we  have  been  together,
the  old  number  being  50  Cornhill — that's  old
Cornhill — now  forming  part  of  Washington  street.
We  left  it  only  three  years  ago,  when  we  removed
to  the  adjoining  store.  I  had  been  an  apprentice
about  two  months  when  he  came.  It  was  pleasant
to  see  him,  as  it  removed  from  me  the  title  which
the  youngest  apprentice  in  a  printing-office  has
affixed  to  his  name.  Our  partnership  agreement,
1818,  just  fifty  years  ago,  was  drawn  up  and  wit-
nessed by  Jeremiah  Evarts,  father  of  William  M.
Evarts.  In  the  arrangement  of  our  business,  Mr.
Brewster  attended  chiefly  to  the  book-store.  I  di-
rected the  printing-office,  the  latter  having  been
wholly  in  my  charge  since  I  was  eighteen  years  of
age.  The  numerous  persons  in  our  employ — and
there  were  in  former  years  from  twenty-five  to
thirty  in  the  printing-office  alone — were  paid  in
full  every  Saturday  night.  The  first  large  work
we  published  was  '  Scott's  Family  Bible  '  (6  vols.,
8vo,  1820).  It  was  an  experiment,  and  many  of  the
older  booksellers  prophesied  that  we  should  not  be
successful.  The  result  was  entirely  satisfactory."
On  29  Nov.,  1886,  Mr.  Crocker  celebrated  the  sev-
enty-fifth anniversary  of  his  partnership  with  Mr.
Brewster.  A  number  of  distinguished  people  were
assembled  at  his  home  to  congratulate  the  two
nonogenarians.  Among  them  were  Dr.  Oliver
Wendell  Holmes,  Dr.  Samuel  Herrick,  Frederick
D.  Ames,  ex-Gov.  Rice,  and  Gov.-elect  Ames.  Each
guest  was  presented  with  a  portrait  of  these  mer-
chant princes,  and  a  member  of  the  Brewster  fam-
ily contributed  a  poem  in  commemoration  of  the
diamond  wedding  festivity.  See  Mr.  Crocker's
"  Autobiography  *  (Boston,"  1869).


^V^fl^,  ^tcxJfctt


CROCKETT,  David,  pioneer,  b.  in  Limestone,
Greene  co.,  Tenn.,  17  An-..  17*6;  d.  in  Texas,  0
March,  1836.  His  father,  a  Revolutionary  veteran
of  Irish  birth,  moved  to  eastern  Tennessee  after  the
war,  and  about  1793  opened  a  small  tavern  on  the
road  from  Knoxville  to  Abingdon.  When  David
was  about  twelve  years  old  his  father  hired  him
to  an  old  Dutchman,  with  whom  he  went  400  miles
on  foot,  but,  after  remaining  a  few  weeks  with  his
master,  ran  away  and  succeeded  in  reaching  home.
Shortly  afterward  he  was  sent  to  school,  but  on
the  fourth  day
gave  one  of  the
pupils  with  whom
he  had  quarrelled
a  sound  beating,
and,  after  playing
truant  for  a  time
to  avoid  a  flog-
ging, ran  away
from  home  to  es-
cape the  venge-
ance of  his  fa-
ther. For  three
years  he  worked
for  teamsters  in
Tennessee,  Mary-
land, and  Vir-
ginia, and  for
eighteen  months
was  bound to  a

hatter  in  the  last-named  state.  Tired  of  wander-
ing about,  he  finally  returned  home,  and  short-
ly afterward  worked  hard  for  a  year  to  pay  two
notes  of  his  father's,  amounting  to  $76.  He
then  went  to  school  for  six  months,  and  learned
his  letters  for  the  first  time,  but  relinquished
study  to  seek  a  wife,  and,  after  several  disap-
pointments in  love,  married  and  settled  in  Lin-
coln county  in  1809,  and  about  1811  in  Frank-
lin county,  one  of  the  wildest  parts  of  the  state.
Crockett  had  by  this  time  acquired  some  fame  as  a
hunter,  and,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Creek  war  in
1813,  he  enlisted  in  a  regiment  of  sixty-day  vol-
unteers. He  served  through  the  war,  and  after-
ward settled  on  Shoal  creek,  in  a  desolate  region
of  the  state,  where  a  temporary  government  was
formed  by  the  settlers  and  Crockett  was  made  a
magistrate.  He  was  subsequently  appointed  to
the  same  office  by  the  state  legislature,  and  was
then  elected  colonel  of  militia.  In  1821  he  was  a
candidate  for  the  legislature,  and  winning  favor  by
telling  amusing  stories  and  by  his  skill  with  the
rifle,  was  elected  by  a  handsome  majority,  though
he  had  never  read  a  newspaper  in  his  life,  and  was
entirely  ignorant  of  public  speaking.  In  1822  he
lost  all  his  property  by  fire,  and  moved  again  to
the  Obion  river,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  his
favorite  occupation  of  hunting,  living  on  bear-
meat  and  venison.  He  served  again  in  the  legisla-
ture in  1823-'4,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  congress.  In  1826  he  was
again  a  candidate,  as  a  supporter  of  Jackson,  and
this  time  was  elected,  serving  two  terms,  from  1827
till  1831.  In  his  second  term  he  opposed  Jackson's
Indian  bill,  and  this  course  caused  his  defeat  in
1830;  but  he  served  again  in  1833-'5.  Crockett
was  popular  at  Washington,  where  he  became
noted  not  only  for  his  eccentricity  of  manner,  but
for  his  strong  common  sense  and  shrewdness.  He
prided  himself  on  his  independence,  and  thus  set
forth  his  position  :  "I  am  at  liberty  to  vote  as  ray
conscience  and  judgment  dictate  to  be  right,  with-
out the  yoke  of  any  party  on  me,  or  the  driver  at
my  heels,  with  his  whip  in  hand,  commanding  me


CRn  KS


MAN


13


to  ge-wo-haw,  just  at  his  pleasure." Aft.-r  the  in-
creasing Lnftaanoi  of  Jsjokson  in  Tcnnossoo,  whi.h

in.fl>'  it  impossible  for  Crockett to  be  re-elected  to

gross,  In-  joined  the  Texans  in  their  >t r :.
for  independence,  ami.  having  psritonned  viinoua

exploits.  ended Km  adventurous  life  in  tin-  famous
defence  of  the  Alamo,  whSTO,  as  OM  of  t I » . -i\  -ur-

n  of  a  band  of  140  Texana,  be  surrendered  to
Santa  Anna,  only  to  be  massacred  by  that  ofl
oiden. An  unauthorised  account  of  Crocki
life,  entitled  "Sketches  and  Eccentricities  of  0ok>
mI David  Crockett"  (Philadelphia,  lK;t;{>.  drew
from him  a  characteristic autobiography  <1
and  hfl  also  published  a  burlesque  "  Lift*  of  Van
Boron,  Heir-Apparent  to  the  Qoronunenl  "  j  16

and  a  "Tour  to  the  North  and 1)<>wm  EaM  "
York, 1*35). See,  also,  '•Crockett's Exploits  in
Texas"  (New  York,  1848);  and  "Life  of  Colonel
d Crockett." bv  Edward S. Ellis  (Philadel-

Shia). — His  son.  John  W.,  l>.  in  Trenton,  Tenn.;
.  in  Memphis.  Tenn..  24  Nov.,  1852,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  is:{?-'41.  He  was  elected  by
the  legislature  attorney-general  for  the  9th  dis-
trict of  Tennessee  <>n  l  Nov.,  1841,  and  afterward
removed  to  New  Orleans,  where,  on  88  May.  1848,
he  became  associate  editor  of  the  "  National."

CROES,  John,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Elizabeth-
town,  N.  .1..  1  .June,  1768;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  26  July,  188SL  His  early  vears  were  occu-
pied partly  in  mechanical  pursuits  and  partly  in
efforts  to  acquire  a  classical  education.  During
the  Revolution  he  served  as  a  sergeant  and  quarter-
master, and  after  the  war  he  opened  a  scnool  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  studied  for  tne  ministry  of  the
Episcopal  church.  He  was  ordained  deacon  by
Bishop  White  in  Philadelphia,  28  Feb.,  1780,  and
priest  in  March,  1792.  He  then  became  rector  of
Trinity  church,  Swedesborough,  N.  J.,  which  place
he  held  for  twelve  years.  He  was  uniform! v  active
and  zealous  in  the  service  of  the  church.  In  both
diocesan  and  general  conventions.  Dr.  Croes  be-
came rector  of  Christ  church,  New  Brunswick,  in
1801,  having  in  charge  also  a  neighboring  church
and  an  academy.  He  was  elected  bishop  of  New
Jersey  in  the  summer,  and  consecrated  in  Philadel-

fmia,  19  Nov.,  1815.  During  the  remainder  of  his
ife  he  gave  himself  to  the  duties  of  his  high  office
with  conscientious  devotion  and  fidelity.  Bishop
Croes  published  a  few  sermons  and  addresses.

CKOFFUT,  William  Augustus,  author,  b.  in
Redding,  Conn.,  29  Jan.,  1835.  He  received  his
education  in  the  public  schools  of  Orange,  Conn.
In  1861  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  U.  S.  army,
and  with  a  certain  pride  records  that  the  warrant
of  a  corporal  is  the  highest  military  appointment
he  has  ever  held.  He  was  a  journalist  before  join-
ing the  army,  and  has  been  successively  engaged
upon  the  New  Haven,  Conn..  "Palladium.**  the
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "  Democrat,"  the  St  Paul,  Minn..
"  Times,'"  the  Minneapolis  "Tribune."  the  Chicago
"  Post,"  the  New  York  "  Graphic,"  "  Tribune."  and
"World."  and  the  Washington.  D.  ("..  "Post."
He  has  twice  visited  Europe,  and  travelled  through
Mexico,  Yucatan,  Cuba,  and  Nova  Scotia,  and  has
been  a  voluminous  correspondent  of  pipsi  in
most  of  the  large  cities  of  the  west.  lie  wrote
the  libretto  of  a  comic  opera  entitled  "  D.-eret."
brought  out  in  New  York  in  1888,  for  which  Dud-
ley Buck  composed  the  music.  The  motive  for
this  opera  was  drawn  from  life  among  the  Mor-
mons. He  is  the  author  of  - The  Histon  f  ('"ii-
n.  client  in  the  Rebellion  "  (New  York.  1867);  -A
Helping  Hand w (Cincinnati,  1868);  "Bombon  Hal-
lads,"  a  popular  series  of  political  rhymee  (New
York,  1880);  "A  Midsummer  Lark"  (1882);  and


h-rbilu"  (1886). The
Lark  "is  n  humorous  account  of  ,-,  t.
■OTOOS, written  in  rhyme,  but  printed  for  the  moat
part  in  the  form  of  prone.

CROQbUN,  ttoorre,  Indian  agent,  b.  in  Ire-
land; d. iu PsSBSJVnk, Pa,,  nlx.ut  AsMM
He  was  educated  In Dublin,  ami
country  settled  near  Hssrfaburg,  Ph..  and  wae  an
Indian  trailer  there  h*  early  im 1  .  ,,g  ac-

quired the  confidence  of  the  Indian*  mid  a  knowl-
edge of  their  language*,  he  became  agent  for  the
colony  sssonc  them.  He  wan  a  captain  in  Brad-
dock**  ex|H-dition  in 1 755.  engag  Irfenos

of  t  lie  western  frontier  in 1756,  and  n
was  made  deputy  Indian  ag
nia and Ohio Indians by  Sir  William Johnson,

who,  in  1 7<U{.  sent  him  to  'England  t afar  with

the  ministry  relative  to  an  Indian  l-Mindarv-line.

While  on  a  inhwion,  in  1789,  to  paeifj

Indians,  he  WSS  attacked.  wournicd,  and  taken  to
Yincennes,  but  was  v-.n inlSBSed.  and tuccsniwJ

in  accomplishing  hfa  inission.  In  May.  1766,  be
made  a  settlement  fonrmilas  from  Eort  1'itt.  nnd
he  continued  thereafter  to  render  valuable  service

in  pacifying  the  Indians  and  ooncflisttng  thsssta

British  Interests  until  177»*>.

CBOQHAH,  QwOTgn, loldier,  b.  n.-ar  L»ui»-
ville. Kv.. U N'o\.. I7flj  d.  iii  ana,  8

Jan..  1849.  His  father  was  Maj.  W'illiar
ghan.  of  the  Revolution,  and  his  mother  a  «i»ter  of
Gen.  George  Rogers  Clark.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  college  in  1*10,  and,  entering
the  army,  was  aide  to  CoL  Boyd  at  the  hsl
Tippecanoe  in  1811,  and  made  captain  iu  the  17th
infantry.  12  March.  1818.  He  distinguished  him-
self under  Harrison  in  the  sortie  (rem  l"ort
Meigs.  became  his  aide-de-camp,  with  the  rank  of
major.  80  March.  1818,  and.  on  the  1st  and  Id  of
August  following,  conducted  the  memorable  de-
fence of  Fort  Stephenson,  at  Lower  Sandusky,
against  (Jen.  Proctor,  with  an  army  of  500 regulars
and  700  Indians.  Maj.  Croghau  was  brevetted  lieu-
tenant-colonel for
his  gallantry  <>n
this  occasion,  and

subsequently  re-
ceived from  con-
gress a  gold  med-
al. He  was  made
a  lieutenant-colo-
nel-.M  Feb..  1814;
upon  the  reduc-
tion of  the  army
at  the  close  of
the  war.  he  was
transferred  to  the
1st  infantry.  He
resigned  in  lv17.
was  postanal

New  Orleans  in
1884,  and  was  ap-
pointed inspeot-
or-general.  with
the  rank  of  colo-
nel.21  Deo,  1866.

In  1846 he  joined  ,

Tavlor's  armv  in  Mexico,  and  served  with  credit
at  the  battle  of  Mont.rcv.—  His  eon,  George  81.
John  a  I  i . federat e  officer,  was  fatally  wound.-.!
at  McCoy's  Mills,  W.  Ya..  during  retreat

from  Cotton  Hill,  in  Dio—hsT.  1861. Before  nia

death  be  admitted  SO  ticii.  Bcnham.  by  »h<*e  •ol-
diers  he  bad  U-.li  wounded,  that  he  hud  f^nght
on  the  Vinig  side.  Be  invented  a  peculiar  pack-
seddk  for  mules,  which  had  been  I


&a:  VtyAjL*^


14


CROIX


CKonK


in  i ■'iiiveying  wonntleil  men  over  the  mountain-
passes  of  we.-tern  Virginia.

4  HOIX,  Jeau  Baptiste  De  La,  It.  C.  bishop,
b.  of  a  noble  family,  in  (irenolde.  France,  in  1053;
d.  in  Quebec,  28  Dec.,  1727.  He  was  first  almoner
to  Louis  XIV.,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1685  as  suc-
cessor t<>  Laval,  the  first  bishop  of  Quebec.  He
founded  three  hospitals,  and  distributed  more  than
a  million  livres  among  the  poor.

CROLY,  David  Goodman,  journalist,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  3  Nov.,  1829 ;  d.  in  New  York,  29
April,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  New  York  uni-
versity in  1854,  was  subsequently  a  professor  of
phonographv,  and  a  reporter  for  the  New  York
"Evening  Post "  and  "Herald"  from  1855  till
1858.  He  owned  and  edited  the  Rockford,  111.,
"Dailv  News"  from  1858  till  1859,  and  became
city  editor  of  the  New  York  "  World  "  when  it  was
founded  in  18C0,  then  its  managing  editor  until  1872.
His  active  work  as  a  newspaper  editor  terminated  in
1878,  when,  in  consequence  of  ill  health,  he  resigned
the  editorship  of  the  New  York  "  Graphic,"  which
he  had  held  since  1872.  Mr.  Croly  predicted  finan-
cial catastrophes,  and  foretold  in  the  spring  of  1872
the  panic  of  the  autumn  of  1873,  naming  the  bank-
ing-nouse  (Jav  Cooke  &  Co.)  that  first  failed,  and
also  indicated  the  railroad  (the  Northern  Pacific)
that  would  first  go  down.  Mr.  Croly  contributed
many  articles  to  periodicals,  and  published  lives  of
Seymour  and  Blair,  with  a  "History  of  Recon-
struction "  (New  York,  1868),  and  a  "  Primer  of
Positivism"  (1876). — His  wife,  Jane  Cunning-
ham, b.  in  Market  Harborough,  England,  19  Dec.,
1831,  is  known  by  her  writings  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Jenny  June."  Her  father  came  to  the
United  States  when  she  was  ten  years  old.  Until
that  time  she  was  educated  at  her  native  place,
afterward  by  her  father  and  brother  at  Pougnkeep-
sie  and  New  York.  In  1857  she  was  married,  and  in
1860  became  editor  of  Demorest's  "  Quarterly  Mir-
ror of  Fashion,"  and  when  that  periodical  and  the
New  York  "Weekly  Illustrated  News"  were  in-
corporated into  "  Demorest's  Illustrated  Monthly  "
she  became  the  editor  of  the  new  journal.  Mrs.
Croly  has  been  also  editorially  connected  with  the
New  York  "  World,"  "  Graphic,"  daily  "  Times,"
and  "Noah's  Sunday  Times,"  and  was  dramatic
critic  and  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Messenger  "  for
five  years,  1861-'6.  She  invented  the  system  of
duplicate  correspondence,  and  has  practised  it  for
thirty  years.  Mrs.  Croly's  pen-name  of  "Jenny
June  "  was  derived  from  a  little  poem  by  Benja-
min F.  Taylor,  sent  to  her,  when  she  was  about
twelve  years  old,  by  her  pastor,  in  Poughkeepsie,
with  the  name  underlined,  because,  he  said,  "You
are  the  Juniest  little  girl  I  know."  Mrs.  Croly
called  the  first  Woman's  Congress  in  New  York,  in
1856,  and  also  the  second,  in  1869,  and  in  1868
founded  the  Sorosis,  and  was  its  president  until
1870,  and  again  from  1876  till  1886.  She  is  vice-
president  of  the  Association  for  the  advancement
of  the  medical  education  of  women.  She  has  pub-
lished "Talks  on  Women's  Topics"  (1869);  "For  Bet-
ter or  Worse  "  (1875) ;  a  "  Cookery- Book  for  Ytoung
Housekeepers " ;  and  "  Knitters  and  Crochet,
"  Letters  and  Monograms  "  (New  YTork,  1885-'6).
^  CROMPTON,  William,  inventor,  b.  in  Preston,
England,  in  1806.  He  was  brought  up  as  a  hand-
loom  cotton-weaver,  and  at  an  early  age  learned  the
trade  of  a  machinist.  While  superintendent  of  a
cotton-mill  in  Ramsbottom,  near  Berry,  he  made
many  experiments  on  cotton-looms.  He  came  to
Taunton,  Mass.,  in  1836,  and  while  there  devised  a
loom  for  the  manufacture  of  fancy  cotton  goods,
for  which  he  received  a  patent  on  23  Nov.,  1837.


In  this  loom  one  part  of  the  warp  was  depressed
while  the  other  was  lifted,  instead  of  allowing  one
part  to  remain  stationary,  thus  securing  more  room
for  the  passage  of  the  shuttle.  Another  feature  of
it  was  the  chain,  which,  with  its  peculiar  apparatus,
operated  the  warp.  Mr.  Crompton  went  to  Eng-
land in  1838,  ana,  after  patenting  his  loom  there,
returned  with  his  family  to  this  country  in  1839,
and  in  1840  adapted  his  loom  to  the  weaving  of
fancy  woollens.  At  least  three  fourths  of  all  the
woollen  goods  now  made  in  the  United  States  are
woven  on  the  Crompton  loom,  or  on  looms  embody-
ing its  principles.  Mr.  Crompton  retired  from  act-
ive business  in  1849.  on  account  of  failing  health. —
His  son,  George,  inventor,  b.  in  Ramsbottom.  Eng-
land, 23  March,  1829,  came  to  the  United  States  in
1839,  and  in  1849  was  called  to  the  management  of
his  father's  business.  In  1851  he  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  fancy  looms  in  Worcester,  Mass.,
where  the  Crompton  loom-works  have  since  been
established.  He  soon  directed  his  attention  to  im-
provements in  his  father's  loom,  and  since  1854  has
taken  out  more  than  fifty  patents,  including  those
for  the  harness  mechanism,  picker  movement,  let-
off  and  stop  motions,  shuttle  and  shuttle-boxes,
shipping  mechanism,  and  devices  for  finding  the
pick  when  broken  or  exhausted.  He  has  also  re-
ceived eight  patents  for  textile  fabrics.  At  the
Centennial  exhibition  in  1876  he  received  an  award
"  for  the  best  looms  for  fancy  weaving  on  shawls,
cassimeres,  and  satinets."  By  Mr.  Crompton's  im-
provements in  his  father's  looms  there  is  an  in-
creased production  of  sixty  per  cent.,  with  a  saving
of  fifty  per  cent,  in  labor  and  more  than  that  in
the  cost  of  repairs.

CROMWELL,  Henry  Bowman,  merchant,  b.
in  1828 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  2  April.  1864.  He
engaged  in  trade  at  an  early  age,  and  became  a
member  of  the  firm  of  Cromwell,  Haight  &  Co.  be-
fore he  was  twenty  years  old.  In  1850  he  became
a  partner  in  the  firm  of  John  Haight  &  Co.,  in  Hud-
dersfield,  England,  and  resided  there  until  1854,
when  he  returned  to  his  native  city,  and  soon  en-
gaged in  the  shipping  business,  managing  a  line  of
screw  propellers  in  connection  with  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad,  his  business  increasing  until  he
had  connection  with  nearly  all  the  important  do-
mestic seacoast  ports.  During  the  few  years  pre-
vious to  1861  he  had  in  successful  operation  steam
lines  from  New  York  to  Savannah,  Charleston,  Wil-
mington, Norfolk,  Alexandria,  and  Washington,
Portland,  and  Baltimore ;  also  from  Baltimore  to
Charleston  and  Savannah.  When  the  civil  war  be-
gan he  sold  nearly  all  his  vessels  to  the  government,
and  immediately  proceeded  with  the  construction
of  two  fine  steamers,  the  "  George  Washington  "
and  "  Oliver  Cromwell,"  which  subsequently  sailed
between  New  York  and  New  Orleans.  Although
Mr.  Cromwell's  commercial  interests  were  so  large-
ly connected  with  the  south,  he  firmly  upheld  the
cause  of  the  government  during  the  war.

CRONYN,  Benjamin,  Canadian  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  in  1802;  d.  in  London,
Ontario,  22  Sept.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Trin-
ity college,  Dublin,  in  1821,  in  1825  was  ordained
a  deacon  of  the  Episcopal  church,  and  afterward
officiated  for  a  short  time  as  curate  in  the  diocese
of  Chester,  England.  Returning  to  Ireland,  he
served  for  six  years  as  curate  under  the  late  arch-
bishop of  Tuam.  In  1832  he  emigrated  to  Cana-
da and  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church.  Lon-
don, which  charge  he  kept  until  1857.  when  he  was
elected  bishop  of  the  new  diocese  of  Huron.

('HOOK,  George,  soldier,  b.  near  Dayton,
Ohio,  8  Sept.,  1828. He  was  graduateH  at  the


CKooK


(U<M,KS


15


3 .  militiiry  academy  in 1868,  and WBI  "ii duty

with  tin-  Itli  infantry in  California  in

Mr  participated  in  the  Kougc  river  i\j«-<|it i<m  in

.mil  commanded  the  I'm  river  ex|>cdition  in

; where  he  was  engaged  in  several a<t i<>ri-..  in

•  f  which  he  was  wounded In nil  niTOW. Bi

had  risen  to  a  captaincy  when,  at  tin-  beginning  of

tin-  civil  war.  In'  returned  to  tin-  cast ami In-came

colonel  of  thr  86th  Ohio  infantry. Ha  afterward

l  in  tin-  WrM  Virginia  oampalcna,  ii a>

mand  of  tha8d  provisional  brigMfl,  from  1  May
till  15  Aug..  1868,  and  was  wounded  in  th<'  totion
at Lewisbure;. He engaged in tin- northern

Virginia  ami  Maryland  oampaigna  in  August  ami

.September.  1868,  and  for  his  services  at  Antietain
was  brevetted  Uautenant-oolonel,  U.  S.  army.  He
served  in  Tennaaaaa  in  1H«U{,  and  on  1  Jnlv  he  was
transferred  to  the  command  of  the  M  cavalry
division.  After  various  actions,  ending  in  the
battle  of  Chickamauga,  he  pursued  Wheeler's  Con-
federate cavalry  from  the  1st  to  the  10th  of  j
Octoln-r, defeated it. and drove it across the

Tennessee  with
great  l<>-s.  Mr
entered  upon
the  command
of  the  Kana-
wha district  in
western  Vir-
ginia in  Febru-
ary, 1864,  made
constant  raids,
and  was  in
numerous  ac-
tions. He  took
part  in  Sheri-
dan's Shenan-
doah campaign
in  the  autumn
*  of that year.

Ps  S  >? and received

SZJsV1-?*. J>)  T-tS-Vllj the 1, re  vets of

brigadier -gen-
eral and  ma-
jor-general in  the  U.  S.  army.  18  March.  INC.").
Gen.  Crook  had  command  of  the  cavalry  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  from  2»5  March  till' !>  April.
daring  which  time  he  was  engaged  at  Dinwid-
dle Court -House,  Jettersville,  Sailor's  Creek,  and
Farmville,  till  the  surrender  at  Ap|iomattox.  He
was  afterward  transferred  to  the  command  of
Wilmington.  N.  C,  where  he  remained  from  1
Sept,  i*<m.  till  15  Jan.,  ls(Mi.  when  he  was  mus-
tered out  of  the  volunteer  service.  After  a  six
weeks'  leave  of  absence  he  was  assigned  to  duty
on  the  board  appointed  t<>  examine  rille  tactic-.
was  oommiasionea  lieatenant-oolone]  <»f  the  88d
infantry.  I'.  S.  army,  on  88  July.  1866,  and  as-
signed to  the  districts  of  Boiee,  Idaho,  where  he
remained  until  1878,  actively  engaged  against  tin
Indians.  In  1878  Geo.  Crook  was  assigned  to  the
Arizona  district,  to  quell  the  Indian  disturbances.
He  sent  an  ultimatum  to  the  chiefs  to  return  to
their  reservations  or*4  be  wiped  from  the  face  of
the  earth."  N'o  attention  was  paid  to  his  de-
mand, and  he  attacked  them  in  the  Tout.,  basin,  B
stronghold  deemed  impregnable, and  enforced  suit-
mi— ion.  In  1H?.">  he  was  ordered  to  quell  the  dis-
turbances in  the  Sioux  and  Cheyenne  nations  in
the  northwest,  and  defeated  those  Indians  in  the
battle  of  powder  Hivi'r.  Wyoming. In  March

another  battle  result* -d in  tlie  destruction  of  189

lodges,  ami  in  June  the  battle  of  Tonga*  River
was  a  victory  for  <  rook,  a  daw  day-  later  the
battle  of  the  Rosebud  gave  him  another,  when  the


>'«d  savages  massed  their  forces  and  swv

in  crushing  Custer.
Annan  ok,  on  r^.

struck  a  severe  blow  at  Slim  Buttea,  I'

followed  it  up  with  Midi  nlent lew  vigor  that  by
May,  1*77.  all  the  hostile  triU-n  in  the  northwest
had  M.I. I.d. In 1HH2  be  returned  to  Ariaoaa,

forced  the  Mormon-.  pupiatb

to  raoata  the  Indian  land-  on  whid
had seized,  encouraged  the  Apache*  in  planting,
and pledge«l them  the l»rot<  I,. gorero-

mint.  In  aha  mine  Of  Ikkj  the  Chineahuas  in-
trenched themselves  in  the  f

tain-  on  the  northern  Mexican  Itoundary,  ami
began  a  series  of  nud-.  Deal  Crook  Mni'ck  the
trail,  and.  instead  of  following  t'«<.k  it backward,

fM-mtrateil  iutoand  bM>k  pomeiwiori  of  their  strong-
mlds,  and,  as  fast  an  the  warrior-  returned  fr  in
their  plundering  eamoraioaa,  made  (Jasaj  prisoners.
He  ssaiehed  over  866  milaa,  made  -too  psiaoaMia,

and  captured  all  the  horses  and  plunder.  I'uring
the  two  years  following,  lie  had  sole  <  harp-  of  the
Indians.and  in  that  time  BO  depredation  occurnd.
He  set  them  all  at  work  on  their  farms,  abolished
the  system  of  trading  and  paying  in  goods  and
store  orders  indulged  in  by  oontractora,  |>aid  cash

direct  to  the  Indians  for  all  hi*  supplies,  and
stimulated  them  to  imMisil  exertion.  The  tribe*
became  self-supporting  within  three  veers.

CROOKS,  Beorwe  Kichard.  author,  h.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.. :t  V,  b..  1888.  Hi  vai  fraduated
at  Dickinson  oollege  in  1840.  and  la  1*41  entatad
the  ministry  of  the  Metbodiat  Kpiv-opal  church,
ami  became  a  misskmary  In  Illinois.  He  was
called  to  Dickinson  college  in  Ih-12  aaeaaaaasalaajd
mathematical  tutor,  in  lH-W  became  principal  of
the  Collegiate  grammar-school,  ami  in  1*4« adjunct
profeaaor  of  Latin  and  Greek.  In  1H4H.  having
returned  to  the  mini-try.  he  wa-  atationed  succes-
sivelv  at  Philadelphia,  Wilmington,  New  York,  and
Brooklyn.  In  1mm  be  became  idit-.r  of  "The
Metlnxlist. "  In  conjunction  with  I>r.  McCliatook,
he  baa  prepared  a  scries  of  ••  First  Books  "  in  I  .at  in
and  Greek  (lK4G-'7);  and  he  mperviead  an  edition
of  Butlers  "Analogy."  for  which  he  furnished  an
analysis, index, and  biography  (1888).  He  also  wrote
••  Life  and  letters  of  Rev.  l>r.  .John  MeClii

.md  "Sermons of  Hi-hop  Simpson"  (1886).

CROOKS,  James.  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
Kilmarnock,  Sot  land,  in  177h:  .1.  in  Weal  Flam-
borough, Ontario, in  I860,  Hewasoneoftl
est  settlers  in  Upper  Canada,  making  his  home  at
Niagara  in  17!U.  Ha  established  the  fir-t  jwi*r-
mill.  and  sent  the first load  of  wheat ami flour

from  Upper  Canada  to  Montreal  Daring  the  war
of  isi*2  be  served  with  diatinctiou  at  QaaaaatoaTj
and  other  points  on  the  Niagara  frontier. He  *a*

soon  afterward  elected  to  the  assembly,  and  ulu-

matelv  became  a  member  of  the  l<

—His' son,  Adam.  Canailian  state-man.  b.  in  West

Flamborough.  Ontario.  11 i

ins.-),  was  graduated  with  honors  at  Kind's  college,

Toronto in ts.Vi.  admitted to  the  lar n

and  distinguished himself  as  an  equity lawyer.

He was for  eight vears «  UOt ,,f ,'"'

I'niversitv  of  Toronto  (formerly Knur's  <x41ege).

He contested the r.

Riding of  Toronto i:i the Ontario MaMatttaj

■awmntv  in  1867  as  a  liberal,  and  to  defeated,  but

eeted  by  the  aajne  constituency  u  ISTLaad

ai.iK.int.d  attorney-general  in  Mr.  Wake's  oaktaat
lie  became  prorinaal  treasunr  u»',«'rjYvMl°1,r"

• and  mini-ter  of  edocatioo  in  1878.  holding
the  two  portfolios  until  1H7T.  when  he  resigned  the

j  treasurer'-,  but rctaimd  that  of  the  minister  Of


16


CROOKSIIANKS


CKOSBV


education  until  1883,  when  he  was  judicially  do-
rian. 1  insane  and  confined  in  a  private  asylum  at
Hartford,  Conn.  Though  his  administration  of
the  department  of  education  was  successful  in  a
certain  sense,  his  concessions  to  the  Catholic  hier-
archy of  Ontario  in  deleting  passages  obnoxious  to
them  from  Collier's  school  history  of  England,  and
the  discarding  of  one  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  poems
as  a  teachers'  examination  class-book,  for  a  similar
reason,  gave  great  offence  to  the  majority  of  the
liberal  party,  as  well  as  to  the  conservatives.

CROOKSIIANKS,  George,  Canadian  pioneer,
b.  in  New  York  in  1778;  d.  in  Toronto,  21  July,
1859.  His  father,  a  native  of  the  Orkney  islands,
emigrated  to  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  about  1775,  but,
being  a  loyalist,  soon  left  the  United  States  and  set-
tled in  New  Brunswick.  The  son  went  to  Canada
in  1796.  During  the  war  of  1812-'5  he  directed
the  construction  of  military  roads,  and  attended  to
the  transportation  of  cannon,  etc.,  for  the  army.
When  York  (now  Toronto)  was  captured  by  the
Americans,  he  followed  the  British  forces  to
Kingston,  and  his  house  in  York  became  the  head-
quarters of  the  American  commander.  He  was  for
many  years  a  member  of  the  legislative  council,
and  was  noted  for  benevolence  and  charity,  when
systematized  charity  was  unknown.  He  con-
tributed largely  toward  the  erection  of  St.  James
Cathedral,  Toronto.

CROPPER,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1756;  d.  at  Bowman's  Folly,  Accomac  co.,  Va.,  15
Jan.,  1821.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  9th  Virginia
regiment  of  the  Revolutionary  forces  in  1775,  was
soon  promoted  to  be  major  of  the  5th,  engaging  in
the  battle  of  Brandywine,  where  his  regiment  suf-
fered severely,  and  became  colonel  of  the  7th,  tak-
ing part  in  the  battles  of  Germantown  and  Mon-
mouth. He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
11th  regiment  on  15  May,  1778,  and  afterward  pro-
moted to  be  its  colonel.

CROPSEY,  Jasper  Francis,  painter,  b.  in
Rossville,  N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,  1823.  After  studying
architecture  for  five  years  he  turned  his  attention
to  landscape  painting,  under  the  instruction  of
Edward  Maury.  He  visited  England,  France,
Switzerland,  and  Italy  in  1847,  went  abroad
again  in  1855,  and  resided  seven  years  in  London,
sending  his  pictures  to  the  Royal  academy  and  to
the  International  exhibition  of  1862.  After  his
return  home,  in  1863,  he  opened  a  studio  in  New
York,  where  he  resided  until  1885,  when  he  re-
moved to  Hastings-on-Hudson.  He  has  been  since
1851  a  member  of  the  National  academy.  His
works  include  "Jedburgh  Abbey";  "Pontine
Marshes  "  (1847) ;  "  Backwoods  of  America  "  (1857) ;
"Richmond  Hill"  (1862);  "Greenwood  Lake"
(1870);  "Lake  Nemi  in  Italy"  (1879);  "Old
Church  at  Arreton,  Isle  of  Wight"  (1880);  "Ram-
apo  Valley  "  (1881) ;  "  Autumn  on  the  Hudson  "
(1882);  "Wawayanda  Valley"  (1883);  "Spring-
time in  England"  (1884);  "October  in  Ramapo
Valley"  (1885);  "Autumn  on  Lake « George,"  and
"A  Showery  Day"  (1886).

CROSBY,  Dixi,  surgeon,  b.  in  Sandwich,  N.  H.,
8  Feb.,  1800 ;  d.  there,  26  Sept.,  1873.  Dr.  Crosby
received  a  classical  education,  but  it  is  not  known
that  he  was  a  graduate  of  any  college.  He  studied
in  the  medical  school  of  Dartmouth,  and  received
his  degree  in  1824.  In  this  year  he  devised  a  new
and  ingenious  mode  of  reducing  metacarpo-
phalangeal dislocation.  After  practising  his  pro-
fession at  Gilmanton  and  Laconia,  N.  H..  fourteen
years,  he  removed  to  Hanover.  He  was  the  first
to  open  an  abscess  at  the  hip-joint.  In  1838  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  surgery  in  the  medical


department  of  Dartmouth,  which  he  occupied  un-
til 1841,  when  he  was  promoted  to  the  surgka]
professorship  made  vacant  by  the  removal  <>t
Prof.  Mussey  to  the  WWt  To  this  chair  was  add-
ed that  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women  and
children,  and  Dr.  Crosby  for  twenty-seven  years '
delivered  both  courses  of  lectures.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  pi
marshal's  office  by  day  and  attended  to  his  medi-
cal practice  at  night.  In  1868  he  turned  over  the
surgical  lectures  to  his  associate,  and  the  college
did  not  appoint  a  full  surgical  professor  till  1871.
In  1870  he  found  himself  unable  to  perform  even
the  divided  duty  to  his  satisfaction,  and  was  ap-
pointed emeritus  professor  of  surgery,  and  lectured
when  he  pleased.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  nim  by  Dartmouth  in  1867. — His  broth-
er, Nathan,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sandwich,  N.  H.,  12
Feb..  1798 ;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1885,  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1820,  and  practised  his

Erofession  in  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  Salisbury,  New-
uryport,  and  Lowell,  Mass.  In  1845-'6  he  pur-
chased for  the  Lowell  manufacturing  corporations
the  great  lakes  of  New  Hampshire,  which  now
form  the  reservoirs  of  water-power  for  that  city.
He  was  commissioned  justice  of  Lowell  police
court,  19  May,  1846,  and  held  the  office  till  his
death.  He  was  the  author  of  "  First  Half-Century
of  Dartmouth  College,"  and  eulogies  on  Tappan
Wentworth,  and  Judge  S.  S.  Wilde,  of  the  Massa-
chusetts supreme  court,  and  many  lectures  and
essays  on  historical  and  philanthropic  subjects.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Dartmouth  in  1879. — Another  brother.  Alpheus,
educator,  b.  in  Sandwich,  N.  H.,  13  Oct.,  1810;  d.
in  Salem,  Mass.,  17  April,  1874.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1827,  and  in  1829-'31  was  a  tu-
tor. He  studied  theology  at  Andover  in  1831-'2,
and  in  1833-'7  was  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek
at  Dartmouth,  when,  after  a  tour  in  Europe,  dur-
ing 1836~'7,  he  entered  upon  the  professorship
of  Greek  alone,  occupying  the  chair  for  twenty
years.  After  resigning  the  active  duties  of  his
professorship  at  Dartmouth,  he  resided  chiefly
in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  and  Newburyport,  Mass.,  till
September,  1854,  when  he  was  appointed  agent  of
the  Massachusetts  board  of  education  and  lecturer
in  the  teachers'  institutes  of  that  state.  In  1857  he
became  principal  of  the  normal  school  in  Salem,
Mass.,  where  he  remained  until  1865.  He  was  the
author  of  various  text-books,  including  "Greek
Lessons,"  "Greek  Tables,"  "Greek  Grammar,"
"  Greek  Fables,"  and  an  edition  of  "  Xenophon's
Anabasis."  He  also  published  the  "  Second  Ad-
vent" (Boston,  1850),  and  "First  Lessons  in
Geometry"  (New  York,  1851). — Another  brother,
Thomas  Russell,  b.  in  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  22
Oct.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  1  March,  1872,
was  also  a  surgeon.  After  graduation  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  Dartmouth  in  1841,  he  began
the  practice  of  his  profession.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  army,  and  was  put  in
charge  of  the  Columbian  college  hospital  in  Wash-
ington. In  1866  he  became  professor  of  general  and
muitary  surgery  and  hygiene  in  the  National  medi-
cal college,  where  he  remained  until  1870.  During
1854-'64  he  was  professor  of  physics  and  natural
history  in  Norwich,  Vt.,  university,  in  1866-'70
professor  of  military  surgery  in  the  National  medi-
cal college,  and  from  1870  until  his  death  profes-
sor of  animal  and  vegetable  physiology  in  the  New
Hampshire  agricultural  college. — Dixi's  son,  Al-
pheus Bennfng,  surgeon,  b.  in  Gilmanton,  N.  II..
22  Feb.,  1832;  d.  in  Hanover,  X.  II..  !»  Aug.,  1877,
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1858,  and  at  the


<  !;<•


»BY


17


•  •al  department  there  in !  nwhile  he

had  devoted  one  year  a*  an  assistant  surgeon  in
tin-  marine  hospital  nt  Chelsea,  Mam.  Returning
t<>  llaimviT,  he  began  pnetioc,  l>nt  at  the  b.

ning  of the  civil  war  joined tin- 1st New  Hamp-
shire volunteers  as  nfMB,  and was  afterward
promoted i" bfiftjdt-Munoo. In I8H hi
i  <l,  ami  I  *  came  associate  professor  of  R]

t<> his father, who was professor of surgery

ami anatomy in Dartmouth. On his father's

lie  became  his  successor,  and  occu-

fiid  tin- chair  until  is??.  i>r.  Crosby  waeeleo,  in
WW-'?'.',  a  professor  in  the  I'niversil y  of  Vermont,
in  isii!i-'?i)a  lecturer  in  the  I'niversity  of  Michi-
gan, in  lHil>  a  professor  and  lecturer  in  Bowdofa
college,  in  lS?l-'2  a  professor  in  the  I-iong  Island
college  hospital,  and  in  1n?-^-'7  professor  of  an-
atomy in  Bellevue  hospital  tuedical  college.  In
Jane,  is??,  he  presided  at  the  annual  meeting  of
the  New  Hampshire  medical  society,  and  delivered
an  address  upon  "The  Kthical  Relations  of  Physi-
cian and  Patient."  Manv  of  his  medical  lectures
have  bean  published. — Nathan's  son,  Stephen
Moody,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Mass.,  14  Aug..  ls-j?,  was
educated  in  the  Boston  Latin-school  and  the
Lowell  high  Bflhool.  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1M!>.  and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1868.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  national
ioe,  was  paymaster  from  1862  till  1868.  and
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious  ser-
vices. He  was  elected  representative  in  the  state
legislature  in  1869,  was  state  senator  in  1N70-'1,
state  director  of  the  Boston  and  Albany  railroad
for  1871-'2.  commissioner  of  the  Hoosac  tunnel  in
1874-'5.  and  treasurer  of  the  Massachusetts  Trust
company  in  1  M70-'83,  when  he  became  president  of
that  corporation.

CROSBY,  Eben,  soldier.  Of  his  early  life
nothing  is  known.  He  served  with  distinction  in
the  national  army  throughout  the  civil  war,  losing
an  arm  at  Gettysburg.  He  received,  on  28  July.
1866,  the  appointment  of  second  lieutenant  of  in-
fantry in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  on  27  May,  1869,  was
assigned  to  service  on  the  western  bonier,  lb-
was  killed  bv  Indians,  near  Heart  river,  fifteen
miles  from  Fort  Rice,  while  returning  from  the
Yellowstone  expedition,  3  Oct,  1872.

CROSBY,  Ebenezer,  physician,  b.  in  Brain-
tree,  Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1753;  d.  16  July.  1788.  Ib-
was  a  son  of  Judge  Joseph  Crosby,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1777,  and  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  Cniversity  of  Pennsylvania  in
1780.  He  served  through  the  Revolutionary  war
as  surgeon  of  Gen.  Washington's  guards,  and
was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  Society  of
the  Cincinnati.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  mar-
ried Catharine,  daughter  of  William  Bed  low.  ami
niece  of  Col.  Henry  Rutgers,  of  New  York,  and  be-
came a  physician  in  that  city.  He  was  also  pro-
fessor of  obstetrics  at  Columbia  college,  and  one  of
the  trustees  of  that  institution  until  his  death. —
His  ton,  William  Bedlow,  philanthropist.  1>.  in
New  York  city.  7  Feb.,  1786;  d.  then-.  18  March,
1886.  His  parents  died  when  he  was  two  years  old.
ami  he  was  adopted  by  Col.  Henry  Rutgers,  his
mother's  uncle,  from  whotn  he  received  a  large  pail
of  the  old  Rutgers  estate,  comprising  most  of  the
present  seventh  ward  of  New  York  city.  He  never
engaged  in  business,  but  gave  his  time  and  atten-
tion to  the  oeieof  his  property  and  to  w.  rk>  ..f

rolence. He  was connected  with man.
ies,  and  spent a  large  part  of his income  in
private  charities. By  virtue  of his  father's  ser-
in the  war  of  the  Revolution,  he  was  made  a
member  of  the Society  of  the  Cincinnati.— Will-
vol.  II. — 2


iam  Bedlow**  son,  Howard.  »-.  in  New  York,  17
Feb., 1826;  d.  there.  29  March,  1891.  vu  gradu.

ated  at the Piowr-it  .  and  became

professor  of  Greek  tie

Ballad  to  the  chair  of  (ir.-ek  at  Itutgrr*.  Two
rears  later  be  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Presby-
terian church,  am!  united  the  duties  of  |ia«torof
the  first  church  of  New  Brunswick  witti  lliuae  of
his  professorship.  In  1868  he  gave  up  In*  work  at
New  Brunswick  to  tiecorae  pastor  of  tin  Fourth
avenue  Presbyterian  church  in  New  Y'-rk.  r.
ing  till  his  death.  He  a|g0  held  the  "flic*  of
chancellor  of  the Cniversr  York  fr>»m

IB70  till  1*M1.  and  wa>  for  many  yean  a  member
of its council. In

lH.v.i  he  reeeired  the

of  l>.  I>.  from
Harvard,  ami  in  1^71
that  of  LL,  I),  from
Columbia.  He  was
chosen  moderator  of
the  general  assembly
of the Preslivterian

church  of  the  United
States  in  1M?:{,  and
was  frequently  ■  dele-
gate to  that  ImhIv.  In
1N77  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  first  Presbyte-
rian general  council  at
Edinburgh.  In  addi-
tion to  his  work  as  an
educator  and  clergy-
man, Dr.  Crosby  ex-
hibited a  lively  inter-
est and  exerted  a  beneficent  influence  in  public
affairs,  particularly  in  advocating  temperance  ss
distinguished  from  total  abstinence.  In  ls?7  he
took the  principal part in founding  the  Society

for  tin-  Prevention  of  Crime,  whose  chief  objen
is  the  reduction  of  the  number  of  salooaa  mid

the  restriction  of  the  liquor  traffic.  Through  this
society,  of  which  he  was  president  from  it*  foun-
dation, and  a|>art  from  it.  be  did  much  in  this
great  work,  influencing  legislation  and  the  mu-
nicipal government  of  his  own  city  in  ro  far  as
it  has  relation  to  the  regulation  of  intemperance
and  crime.  lie  was  also  activelv  interested  in
the  welfare  of  the  Indians,  and  in  the  procure-
ment of  an  international  copyright  law.  His
published  works  include  ••  Lands  of  the  M
written  after  a  tour  in  the  east  ( New  York
"GSdipus  Tyrannns  of  BophocJea,"  edited  with
notes  (IK.*)!)':  "Scholia  on  the  New  Testament"
(1861);  "Social  Hints"  (1806):  ••  Life  of  Jeaaa"
(1870);  "Bible  Companion  •'  (1830):  "Healthy
Christian"  ( 1HT1 ) :  M  Thoughts  on  the  Pentatt
(1878);  "Notes  on  Joshua"  CVanmeatan

on  Nehemiah  "  (1876);  "  The  Christian Preacher'*
"The Huinanitv of  Christ" <IH*h:  and

"Commentary  on  the  New  Testament"  (1885)

He also  wrote largely  for  ["-riodieaK  and  was  a

member Of the American committee

the New Testament.  —  Howard's nephew. John

Schmler.  soldier,  b,  In  Albany.  N.  v..  18
lb-  was  educated  in  the  New  York  -
and at the Cniversitv. but Defaru graduation
made  a  tour  of  the  world. At the  b

the  civil  war  he  entered  the  regular  away  aa  wc-

ond  li.-utenant  of  artillery,  tarred  with  hi*  lwtten
under  MoClellan  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and
in  the  Florida  campaign  of  1866  W8J  transferred

to  the  Departmenl  of  the  Gulf  araderGen.  Bank*.

and  brevetted  captain  after  the  Tec  he  citnit«igU
He  carried  the  first  despatches  from  the  Red  river


18


CROSBY


CROSBY


to  Farragut,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  major,  and
also  braretted  major  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
regular  army  for  his  ten  Io60  at  Babine  I  mss-Roads
ami  IMeasant  Hill.  In  August,  1H(>4,  he  was  com-
missioned colonel  of  the  Tth  New  York  heavy  artil-
lery, but  declined  the  appointment,  becoming  as-
sistant adjutant-genera]  on  the  staff  of  Gen.Canby
in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  and  being  after-
ward transferred  to  Sheridan's  staff.  In  1866  he
served  in  the  campaigns  of  Sheridan  and  Custer
against  the  Indians,  lie  resigned  in  1872,  and  was
appointed  consul  to  Florence,  Italy,  in  1876.  He
became  governor  of  Montana  on  4  Aug.,  1882,  took
an  active  part  in  preventing  the  Yellowstone  park
from  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  cattle  syndicate,
and  in  November,  1884,  was  appointed  first  assistant
post  master-general,  but  resigned  4  March,  1886.

CROSBY,  Enoch,  patriot,  b.  in  Harwich,  Mass.,
4  Jan.,  1750;  d.  in  Brewsters,  N.  Y.,  26  June,  1835.
He  was  supposed  to  be  the  original  of  "  Harvey
Birch  "  in  Cooper's  "  Spy."  In  his  infancy  his  par-
ents removed  to  Southeast,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  and
by  a  series  of  disasters  were  reduced  to  poverty.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  cord-
wainer.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary
war  he  joined  the  Continentals,  and  served  in  the
Lake  Champlain  campaign  for  several  months,
then  became  ill  and  was  sent  home.  On  his  recov-
ery he  shouldered  his  musket  and  set  out  on  foot
for  the  American  camp.  On  his  journey  an  inci-
dent, of  which  he  took  advantage,  revealed  a  deep-
laid  conspiracy,  upon  which  he  successfully  studied
and  acted.  The  result  was  the  prompt  arrest  of  a
band  of  tories,  and  his  own  appointment  to  a  place
in  the  Secret  Service  Department.  He  became  a
most  successful  worker,  and  by  his  shrewdness  pre-
vented various  catastrophes  to  the  patriot  cause.
After  many  hair-breadth  escapes  he  Anally  joined
the  command  of  Lafayette,  under  whom  he  served
till  the  end  of  the  war,  when  he  purchased  a  farm
and  devoted  himself  to  agriculture  for  the  rest  of
his  life.  The  story  of  his  secret-service  life,  which
was  thought  to  be  incorporated  in  Cooper's  "  Spy  "
(though  Cooper  had  never  heard  of  him),  was
dramatized,  and  Mr.  Crosby  was  on  one  occasion
present  at  a  representation  of  the  play  in  New  York
city,  and,  as  the  hero,  received  the  plaudits  of  the
multitude.  His  narrative,  taken  from  his  own  lips
by  Capt.  H.  L.  Barnum,  was  published  under  the
title  of  "The  Spy  Unmasked"  (New  York,  1828).

CROSBY,  Peirce,  naval  officer,  b.  near  Chester,
Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  16  Jan.,  1823.  He  was  educated
at  a  private  school,  and  was  appointed  in  1838  mid-
shipman from  Pennsylvania.  He  sailed  in  1842  on
the  frigate  "  Congress  "  to  the  Mediterranean,  serv-
ing on  her  six  months,  when  he  returned  to  the
United  States.  In  May,  1844,  he  was  promoted  to
passed  midshipman,  and  served  on  the  coast  survey
in  1844-'6.  He  was  six  months  on  the  "  Decatur,''
in  the  gulf  of  Mexico  during  the  Mexican  war,  par-
ticipated in  the  attack  and  capture  of  Tuxpan  and
Tobasco,  and  then  served  a  year  on  the  "Petrel."
Peace  being  declared  in  1848,  he  was  transferred  to
other  duties,  and  commissioned  lieutenant,  3  Sept.,
1853.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Lieut.
Crosby  served  in  Chesapeake  bay,  keeping  the  com-
munications open  between  Annapolis  and  Havre  de
Grace,  was  detailed,  on  the  night  prior  to  the  battle
of  Big  Bethel,  to  transport  troops  across  Hampton
creek,  and  also  upon  their  return  from  their  uusu<  -
cessful  expedition.  In  the  attack  on  Forts  Hat-
teras  and  Clark  he  commanded  the  "  Fannie,"  a
light-draught  steamer,  and  superintended  the  land-
ing of  troops,  until  the  surf  swamped  and  broke  his
boats. He  then  took  a  ship's  heavy  launch  and


landed  two  more  boat-loads  of  men ;  but  the  sea
became  so  heavy  that  the  launch  was  dashed  upon
the  shore  and  the  crew  hurled  out.  He  succeeded
in  landing  300  men,  but,  on  account  of  the  bad
weather,  the  squadron  stood  off  seaward,  leaving
him  and  his  companions  upon  shore.  Lieut.  Cros-
by put  out  a  strong  picket  in  front  of  the  enemy's
batteries,  thus  preventing  their  making  a  recon-
noisance  and  ascertaining  his  weakness.  On  the
following  day  the  squadron  returned  and  captured
the  forts.  In  the  winter  of  1861-'2  he  took  com-
mand of  the  gun-boat  "  Pinola,"  and  joined  the
Gulf  squadron  under  Farragut.  On  his  way  he
captured  the  "Cora,"  loaded  with  cotton.  On  ar-
riving at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  he  co-oper-
ated with  the  "  Itasca  "  in  breaking  the  chain  bar-
rier across  the  river  below  Forts  Jackson  and  St.
Philip,  and  participated  in  the  capture  of  New  Or-
leans, and  also  at  the  passage  and  repassage  of  the
batteries  at  Vicksburg,  30  June  and  15  July.  He
was  promoted  to  commander,  3  Sept.,  1862,  and  ap-
pointed fleet-captain  of  the  North  Atlantic  squad-
ron, and  did  good  service  in  various  expeditions.
In  the  winter  of  1863  he  took  command  of  the
"  Florida,"  destroyed  two  blockade-runners  at  Ma-
sonboro  inlet,  was  transferred  to  the  "  Keystone
State  "  in  1864,  and  captured  five  blockade-runners,
causing  many  others  to  throw  overboard  their  car-
goes in  order  to  escape.  In  1864-'5  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  "  Metacomet,"  and  planned  and  super-
intended the  removal,  by  the  use  of  drag-nets,  of
140  torpedoes  which  interfered  with  the  approaches
to  Mobile,  successfully  clearing  the  track  so  that
vessels  passed  up  the  river  and  forced  the  surren-
der of  the  city.  In  1865  he  was  transferred  to  the
command  of  the  "  Shamokin,"  and  sailed  in  her  for
the  coast  of  Brazil,  where  he  remained  until  1868.
On  27  May,  1868,  while  yet  in  Brazilian  waters,  he
was  promoted  to  a  captaincy,  and  returned  to  the
United  States,  becoming  inspector  of  ordnance  at
Norfolk  navy-yard.  He  was  promoted  to  commo-
dore,. 3  Oct.,  1874,  made  rear-admiral,  10  March,
1882,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Asiatic
squadron.  In  1883  he  was  placed  on  the  retired
list.  He  had  been  in  active  service  more  than  forty-
eight  years,  over  twenty-three  of  which  were  at  sea.

CROSBY,  William  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bel-
fast, Me.,  in  1806 ;  d.  there  in  1881.  He  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1823,  and  studied  and
practised  law  in  his  native  town.  Gov.  Crosby  was
one  of  the  two  whigs  that  held  the  office  of  gover-
nor, Edward  Kent  being  the  other.  In  1853  the
Maine  law  and  the  pro-slavery  tendencies  of  the
democracy  lost  that  party  the  control  of  both
branches  of  the  legislature,  which  elected  Mr.
Crosby  governor,  and  he  was  re-elected  by  the  legis-
lature in  1854.  After  the  close  of  his  term  he  took
no  active  part  in  politics.  During  the  civil  war
his  sympathies  were  with  the  Union,  but  at  its  close
he  affiliated  with  Andrew  Johnson  and  was  a
democratic  candidate  for  congress,  but  was  defeat-
ed. He  was  prominent  in  promoting  the  public-
school  system  of  Maine.  While  in  college  he
published  a  small  volume  of  poems.  He  was  a
contributor  to  the  "Token,"  a  Boston  annual,
edited  by  N.  P.  Willis;  "The  Legendary,"  which
illustrated  the  scenes,  romances,  and  legends  of
our  own  country ;  and  the  "  Bowdoin  Poets,"  and
was  the  author  of  "Poetical  Illustrations  of  the
Athenaeum  Gallery."

CROSBY,  William  Otis,  geologist,  b.  in
Decatur,  Ohio,  14  Jan.,  1&50.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology  in
is:*;,  where  he  was  an  assistant  in  1876-'80,  in-
structor in 1880-'3,  and assistant professor  of


I  B06MAH

mill.  nil. '^'v  and  HtholOfV  lino* 1kh:1. In

was  appointed  assistant  in  tin-  Boston  museum

of  natunil  history.  Prof.  Croabf.  is  |  ni.iul.er  >.f
miiiiiTims  Boientiflc  societies,  mid  has  lectured  in
the  Lowell  course.  II'-  bat  travelled  i-\t.n-i\i|\
throughout the United States, Canada, ami the

Indies,  ami  baa  published  mtmoiri  on  the

\  uf  tin-  localities  visited  in  vari.ni>-  scientific

journals. "  Native  Hit  uinetis  ami  t  In- Pitch Ijike

of  Trinidad  "  (1870)  i-  ooe  of  his  moot  Important

papers,  lie  is  the  author  of  "Common  Minerals
ami  Rooks "  i  Host. .11.  1881:  enlarged  el,  I

CKOS.M.W.  (....i-««  Hampton,  soldier.  I.,  in
Taunton,  Mass..  in  N"\.,  l?i»N;  .1.  in  Philadelphia,
.'.  lie  was  graduated  at  the  I',  s.
military  academy  in  1H28,  assigned  to  the  8th  In-
fantry,  ami  served  <.n  frontier  ami  garrison  duty.
He  was  ptomoted  to  tirst lieutenant on  :{()  Aug..

:nl  made  assistant  Quartermaster  on  1  -"» <  > « ■  t . .

Me  performed  the  rmtire  of  thiooffioe  In  the
Indian  oonntry  during  the  Blaok  Hawk  war  of

ud  in  the  Florida  war  of  lNtfO-'T,  and  was
jin minted  to  captain,  30  April,  1837.  He  was  chief
quartermaster  in  the  military  ooonpation  of  Texas
in  1845-'tt,  and  distinguished  himself  at  the  storm-
ing of  Palo  Alto,  8  May,  1846,  receiving  the  brevet
of  major  for  his  gallantry  on  that  occasion.  He
hooame  major  on  the  staff  and  quartermaster.  •">
March,  1847,  deputy  quartermaster-general  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  185(1,  and  ami  it
ant  quartermaster-general  with  rank  of  colonel  in
1888,  serving  during  this  time  in  charge  of  various
clothing  depots  and  arsenals.  From  1864  till  1866
he  was  occupied  in  preparing  for  publication  a
"  Manual  for  the  Quartermaster's  Department."
He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  and  major-
general,  U.  S.  army,  for  nis  services  during  the  civil
war,  on  13  March,  1865,  and  was  retired  from
active  service  in  1866,  but  was  on  dutv  again  in
Philadelphia  as  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  East  till  1868. — His  son,  Alexander
Foster,  naval  officer,  b.  in  St.  Louis,  M.>..  1 1  June,
1838 ;  d.  in  Greytown,  Nicaragua,  12  April,  1H72.  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  from  Penn-
sylvania, and  graduated  in  1855.  He  was  attached
to  the  frigate  "Congress,"  of  the  Mediterranean
squadron,  in  1856-'8,  made  master,  4  Nov.,  185N,
■erved  on  the  Paraguay  expedition  of  1858-'9,  and
was  promoted  to  lieutenant  in  1M(>1.  He  com-
manded the  "Somerset,"  of  the  East  Gulf  squad-
ron, in  1862,  was  made  lieutenant-commander  on
16  July  of  that  year,  and  served  in  the  South
Atlantic  blockading  squadron  during  the  rest  of
the  war,  most  of  the  time  in  the  "  Wabash."  Ib-
was  with  the  naval  brigade  of  that  squadron  on
(Jen.  Hatch's  expedition  to  sever  the  railroad  from
Charleston  to  Savannah,  and  co-operated  several
times  with  the  army  on  Stono  river,  engaging
Fort  Lamar  once.  He  was  honorably  mentioned
in  Commander  George  H.  Preble's  official  report  of
10  Jan.,  18<>5.  After  the  war  he  served  on  the  "  •  leti*

(ice,'*  the  "  Onward,"  and  at  Portsmouth  navy-vard.
le  was  commissioned  commander  in  1870,  ordered
to  the  command  of  the  isthmus  surveying  expedi-
tion in  January,  1N?2.  and  was  drowned  in  the
harbor  of  Greytown.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  |ire]iaring  a  book  on  seamanship,

<  ItoSS.  Charles  K..  soldier,  b.  in  Massachusetts
in  1817;  d.  near  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  5  May.  1868,
He  was  graduated  at  the  C.  S,  military  academy
in  May.  1881,  standing  second  in  a  class  of  for'v-
live.  and  was  assigned  to*the  engineer  corps.  lie
was  engaged  in  drilling  volunteers  at  Washington.
I>.  ( '.,  and  as  assistant  engineer  in  constructing  the
defences  of  that  city  till  March.  1888, participating


coon


19


III  the  Utile of |t„|| H,,„ ,„, |J J„|V> lM6,f ^

l«-ing  promoted  to  first lieul  1J{. |„

the  \  irginia  |*ciiinsular  <aiii[«jirn  he  wan  leafed
in  the  siege  of  v..rktowii.  and  in  the  construction

of  roads,  field-work*,  and  I  the  passage

of  the  army  and  its  immense  train*  over'  White
<>ak  swamp  and  <  hi.  kahoiuinv  riv.-r.  II.  ...in-
mamled an engineer battalion  at Antictam.  and

I  the brevet of  lieutenant-...) | f„r  ^J.

lantry  there,  haxing  previ..u»|v  btssj  given  that  of
major  fur  services  on  the  peninsula. Re  was  en-
gaged  in building  the p.ntot.n bridge* f..r  the
advance  and  retreat  of  the  anu>  at  IV.
and was  employed  in throwing up '
maliing  sun. -vs.  and  guarding  bridge,  m  the  early
pari  of  l^tt,  being  promotsd  t"  oaptam  of  en-
gineers  on | Mar.h. Me  was at the battle of
Chan.ellorsMlle.  .'1-5  May.  1H68,  and  was killed
•idle  assisting  to  thrown  I. ridge  aenwt  tl,.
pshannoek, in  the  face  of  the  enemy. For  his
gallantry  on  this  occasion  I  •  u.  after  Ins

d.ath.  the  brevet  of  colonel.

CKOSS.  Charles  Koberl,  nhjsJllol.  b.  in  Tn>r,
N.  V..  88  Mar.  h,  1H4.M.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  techimogy  in  1810,  and
bas  sines  bean  nonnontod  with  the  physical  <i.  j.»rt -

mint  of  that  institution  as  student  assistant  in
lM(il»-'7l».  instructor  in  1870-1,  assistant  professor
in  1H71-T),  and  as  professor  in  l*75->7.  In
addition  to  holding  the  chair  of  phvsjen,  he  i«  di-
rector of  the  Rogen  laboratotr,  and  is  sis,,  at  the
head  of  the  department  of  electrical  engineering*
The  developing  and  superintending  of  this  Utter
course,  one  of  the  first  to  be  Introduced  in  a  college
in  this  country,  has  occupied  his  attention  M
Several  years,  and  its  success  under  his  administra-
tion is  his  just  reward.  Prof.  Cross  isa  mcmU-r  of
the  Appalachian  mountain  club,  and  was  its  presi-
dent in  1NH0.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Interna-
tional congress  of  Alpine  clubs  held  in  Geneva  in
1879,  and  was  elected  one  of  its  vice-presidents.
Hesid.s  numerous  papsn  contributed  t<>  ••  pr
in^'s  ,>f  the  American  Academy  of  Sciences  and
Arts."  u American  Journal  of  Otology,"  h«iia«pui>-
lisbed  "Course  in  Elementary  Physios"  .Boston,
1*7:1)  and  "Lecture  Notes  on  Mechanics  and
Optics"(lSK4).

CROSS,  Harld  W.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Richland  (now
PulasldXOewego  <■<>.,  N.  V..  17  Nov..  i^u. Be

was  educated  at  Hamilton, N. Y.. seminary  mow

Madison  university),  and  removed  in  lKMi  to  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  where  he  began  the  study  of  law.  Ib-
was  appointed  deputy  colleotor  <>f  the  |«>rt  in  1887,
and  held  the  office  tiil  1886. He  began  the  practice

>f  his  profession  in  1K4-1.  was  ehossn  township
clerk  in  1848,  and  a  member  of  the  city  council  in
1849.  In  1H.V)  he  entered  extensively  into  coal-
mining, and  continued  in  it  till  1867.  Bines  then
he  has  been  connected  with  other  laanortnat  enter-
pris«*s  and  Ihls  done  much  f«>r  the  industries  of
Cleveland.  Mr.  Cross  is  an  ardent  sportsman,  and
was  one  of  the  tirst  to  plant  successfully  tin
tenia  trout  in  Ohio  waters.  He  ha*  published
"  Kiftv  Years  with  the  (inn  and K<h1  "  (Cleveland,

18H0).'an.l  has  been  for  years  a  contributor  to
••  fan*  and  Stream."  the  "American  Field,"  and
the  ••  American  Angler."

CROSS.  Edward  Kph ram,  soldier,  b.  in  I*n-
easter,  N.  11..  22  April.  \^2 :  d.  near  t.

Be  was  edueal.-d  at  1  Lancaster
academv,  and  U-gan  life  as  a  journeyman  printer.
He  went  to  Cincinnati  in  1888,  and  in  !*"•(  lieosme
an  editor  of  the  "Cincinnati  Times,"  al->  acting  a*
corresiximlent for  th.  rk Herald"  and

other  journals. In  WV1  he  canvassed  the  state  of


20


CROSS


CROSWKLL


Ohio  for  the  American  party.  He  was  afterward
employed  as  agent  of  the  St.  Louis  and  Arizona
mining  company,  in  which  he  subsequently  became
a  large  stockholder.  In  1886  he  made  a  trip  across
the  plains,  taking  the  first  steam-engine  and  the  first

firinting-press  that  ever  crossed  the  Rocky  moun-
ains.  In  1860  he  held  a  lieutenant-colonel's  com-
mission in  the  Mexican  army,  and  when  the  news
of  the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  readied  him  he  was
in  command  of  a  large  garrison  at  El  Fuerte.  He
at  once  resigned,  and  hastened  to  Concord,  N.  H.,
where  he  offered  his  services  to  the  governor  of  the
state,  organized  the  5th  New  Hampshire  regiment,
and  was  commissioned  as  its  colonel.  Under  his
command  the  regiment  distinguished  itself  in  many
important  engagements,  and  won  an  enviable
reputation  for  bravery,  becoming  known  as  the
"  Fighting  Fifth."  He  was  mortally  wounded  at
the  battle  of  Gettysburg  while  leading  the  1st  bri-
gade of  the  1st  division,  2d  army  corps.  He  had
been  several  times  wounded  before,  and  Gen.  Han-
cock had  strongly  recommended  his  promotion  to
brigadier-general,  but,  though  he  had  commanded
a  brigade  for  several  months  with  conspicuous
gallantry,  it  was  delayed,  as  has  been  claimed,
through  political  influence.  Col.  Cross  was  the
author  of  numerous  poems  and  prose  sketches,
written  under  the  pen-name  of  Richard  Everett.

CROSS,  George  Dilwyn,  jurist,  b.  in  Westerly,
R.  I.,  24  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  there.  1  Oct.,  1872.  He
was  educated  at  a  priyate  school  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,
and  entered  public  life  in  1821.  He  served  six
terms  in  the  general  assembly,  was  state  senator  in
1826-'35  and  1848-'50,  chief  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  for  Washington  county  in  1837-'49,
and  in  1840  was  one  of  the  commissioners  for  fix-
ing the  boundary-line  between  Connecticut  and
Rhode  Island.  In  1842,  and  again  in  1853,  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  conventions  to  amend  the
state  constitution.  He  held  many  offices  of  honor
and  trust  in  his  native  town,  interesting  himself
especially  in  the  matter  of  free  schools.

CROSS,  Joseph,  clergyman  and  author,  b.  in
East  Brent,  Somersetshire,  England,  4  July,  1813.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1825,  and  in  1829
entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  Genesee,  N.  Y.  He  was  for  some  time
professor  of  English  literature  in  Transylvania
university,  Lexington,  Ky.,  and  became  prominent
in  the  southern  branch  of  the  church.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Nashville  general  conference  of
1856  and  its  official  reporter,  and  principal  of  a
female  seminary  at  Spartanburg,  S.  C.  He  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in
1866,  and,  after  holding  pastorates  at  Houston,
Tex.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  St.  Louis,  and  other  places,
became  in  1885  rector  of  the  church  at  Las  Vegas,
New  Mexico.  Among  his  publications  are  "  Head-
lands of  Faith  " ;  "  Life  and  Sermons  of  Christmas
Evans,"  from  the  Welsh ;  "  The  Hebrew  Mission-
ary "  (Nashville,  Tenn„  1855) ;  "  Pisgah  Views  of
the  Promised  Inheritance,"  a  series  of  dissertations
on  the  unaccomplished  prophecies  (New  York,
1856)  ;  "  A  Year  in  Europe  "  (1859) ;  "  Gospel
Workers  "  (Baltimore,  1861) ;  "  Stories  and  Illustra-
tions of  the  Ten  Commandments"  (New  York,
1862) ;  "  Illustrations  of  the  Shorter  Catechism  "
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1865) ;  "  Prelections  on
Charity";  "Edens  of  Italy"  (New  York,  1882);
"Knight  Banneret."  (1882);  "Coals  from  the
Altar R  (2  vols.,  1883);  '-Pauline  Charity"  (1883);
and  "Old  Wine  and  New"  (1884).  The  last
four  are  collections  of  sermons.  Dr.  Cross  has
also  compiled  a  "  Church  Reader  for  Lent"  (1885).
—His  wife,  Jane  Tandy  Chinn,  author,  b.  in  Har-


rodsburg,  Ky.,  in  lHiT:  d.  In  EUsabethtown,  Ky.,
in  Oetober.  \s?k  married  Tnmwi  P.  Hardin,  a  law-
yer, in  1835,  but  he  died  in  1N-42.  leaving  her  with
three  children,  and  in  1848  she  married  Dr.  I
Mrs.  Cross  devoted  more  than  twenty  years  to  the
education  of  young  ladies,  in  which  she  was  emi-
nently successful.  During  a  trip  through  Europe
with  Dr.  Cross,  she  wrote  letters  to  the  "Christian
Advocate," and  also  to  the  Charleston  "Courier,"
and  contributed  largely  to  the  NashvUle  "Home
Monthly"  and  other  periodicals.  During  the  civil
war  she  sympathized  stronglv  with  the  south,  and
at  one  time  sne  and  her  two  daughters  were  arrest-
ed, tried  by  a  military  tribunal,  and  sent  to  jail.
Her  works,  all  published  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  be-
tween 1860  and  1870,  include  "  Heart  Blossoms  for
mv  Little  Daughters";  "Wayside  Flowerets";
"  Bible  Gleanings  " ;  "  Drift- Wood  " ;  "  Gonzalvo  de
Cordova,"  a  translation  from  the  Spanish  of  Flo-
rian ;  "  Duncan  Adair,"  a  story  of  the  civil  war ;
and  "  Azile,"  a  story  partly  of  southern  experiences
during  the  war  (1868).

CROSS,  Trueman,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland;  d.
near  the  present  Fort  Brown,  Texas,  21  April,  1846.
He  entered  the  army  as  ensign  in  the  42d  infantry,
27  April,  1814 ;  became  assistant  deputy  quarter-
master-general, with  the  rank  of  captain,  16  June,
1818 ;  major-quartermaster,  22  May,  1826 ;  and
assistant  quartermaster-general,  with  the  rank
of  colonel,  7  July,  1838.  He  was  chief  of  the
quartermaster's  department  of  the  army  of  occu-
pation from  10  Oct.,  1845,  till  his  death,  which  he
met  at  the  hands  of  Mexican  banditti.  Col.  Cross
published  "  MUitary  Laws  of  the  United  States  "
(Washington). — His  brother,  Osborne,  soldier,  b.
in  Maryland  in  1803  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  15  July,
1876,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1825,  assigned  to  the  infantry,  and  served  on
garrison,  frontier,  and  commissary  duty.  He  was
made  first  lieutenant  on  31  Dec.,  1831,  assistant
quartermaster,  1  Jan.,  1836,  and  became  captain  in
the  first  infantry,  7  July,  1838.  He  was  chief
quartermaster  of  Wool's  division  in  1846-'7,  and  of
the  Army  of  Mexico  in  1848,  promoted  to  major
on  24  July,  1847,  and  served  until  the  civil  war,
during  which  he  was  chief  quartermaster  of
various  posts  and  camps.  He  was  made  deputy
quartermaster-general,  26  Feb.,  1863,  and  on  13
March,  1865,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in
the  regular  army.  He  was  promoted  to  colonel,  29
July,  1866,  and  on  the  same  day  was  retired.

CROSWELL,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  in  1709;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  April,
1785.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1728,  or-
dained in  Groton,  Conn.,  14  Oct.,  1738,  and  on  6
Oct.,  1738,  was  installed  over  a  society  in  Bos-
ton formed  by  persons  from  other  churches.  He
was  active  as  a  controversialist.  Among  his
numerous  publications  are  "  Reply  to  a  Book  en-
titled '  A  Display  of  God's  Special  Grace ' "  (1742) ;
"The  Apostle's  Advice  to  the  Jailor  Improved;
being  a  Solemn  Warning  against  the  Awful  Sin  of
Soul-Murder  "  (1744) ;  "  Heaven  Shut  against  Ar-
minians  and  Antinomians"  (1747) ;  "Remarks  on
Bishop  Warburton's  Sermon  before  the  Societ  y  for
the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel  "  (1768) ;  and  "  Re-
marks on  the  Satirical  Drollery  at  Cambridge,  Last
Commencement  Day  "  (1771).

CROSWELL,  Charles  M.,  statesman,  b.  In  New-
burg,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1825;  d.  in  Adrian,  Midi..
13  Dec,  1886.  He  was  apprenticed  to  the  carpen-
ter's trade  in  Adrian,  but  in  his  twentieth  year  be-
gan the  study  of  law,  and  soon  became  depute
county  clerk.  In  1850  he  was  city  registrar,  and
was  re-elected in 1852. Mr.  Ctoswell became


i  Etoei

mayor  of Adrian  in l*»',-.\  and  in  the  autumn  of
year  entered  the  rtats  senate. Afb

in  tin*  .•:i|uuii y  three  term-.  In-  was  sueccs-:
ideal  of  tin'  Constitutional  oonventiun  in  I

elcctor-at -large mi i h«-  ri|>u)>liiiiii ticket in 1808,

speaker  of  the  lower  bom  of  tin*  Isghsaturs  In
Land  later  secretary  of  the  State  board  of  chari-
After  filling  the  office  of  goreroor  <>f  Michi-
gan in  l*?u.  In-  whs  re-elected  in 1m;

CROSWELL,  Harry,  clergyman,  l>.  in  West
fonl,  ("tin.,  16  Jane,  KT*;  d.  in  New  Hasan,
Conn.,  i;{  Man  in.  ls.vs.  H.  whs  edooated  under
tin-  sue  of  Eter.  Dr.  Perkins  ami  Dr.  Noah  Wsb-
si.r.  When  iiniti-  young.  In-  entered  liis  broth*
printing-office  in  (atskill.  N.  v.,  and  soon  u>-
atnna  sditor  of  a  paper  issued  there.  He  founded
I  rYiliTnlist  newspaper  oaUed  the  ••Balance"  in
Hudson,  N.  V..  in  1808,  which  became  noted  for
the  bitterness  hiiiI  scathing  sarcasm  of  its  editori-
als; and  Mr.  Croswell  became  involved  in  many
libel  suits.  The  most  celebrated  of  these  was
led  by  an  article  on  Jefferson,  published  in  the

\\a>p,"  a  paper  controlled  by  Mr.  Croswell.  and
Alexander  Hamilton's  last  and  one  of  his  finest
speeches  was  made  in  Croswell*!  defence  at  the
trial.  Croswell  afterward  edited  a  jM>litical  news-
paper in  Albany,  whither  he  removed  in  1809.
and  was  again  prosecuted  for  libel  by  a  Mr.  South-
wick,  who  recovered  damages.  Croswell  called  00
his  friends  for  money  to  make  good  this  amount,
and  on  their  refusal  determined  to  enter  the  min-
istry of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  though
he  had  been  brought  up  a  Congregational ist.  II.
was  ordained  deacon,  8  May,  1814,  and  had  charge
of  Christ  church,  Hudson,  till  1  Jan..  1815,  when
he  became  rector  of  Trinity  church,  New  Haven,
Conn.,  then  the  only  Episcopal  church  in  the
city,  holding  services  in  an  old  wooden  building
on  Church  street  till  the  opening  of  the  new
church  edifice,  on  22  Feb.,  1816.  He  remained  in
New  Haven  till  his  death.  One  who  knew  him
writes:  "  His  tall  figure  and  manly  form,  clerical
garb,  and  high-topped  boots  with  knee-buckles,
impressed  every  beholder  as  they  saw  him  walk  t  lu-
st reefs  of  New  Haven,  ne  was  not  a  gnat
preacher,  but  he  had  an  extraordinary  knowledge
of  human  nature,  and  could  ingratiate  himself  into
every  man's  heart."  Trinity  college  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.I),  in  1831.  He  published  **  Young
Churchman's  Guide "(4  vols.i;  ••  Manual  of  Family
Prayers"  (New  Haven);  "Guide  to  the  Holy  Sacra-
ment"; and  a  "Memoir"  of  his  son,  Rev.  William
Croswell,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1854).  He  left  in
manuscript  "Annals  of  Trinity  Church"  and  a
voluminous  diarv.  See  "  Letters  of  Waldegrave,"
l»y  Ke\.  <;.  W.' Nichols  (New  York.  1880).--  His
son,  William,  clergyman.  1>.  in  Hudson,  N.  V„  7
Nov..  1*04  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Nov..  1851,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1822,  taught  a  select  school
in  New  Haven,  with  an  elder  brother,  and  in  1884
was  engaged  with  his  cousin.  Edwin  Croswell,  as
assistant  editor  of  the  Albany  "Argus."  He  en-
tered the  General  theological  seminary  in  New
York  in  1888.  and  pursued  his  studies  with  Bishop
BrOWnelLIn  Hartford,  in  1887,  at  the  same  time
editing  the  "  Episco|wil  Watchman."  He  wasor*
dained  in  1898,  and,  after  holding  several  pastor-
ates, became  rector  of  the  recently  organised
Church  of  the  Advent  in  Boston,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.  His  manner  of  conducting
the  church  service-  1,-d  to  a  controversy  with  Dish-
Hl  En-tl>urn,  by  whom  *he  was  officially  censured,
id's  lift  ffM  one  of  charity  and  religious  devotion.
Trinity college gars  him the  degree  of  D.  D.  in

1846. He  wn.te  ajunerom  ahon  lyrical  pesos,


CB0WI


U


some  of  which  wan  published  in  his  father's
memoirs  of  him, and  hi  Nu-n<d  •ikISsdu-

lar." wen*  edited, with n

Cleveland Cose, D.D  k. l^i.-IUm

Croswcdl's  nephew,  Edwin,  lournali.t.  I.,  in  Cahv
kill  N.  V..  gj  Hey,  1787;  I  m  Princeton.  N.  J..
l.l  June.  in?i,  l«came  assistant  editor  of  ah  fa-
ther-- paper,  the  -(atskill  Reoorder,"  In.  tlmi  arti-
ek  bam*  a  defence  and  vindication  of  the  soldiers
drafted  for  the  defence  ol  New  York
war  of  lsi2. After  the  retirement  of  In*  father.

in-  maiiagcinisit  ..f  the,  MBeoftrderN  nttracted  the
attention  of  the  democrats  md  in  1H84

invited  to  Aftanj  i>v  Martin  Vm  i
Benjamin E. Butler, and  others, to  ...

"  Argu-,"  and eJlO  to  bsSOSM  -late print.  •
Croswell  remained  in  Allmuy  thirty  wars,  changed
the  ••  Argus'1  from  a  semi-weekly  to'  a  daih
mil. and made it one of  the' chief  democratic
organs  in the  country. Al  a  member  of  U
called  "Albany  Regency,"  a  group  of |>ulil
who  directed the j»arty  council*  in the -•
was  his  duty  to  preserve  order  in  the  ranks  tl
the  coluinns  of  his  journal,  and  to  hi>  ta-  t in j-  r-
forming  this  dutv may DS largely axriU-d the
position of the  democrats  in New York  tit that
time. The  leading  articles  in the  "Argu-"
Copied  in  the  minor  partv  |>u|*rs  throughout  the

state  as  embodying  al]  tlmt  was  mand  of  demo-
cratic principles,  and  for  many  years  it  was
regarded  a-  political  apostasy  to  ipieMion  the
authority  of  the party organ. When the mhig*

obtained  possession  of  the  state  in  into,  Mr

Well  WHS  succeeded  in  t  he  ofljee  of  -tatc  printer  bv
Thurlow  Weed,  but  held  it  again  fn.in 1*44  till
1K4T. Subsequently  he  found  himself  pnpi
Martin  Van  Buren  and  others  of  sis  earn  |»>liti<-al

— OCJStes,  through  a  spli»  in  the  |wrtv.  lb-  mired
from  journalism  in  1854  and  engaged  in  business
in  New  York.  He  published  numerous  addresses.
CR0THERS,  Samuel,  clergvman.  b.  near
Chambersburg,  Pa.,  88  <><!.,  1788:  d.  in  <>swego,
III..  80 July,  1886,  He  went  to  Lexington,  hy..
with  his  father  in  1787, entered  the  academy  there

in 1T!)N,  and.  after studying at tin

theological  seminary,  returned  to Kentucky  in

l^o".  and  whs  UeSPSOd  to  preach  bv  the  Kentucky
presbytery.  After  a  year  of  missionary  work,  he
wss settled,  la  1810, over  the  churchei  of  chilli-
cothe  and  Greenfield,  Ohio, but  in  i*i:t  di
hlmsnH  to  the  latter  alone.  In  comimny  with  Ml
former  teacher  in  New  York.  Dr.  Mssou,  I
posed  close  communion,  and  the  exclusive  use  of
what  has  been  oslled  inspired  |e*lrnody. Trouble

rrowingoul  of  his  opinions  on  thssssabjo
lim.  iii  1*1*.  to  resign  his  charge  and  as
Winchester,  Kj.\  but  be  returnee  toGiesaaaM  in

1880,  organiSSO  I  new  church,  and remained |«!»
tor  of  it till  his  death. Dr.  Crotlurs  «M  |
cms  and  rigorous  writer  ami  an  elooiient  preacher.
Bee  *  Life  and  Writings  of  BsmmnCrnUam:
\.  Kitehie  (Cmrinnal
CKOWK, Frederlrk, missionary, b. in ltel-
giuni  :  d.  in  New  York  US  WSS

the -on  Of  a  British  siibiect.  Coining  la  Baluo
about  1*1*.  he  established  himself  than  as  an  m-
de|«'iident  mi— ionarv.  lalnm-d  thirteen  years  in
disseminating  the  scriirturei  in  S|M»nish  America.
and  wa-  the  author  Of  a  valuable  historn..
on  Central  America.  He  was  c\|«-li.
Batradi  id.  by  the Woman  Catholics,  be-

eaiis.-  he  circulated  the  Bible,  and  intended  l
a  school  in  San  Hsgual After  lNink'  imprisoned,
harassed,  and  at  lasl  driven  \*\  m

l  York,  ami  sooo  died.


I


22


<k<>\\  i:u.


CRUGER


CROWELL,  William,  journalist,  b.  in  Middle-
Odd,  -Mass.,  in  lN(Ki;  d.  in  Flanders,  X.  .1..  l'.i
Aug.,  1871.  After  receiving  an  academical  educa-
tion, he  entered  the  Baptist  ministry. and  was  pas-
tor for  some  years  at  Waterville,  Me.  He  took
charge,  in  1838,  of  the  "Christian  Watchman,"
the  principal  Baptist  pai>er  in  New  England,  to
whicn  he  had  previously  been  a  large  contributor,
and  conducted  it  with  ability  till  its  consolidation
with  the  "  Christian  Reflector  "  in  1848.  He  then
edited  the  "  Western  Watchman,"  in  St.  Louis,
for  several  years,  and  during  the  civil  war  was  pas-
tor of  a  church  in  central  Illinois.  Rochester
university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1857.
Dr.  Crowell  was  the  author  of  "  The  Church-Mem-
ber's Manual  of  Ecclesiastical  Principles  "  ;  "  The
Church-Member's  Hand-Book"  (Boston,  1850);  a
"  History  of  Baptist  Literature  for  Fifty  Years,"
for  the  missionary  jubilee  volume,  and  several
Sundav-school  books.

CROWNINSHIELD,  Jacob,  congressman,  b.
in  Salem,  Mass.,  31  March,  1770;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  14  April,  1808.  He  was  educated  for  a
merchant,  and  at  one  time  he  and  three  of  his
brothers  were  in  command  of  vessels  in  the  India
trade.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature  in  1801,  and  elected  to  congress,  serving
from  1803  till  1805.  He  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  navy  by  President  Jefferson  on  3  March,
1805,  but  never  entered  upon  his  duties,  owing  to
his  rapid  decline  and  death,  the  result  of  consump-
tion.—Jacob's  brother,  Benjamin  Williams,  sec-
retary of  the  navy,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  Dec,
1772 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1851,  received  an  English
education,  and  engaged  in  business  in  Salem,
Mass.  He  was  a  state  senator  in  1811,  and  on  17
Dec,  1814,  appointed  secretary  of  the  navy  by
President  Madison.  He  held  the  same  office  in
Monroe's  cabinet,  and  resigned  in  November,
1818.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1820,  again
a  state  senator  in  1822-'3,  and  then  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  democrat  from  the  Salem  district,  serv-
ing from  1  Dec,  1823,  till  3  March,  1831.  He  was
a  candidate  for  re-election  in  1830,  but  defeated
by  Rufus  Choate. — His  grandson,  Arrant  Schuy-
ler, naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York  state,  14  March,
1843,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in
1863.  He  was  attached  to  the  steam  sloop  "  Ti-
conderoga,"  and  participated  in  both  attacks  on
Fort  Fisher,  being  commended  for  his  efficiency
by  Capt.  Charles  Steedman.  He  was  made
lieutenant,  10  Nov.,  1866,  lieutenant-commander,
10  March,  1868,  and  commander,  25  March,  1880.
He  is  a  member  of  the  naval  advisory  board  in  New
York  city. — Benjamin  Williams's  grandson,  Fred-
eric, artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  Nov.,  1845,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1866,  and  began  the  study
of  water-color  drawing  in  London  in  1867  under
Rowbotham,  devoting  himself  to  landscape-paint-
ing in  water-colors  and  in  oil.  He  passed  eleven
consecutive  years  in  Europe,  most  of  the  time  in
Italy,  and  studied  his  profession  chiefly  under
Couture,  though  he  was  for  one  term  in  the  Paris
ecole  des  beaux  arts,  under  Cabanel.  At  this
time  he  took  up  fWure-painting.  His  first  work
exhibited  in  public  \  was  an  allegorical  portrait
group  sent  to  the  Paris  salon  of  1878.  His  water-
colors  are  much  admired.  After  his  return  to  this
country  he  became,  in  T879,  instructor  in  the  art
school  connected  with  the\  Museum  of  fine  arts  in
Boston,  and  remained  there  till  1885.  He  has
lately  devoted  the  greater  jrnrt  of  his  time  to
mural  painting,  and  to  stained  glass.

CROXTON,  John  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Bour-
bon county,  Ky.,  20  Nov.,  1837;  d.  in  La  Paz,


Bolivia,  16  April,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1857.  studied  law  in  Georgetown,  Kv..  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858,  and  began  practice  in
Paris,  Ky.,  in  August,  1859.  Two  years  later  be
was  active  in  the  movement  for  raising  Union
t mops,  and  went  to  the  front  in  June,  1861,  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  Kentucky  infantry.
In  March,  1862,  he  succeeded  to  the  command  of
the  regiment,  and  in  August,  1864,  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general.  Soon  afterward  he  was
brevetted  major-general.  He  participated  in  the
battles  of  Sherman's  army,  and  at  the  close  of  the
war  was  put  in  command  of  the  military  district
of  southwest  Georgia,  with  headquarters  at  Macon.
In  December,  1865,  he  resigned  Ins  commission
and  returned  to  Kentucky,  where  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law,  residing  on  his  farm  near  Paris.
Two  or  three  years  later  he  was  active  in  estab-
lishing the  "Louisville  Commercial"  as  a  repub-
lican journal.  His  exposure  during  the  war  and
subsequent  overwork  had  greatly  impaired  his
health,  and  in  1873  he  accepted  the  office  of  U.  S.
minister  to  Bolivia,  in  the  expectation  of  benefit
to  his  health  from  it ;  but  it  was  too  late.

CROZER,  John  Price,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Springfield,  Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  13  Jan.,  1793  ;  d.  in
Upland,  Pa.,  11  March,  1866.  In  the  manufacture
of  cotton  goods  he  made  an  ample  fortune,  which
he  largely  devoted  to  philanthropic  purposes.  In
1858  he  erected  at  Upland,  Pa.,  at  a  cost  of  $45,-
000,  a  building  intended  for  general  education,
but  which  he  subsequently  gave  to  the  Baptists
for  a  theological  seminary.  In  honor  of  him  as  a
founder,  this  institution  was  called  the  Crozer
theological  seminary.  His  widow  and  children
have  endowed  it  with  contributions  amounting  to
$275,000.  Mr.  Crozer  made  other  large  gifts  to
the  cause  of  education,  the  American  Baptist  pub-
lication societv,  and  humane  institutions.

CROZET,  Claude,  educator,  b.  in  France ;  d.
in  1863.  He  was  educated  at  the  Polytechnic
school  in  Paris,  and  became  an  officer  of  artillery
under  Napoleon  I.  He  came  to  the  United  States
in  1816,  and  on  1  Oct.  was  appointed  assistant
professor  of  engineering  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  at  West  Point,  and  on  6  March,  1817,
professor.  He  resigned  in  1823,  and  thereafter
acted  as  a  civil  engineer.

CRUCE,  or  CRUZ,  Francisco  de  la,  author,  b.
in  Granada,  Spain,  about  1600;  d.  in  Potosi,  Peru,
in  1660.  He  was  a  Dominican,  and  held  offices  in
San  Juan  Bautista,  Peru.  He  founded  the  College
of  Santo  Tomas  in  Lima,  and  was  its  professor  of
theology.  He  was  a  voluminous  writer,  both  on
theological  and  political  subjects.  His  works  in-
clude "  Historia  del  Rosario  a  Coros"  (Alcala,  1652) ;
"  Discursus  pro  Occidentalibus "  (Lima,  1653);
"  Cursus  Artiura  "  (Sevilla,  1655) ;  and  "  Manifiesta
obligacion  del  Vasallo"  (Lima  and  Madrid,  1656).

CRUET,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Indiana;  d.  in
Terre  Haute,  Ind.,  23  March,  1883.  He  was  com-
missioned an  officer  of  volunteers  from  Indiana,  16
July,  1862,  and  became  a  major-general  of  volun-
teers, 5  March,  1865.  He  served:  with  credit  through-
out the  war,  and  specially  distinguished  himself  in
the  battles  that  were  fought  near  Richmond,  Ky.,
29  and  30  Aug.,  1862,  having  command  of  a  bri-
gade under  Gen.  Mahlon  D.  Manson.

CRUGER,  John,  colonial  mayor  of  New  York,
b.  there,  18  July,  1710;  d.  27  Dec".,  1792.  He  early
turned  his  attention  to  trade,  and  became  eminent
as  a  shipping  merchant.  Like  his  father,  who  was
mayor  from  1739  till  1744,  he  filled  important  po-
litical offices.  In  1754  he  was  chosen  alderman  of
the  dock  ward,  and  from  1756  till  1765  was  mayor.


^^fayt?


OBI

He  was  elected  to  the  general  assembly  iii  17*>1».
ami  in  1701  Mr.  I  s  n  leading  member  <-f

the  committee  on  corrc.s|M>udcuoa,  and  wan  asso-
ciated in the

drafting  of  me-
morials to  lin-
king, the  lords,
ami  tin-  ooav
iimus."  relative
to  the  dangers
which  throat
en  Mm  Bohmiai

to  be  tu\"l
by  laws  tn
M  passed  in
(ireat  Britain. "
Again  in  LTS8
he  was  sent  to
represent  New
York  city  in
the  last  colo-
nial assembly,
and  was  unani-

mooely  ehoaan

speaker,  which
office  he  held
until  I??.-).  He
was  the  first
president  of  the  New  York  chamber  of  oommerw
in  1708.  In  1775.  with  thirteen  other  memben
of  the  assembly,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  Gen.
Thomas  Gage,  urging  "that  no  military  force
might  land  or  be  stationed  in  this  province."
During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  retired  to  Kin-
derhiMik.  but,  after  peace  was  declared,  returned
to  New  York.— His  brother,  Henry,  merchant,  b.
in  1702;  d.  in  Bristol,  England,  8  Feb.,  1780,  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  and  council  of  New  York,
and  settled  as  a  merchant  in  Bristol,  England,  of
which  city  he  was  mayor  at  the  time  of  his  death. —
Henry,  son  of  the  preceding,  politician,  b.  in  New
York  in  1739;  d.  there,  24  April,  1827,  established
himself  in  trade,  with  his  father,  in  Bristol,  and
succeeded  him  as  mayor' in  1781.  He  was  elected
to  parliament  as  the  colleague  of  Burke  in  1774.  and
re-elected  in  1784,  and  advocated  on  all  occasions  a
conciliatory  course  toward  his  countrymen.  He  BO
severely  retorted  upon  Col.  Grant,  who  said,  in  par-
liament, that  the  colonists  would  never  dare  to  face
an  English  army,  that  he  was  called  to  order  by  the
siM-aker.  After  the  war  he  became  a  merchant  in
New  York,  and  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  while
yet  a  member  of  parliament. — John  Harris,  broth-
er of  the  preceding,  British  officer,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  17:5*;  d.  in  London,  3  June,  1H07, succeeded
his  father  as  a  member  of  the  New  York  city  council,
was  its  mayor  in  1704,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  was  its  chamlicrlain.  He  was  a  son-in-
law  of  Col.  De  Lancey,  and  commanded  the  1st
battalion  of  his  loyalist  corps.  In  June,  17m>.  he
was  captured  at  a" plantation  in  Belfast,  (»a.,  but
was  soon  exchanged  for  Col.  John  Mcintosh.  In
Septemlier  he  made  a  forced  march  to  Augusta,  to
relieve  Col.  Browne,  and  arrived  most  opportunely.
He  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Kutaw
Springs,  when-  his  corps  formed  the  British  centre.
Hi-  defence  of  Ninety-Six.  when  attacked  by  Qrsene
in  .May,  17*1.  won  great  praise.  His  property  was
confiscated,  and  he  went  to  England  after  the  war.
<  RUSE,  Christian  Frederic,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  27  .lun'e.  1794;  d.  in  New  Y«>rk
city.  5  Oct..  1804  He  was  graduated  at  the  I'ni-
'\  ..t  Pennsylvania  in  1818,  and  after  study-
ing theology  was  ordained  in  the  riotoatsnl  Epu-
copal  church  by  Bishop  While,  of  Pennsylvania,  in


CRUZ


H


1822.  He  acquired  a  high  reputation  for  hi*  know].
"!;?•' of  Hiiririit  languages. 1  till  DOS  he

was  assistant profc«.,r  in  tl

sylvania.  and  ajSO  f'-r  a  time  ptofaamf  [t,'  St.  Paul'*
college,  Minn.  In  IM7  he  Iwoeme  rector  of  Tnmtv
church  in  Pishkill,  N.  Y..  where  he  remained  until
lKVt.  after  whuh  he  Uxamc  librnrian  in  the  Gen-
eral theological  seminar}  in  New  York.  Ih-  tram*
lation  of  husebiu*  riaatksJ  Hilton

York  ;  reprinted  in  l/ondon. - -
best  English  version.

(RISK. Peter  Hoffman,  writer,  b.  in  Balti-
more. M,|..  in  1798;  .1.  th.re.  7S-pt..  IKf.». Hew*.
educated  at  Princeton,  and  studied  law,  but  sahse-
quentlj  devoted  him— If  entirely  to  I
suits. Hi*  contribution-  appeared  prtaoipalfy  in

the  reviews,  and  for  ten  years  prior  t..  hi.  •hath
he  edited  the  ••  Baltimore  American."  I»ur
yean  1818-1  hs  was  associated  with  John  P.  Ken-
nedy in  the  publication  of  "The  Bad  Book*  n
fortnightly  of  local  and  hMUMOUJ  IsrfsrsaL  win,  h
contained  much  playful  satin-  b\  K<  im.-dv,  ami
some  bright  poetry  by  Crass.  He  was  noted  as  a
brilliant  conversationalist.

CRITTENDKN,  Daniel  Henry,  educator,  b.
in  (ialway.  N.  Y..  27  Feb..  lH|ii;  d.  in  Castleton,
N.  Y..  21  June,  1H74.  He  was  graduated  at  l
in  1K41,  and  bsoams  principal  of  the  Bohool  of  the
Mechanics'  institute  m  New  York  city.  He  adro-
cated»niethiMls  of  roanhhlS  that  are  now  in  general
Das,  lb-  published  nxt-books,  including  »
of  "Systematic  Arithmetics"  (New  York,  1888);
"The  Philosophy  of  rmngnagt"  (1810);  and  a
■•  Rhetorical  Grammar (iv

CRIZ,  Juan  Bautista  Yalerio  de  la  (eroothl
cacique  and  captain-general  of  the  (  Im  Inn,.
in  Texcoco,  Mexico,  about  1517;  d.  in  the  i
Mexico  in  1572.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Ring
Netzalhiialcoyotl.  When  the  S|wniards  occupied
Mexico  he  was  liapti/.ed.  and.  entering  the  Spanish
militia,  was  appointed  ensign  of  the  royal  guards
two  years  afterward.  Antonio  de  Mendoza  »:n\e
him  command  of  *<>  Spanish  soidisn  and  4«X»  In-
dian archers,  and  sent  liim  to  enlist  rolnntssn  and
conquer  ths  territories  OOOnpisd  by  the  (Im  hime-
0SS.  When  Mendoza  left  Mexico,  in  1600,  hs  ai>-
|>oiiited  Cruz  caciipieof  all  territories  that  he  misfit
conquer,  and  in  looO  I.ui-  de  Valssoo  advanced  him
to  the  rank  of  oaptain-general  of  ths  Chichimecaa.
Cruz  gave  the  church  and  convent  of  Tula  to  the
Franciscan  friars  in  acknowledgment  of  their  work
in  favor  of  the  natives,  and  l.inlt  the  bridge  of  that
iiiv.  Chariei  v.  rewarded  him  *nh  BSW  privil-
eges, and  Cruz  oontinned  his  services  during  the
test  of  his  life.  His  remains  VON  buried  in  the
convent  of  Santiago  Tlaltelolco  of  Me\

CRIZ.  Rodriiro  de  la  (erooth).  soldier,  b.  in
HarbeUa,  Spain.  00  Deo-  1«*I7:  d.  in  Mexico,  28
Bent,  171<i.  Hs  Pent  to  Central  America  with  his
father,  who  had  hsSB  appointed  gi>venior..f  Ooflta
Kica.  in  1000, and  afterwanl  succeeded  him  in  that
i. line.  Be  BOOOmplishcd  the  conquest  of  Talainan-
ca.  in  which  he  spsni  a  large  BOrOOl  of  hi*  private
fortune,  and  the  kin^r  of  Siwin  rewarded  hm
the  title  of  Marquis  de  Talamanca :  but  he  soon
entered  the  order  foiiiul.sl  by  Father  BetSJBBOSjrl  in
(iiiatcmala.  and  snOOSSdsd  him  as  superior,  !

lie  went  to  Peru,  where  he  founded  nuincr-
oni  bospitala,  and  obtained  the  inonrj>oration  of
his  order.  00  Karen.  mM7.  F..r  this  purpose  be
went  I"  Koine  and  Madrid,  when-  he  reman
nine  vears,  and  >n  his  return  he  founded  new  in-
stitutions ami  hospitals  in  Mexico  and  Peru
wrote  ••Const it u.iones  de  la  BsMgjfJB  Hetlendtica
fundada in  la>  Indies  Oecidentales"  (Mexico.  lT'.K


24


CRUZ


CUDEQUALA


CRUZ,  Sor  .In. ma  In6sde  in,  Mextaan  poet, b.
in  San  Miguel  do  Nepantla,  near  the  city  of  Max-
ico,  12  Nov.,  1651;  d.  in  Mexico,  17  April.  L698.
At  the  age  of  five  she  could  rend,  write,  and  keep  ac-
counts, and  at  the  age  of  eight  composed  a  poem
on  the  holy  sacrament.  Soon  afterward  she  was
sent  to  the  citv  of  Mexico,  learned  Latin  and  other
branches  rapidly,  and  asked  her  parents'  permission
to  disguise  herself  as  a  student  so  that  she  could
enter  the  university.  Not  being  allowed  to  do  this,
she  continued  her  studies  privately,  and  her  literary
accomplishments  soon  made  her  famous  in  Mexico.
The  vice-queen  retained  her  as  one  of  the  ladies  of
the  household.  The  viceroy,  the  Marquis  de  Man-
cera,  wishing  to  test  her  learning  and  intelligence
(she  being  then  seventeen  years  old),  invited  several
theologians,  jurists,  philosophers,  and  poets  to  a
meeting,  during  which  she  had  to  answer,  unpre-
pared, many  questions,  and  explain  several  difficult
points  on  various  scientific  and  literary  subjects.
The  manner  in  which  she  acquitted  herself  aston-
ished all  present,  and  greatly  increased  her  repu-
tation. She  was  much  admired  in  the  vice-
royal  court  for  her  beauty,  but  refused  several
proposals  of  marriage,  and  entered  first  the  con-
vent of  San  Jose,  and  subsequently  that  of  San
Jeronimo,  where  she  finally  took  the  veil.  She
then  devoted  herself  for  twenty-seven  years  to  her
religious  duties,  as  well  as  to  her  favorite  studies
of  theology,  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures,  logic,
rhetoric,  natural  philosophy,  mathematics,  history,
music,  and  poetry.  In  1693  she  gave  up  all  studies
and  exercises  unconnected  with  her  religious  du-
ties in  the  convent,  and  sold  her  splendid  library
to  help  the  poor.  Two  years  afterward  a  terrible
scourge  desolated  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  Sister
Juana  Ines.  while  personally  assisting  other  nuns
suffering  from  the  epidemic,  became  its  victim  and
died.  Her  remains  were  buried  with  extraordinary
ceremonies.  She  was  generally  known  as  "The
Nun  of  Mexico,"  and  was  also  called  "  The  Tenth
Muse."  Her  writings,  mostly  in  verse,  include
"Amor  es  laberinto,"  a  classical  drama;  "Los
empefios  de  una  casa,"  a  comedy ;  "  Ovillejos,"  a
satirical  poem  ;  "  El  Neptuno  alegorico,"  and  two
volumes  entitled  '*  Poesias  sagradas  y  profanas."

CUADRA,  Pedro  Lucio  (kwah'-drah),  Chilian
engineer,  b.  in  the  city  of  Santiago,  14  April,  1842.
He  studied  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and
when  still  very  young  was  attached  to  the  scientific
commission  that  the  government  appointed  to  make
a  geographical  study  of  the  Chilian  territory,  his
personal  efforts  assuring  the  success  of  the  commis-
sion's work.  In  1874  the  owners  of  the  newly  dis-
covered silver  mines  at  Caracoles,  Bolivia,  gave
Cuadra  the  general  superintendence  of  the  works,
and  in  1876  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Bank
of  Valparaiso.  During  Pinto's  administration  Cu-
adra was  several  times  offered  a  portfolio  in  the
cabinet,  but  declined  it,  and  in  1882  he  accepted
that  of  finance  under  President  Santa  Maria,  dis-
tinguishing himself  by  important  reforms.  Being
a  member  of  the  cabinet  that  negotiated  the  treaty
of  peace  with  Spain,  he  used  all  tys  influence  in
favor  of  its  negotiation,  and  King  Alfonso  XII.
awarded  him  the  Great  Cross  of  NavaJ  Merit.  He
was  elected  senator  in  1882  for  six  years,  and  was
president  of  the  senate  in  1886.  *5

CUAUHTEMOTZIN  (kwau  -  tay  -  ino  -  tseen'),
which  means  "  Eagle's  Eyesight,"  sometimes  called
Cuauhtemoc,  Quauhtemotzin,  Quauhtemoc,  Guate-
moc,  Guatimoc,  or  Guatimocin,  thirteenth  and  last
Mexican  king  (eleventh  monarch,  according  to  other
accounts),  b.  in  I486 ;  d.  in  1594.  He  was  the  son  of
Almitzol,  and  married  Tecuichpatzin,  a  daughter  of


Motecuhzoma  (Moctezuma)  and  the  widow  of  Cui-
tlahuatl,  his  own  uncle,  whom  he  succeeded  on  the
throne,  Ming  elected  and  crowned  about  the  end  <>f
January.  1681.  Cuauhtenmtzin  at  once  began  to
strengthen  the  defences  of  the  city  of  Mexico;  but
Cortes,  after  several  successful  butt  Irs  and  subse-
quent agreements  with  the  natives,  besieged  the  eft  v
with  a  large  force  of  Indian  allies  and  his  Spanish
troops,  and  final-
ly Cuauhtemotzin
and  all  his  war-
riors surrendered
(13  Aug.,  1521).
The  siege  last-
ed 75  days,  and
cost  the  Spaniards
over  100  men  of
the  900  present,
their  allies  losing
several  thousand,
while  many  thou-
sand Mexicans
died  fighting  or
from  starvation
and  disease.  Cu-
auhtemotzin had
on  one  occasion,
with  the  approval
of  the  senate,  sac-
rificed four  Span-
iards and  4,000
Indians,  to  obtain
favor  of  the  gods.
The  invaders  tortured  him  to  make  him  tell  where
his  treasures  and  those  of  the  temples  were  hid-
den ;  and  three  years  afterward  he  was  executed,
with  the  kings  of  Texcoco  and  Tlacopan,  on  sus-
picion that  they  had  conspired  against  the  Spanish
rule.  The  young  emperor  endured  his  torture
calmly,  and  when  the  Texcoco  chief  groaned  in  his
death-agony,  reproved  him,  saying,  "  Do  you  think
I  am  on  a  bed  of  roses  t "  A  monument  to  Cuauhte-
motzin, surmounted  by  a  bronze  statue,  represent-
ed in  the  illustration,  was  erected  in  the  city  of
Mexico  in  January,  1887.

CUBA,  Dion isio  Vires,  Count  of,  Spanish  gen-
eral, b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th  century ;  d.  in
1840.  He  was  captain-general  of  Cuba  in  1824,
when  all  Spanish  possessions  on  the  American  con-
tinent had  become  independent.  He  had  then  but
few  troops  under  his  command,  but  managed  to
maintain  order  and  preserve  the  island  of  Cuba
for  Spain  without  troubles  or  any  sort  of  violence.
In  recognition  of  his  valuable  services  to  the  mother
country,  the  government  rewarded  him  with  high
honors,  among  them  the  title  of  Count  of  Cuba.

CUDEQUALA  (coo-da-kah'-lah),  Araucanian
warrior,  b.  in  the  Mariguena  valley,  Chili,  about
1555;  d.  near  Puren,  12  Dec.,  1587.  While  very
young  he  entered  the  Araucanian  army  as  a  pri-
vate, although  he  was  a  nobleman,  and  gradually
won  promotion  to  the  grade  of  general.  The  gen-
eral-in-chief,  Dayaucura,  gave  him  command  of  a
strong  army  to  attack  the  city  of  Angol,  which  he
did  without  success,  but  then  marched  to  the  city
of  Arauco,  besieged  and  entered  it.  Afterward  he
intended  to  attack  Fort  Trinidad,  this  fortress  com-
manding the  passage  from  Biobio,  but  a  body  •  •!'
Spanish  troops  under  Francisco  Hernandez  came
out  and  defeated  Cudequala,  who  lost  an  arm  ami
was  otherwise  severely  wounded.  This  forced  him
1<>  ret  ire  to  the  mountains.  He  was  followed  thither
by  the  lieutenant-governor  of  Chili,  who  attempted
an  ambuscade,  only  to  be  discovered,  defeated,  and
killed,  with  fifty  of  his  men,  14  Nov.,  1586. On


CUDWORTH


H


tli.«  same  day  Oodequala  whs  elected  general-in-
chief  by  acclamation. In  the  following  yeai

'I'ii  I udi-h,  who  commanded  a  pr< datory

expedition  of  three  -hip--  against  the  Spanish  colo-
nies, landed  at  Qnlntero,  but  CudeqjnahVi  a  anion
attacked  the  English  and  forced  them  tonal]
a  number  <»f  their  men  having  been  killed. After
some  successful  oponfioM  the  Arnnoanian  chief

determined  t«i  take  the  city  of  Angol  by  -urpri-c,
fur  winch  In'  managed  to  liavi-  the  Indian  Inhabi-
tants prepared  t<>  set  lire  to  the  house-,  of  the  Span*
%  iardsat  an  appointed  time  during  the  night,  while
he  would  have  his  troops  quietly  approaching  the

gate*  of  the  plaee.  This  wits  done,  ami.  while  T 1 1 •  -
flames  consumed  many  buildings,  the  frightened
inmates  ran  about  the  streets  only  to  In-  horrihly
dealt  with  at  the  hands  of  the  Aramanians.  The
fOVaUIOr  of  Angol  hastily  gathered  some  troops,
and,  after  doaparata  fighting,  Cudequala  retreated
at  daybreak.  But  this  did  not  discourage  the  In-
dian general,  who  soon  besieged  Puren  and  defeated
ft  both'  of  Spanish  troops  sent  by  the  governor  to
ra  anffimn  the  pla<v.  Then  he  propose*  1  to  the  be-
sieged that  they  either  surrender  or  enter  UaoWfl
service;  but, as  his  proposals  received  no  attention,
Cude<|ualn  went  near  the  rampart  of  the  place,  lid-
bag  on  a  splendid  horse  taken  by  himself  from  the
governor,  and  challenged  the  commander  of  the
Spanish  forces  to  come  out  and  light  penonally
with  him.  The  commander,  (iania  Kamon,  imme-
diately accepted  the  challenge,  and  on  an  appointed
day  the  chiefs  met  in  an  open  field,  each  being  ac-
companied by  a  small  number  of  officers  and  men.
The  encounter  was  very  short,  for  the  two  oppo*
nents  at  once  made  a  furious  attack,  riding  at
full  gallop,  and  Cudequala  fell,  baring  been  run
through  with  the  Spaniard's  s|K-ar.  Even  when
dying  the  Araucanian  warrior  would  not  admit
defeat,  and  tried  in  vain  to  mount  his  horse  again.

CUDWORTH,  James,  colonist,  b.  in  England
about  1012;  d.  there  in  1082.  He  was  an  elder
brother  of  Ralph  Cudworth,  famous  among  Cam-
bridge IMatonists,  and  came  to  America  in  10:54,
settling  in  Plymouth.  Later  he  removed  to  Seitu-
ate.  where  for  several  years  he  was  prominent  in
public  affairs,  and  one  of  the  council  of  war.  He
was  a  brave  and  prudent  officer,  ami  commanded
the  Plymouth  troops  during  the  Indian  war  with
King  Philip,  winning  a  military  reputation  second
only  to  that  of  Miles  standish.  Be  became  unj>opu-
lar  on  account  of  hisopjiosition  to  the  severe  meas-
ures taken  against  the  (Quakers.  In  1081  he  was
made  deputy  governor,  and  during  the  same  year
sent  to  England  as  an  agent  for  the  colony,  but
died  soon  after  his  arrival.  Some  of  his  letters  on
public  business  are  still  extant.

CIKLLAR,  Joae"  T.  de  (kwayl  -jar),  Mexican
author,  b.  at  San  Luis  Potosi.  IS  Aug..  1885.  He
studied  at  the  San  Carlos  academy  in  Mexico,  and
afterward  entered  the  diplomatic  service.  He  was
attache  to  the  Mexican  legation  at  Washington
from  1850  till  1858,  when  be  returned  to  Mexico  to
fill  a  place  in  the  foreign  office.  He  accompanied
President  .Juarez  to  Paso  del  Norte  in  nil  Official
capacity,  and  returned  to  the  capital  with  .luarez
in  1*07.  Having  asked  for  a  leave  of  absence,  he
retired  to  his  native  city  in  1H08,  and  there  won
literary  reputation  by  a  novel  entitled  "  El  Pecado
del  Siglo."  He  was  appointed  secretary  to  the
nan  legation  at  Washington  in  1*?<».  and  re-
mained then-  until  180,  then  In-ing  recalled  and
siil>se<piently  elected  a  representative  to  congress.
1 1  is  appointment  as  chief  officer  or  under-seci
of  foreign  affairs  was  made  in  August.
Among Cuellar's  works  are these  comedies  and


drama*  i  y  aacriflcioa,"  ■  Aaares  da  ana

■  ral  y  flgura,"  -  «raar,"

"<  ubnr  las  aparieneiaa,M  ••  Kcdendon,"  and
viaje  u  Oriante." lit*  norela  be  -*l».U

de  poll  ho  e|  Sinfo."  ••  U.lina  la  ex-Agu-

rante."  -  Lflg  j,,,,,,,,,,,-.  •  ••  Lai  ■
and  "(iabriel  e|  (  Vrrajer..." ||. ha*  „!«..  written
several  immmiih.

CtJENECURA  'kwav-nav-coo-rahi.  Araw-anian
soldier,  b.  in  the  provin.
d.  in  Octolwr,  1009. I

Cati ray,  and  officer  of  the  Aran-  milan  armr  under

Cnillamaehn,  be  — wpmH  thia  ehieftatn  in  all

hi-Uittl.-s  against the  S|«ninnU.  and  finally  kuc-

oaadad  bin  G  bkeoauaMdaatty  ■  M04 In  loos
he  dafaated  the  Bpaaiali  boom  ftftdat  tin-  German

commander,  LUperger,  near  itaroa.  <li r

lama  attaekaoa  that  city,  and  took  it.  Lispetgar
having  been  killnl  during  it-,  defence.  Iii  1&7
Cueiiecura  routed 3,000  Spaniards  newly  in  I
Peru  and  marching  in  two  column-,  headed  l>y
ton-.  Saravia  ami  Pineda,  nnd  every  man  of
that  army  was  either  killed  or  made  n  |>n-»o«r  by
the  Indians.  The  captain-general  of  Chili  want
with  2.000  men  to attack  him  in  1000,  but  after

a well-fought  battle  retreated. Caaajaaara  waa

wounded  then,  but directed  another  Iwttle  In-fore

he  recovered,  ami,  seeing  that  his  condition  pre-
vented him  from  continuing  the  figl/
banated,  he  took  hi-  own  life  on  the  Imttlo-fleld.
He  adopted  the  nee  of  artillery  and  other  fire-arms
taken  from  the  Spanianls,  and  his  Indians  became
very  dexterous  in  handling  their  new  weapons.

( TKVA,  Heatriz  de  la  (kway-vah).  wife  of
Pedro  de  Alvarado.  the  COUqtiarOT  of  Guatemala,
b.  in  Spain  early  in  the  10th  century;  d.  in  the  city
of  Guatemala,  il  Sept.,  1641.  Winn  Alvarado  re-
turned to  Central  America,  after  his  BBCOad  vovage
to  Spain  in  1580,  be  had  iiiarri.il  then-  Dona
Heatriz,  a  si-t.-r  of  hil  tir-t  wife.  l>ofln  Erancinca
'  de  la  Cueva,  who  died  in  Vera  Cruz  in  1530.  In
1540  Alvarado  wiis  engaged  in  several  cX|>edition»
in  Mexico,  and  while  crossing  the  mountain-  wan
killed  by  a  fall  of  his  horse  cnrlv  in  July,  Cell.
When  this  news  reached  Guatemala,  the  municij*!
council  elected  Dofia  Beatril  to  ■nmed  her  hus-
band in  the  government ;  but  on  the  day  following
her  inauguration  .-he  |m  ri-lml.  with  manv  other
people,  during  the  ternl.le  earthquakes  an  Boodf
thai  destroyed  the  city.  11  S-pt..  1541.  Kvaf  -m.i-
-he  has  been  generally  ••nihil  "  Ifc>na  Heatriz  la  sin
Ventura "  (Dona Heatriz.  the  unfortunate).

(TKVAS 1»A\  AI.OS. Ab.n-o  prel-

ate, b.in  thecitvof  Me\ic,..-j:»  Nov.,  |590;d  I
1005. Re  was  the  first  native  Mexican  elected  to
the  archiepisoona]  ate  of  ktaxioa He  studied  at
the  college  of  son  Ildefoneo.  won  the  doetortda-


1 distingui-hed  himself  by  hi-  charitnlile  work
ring  an  epidemic  in  1042-U Eight  years


greein  (neology,  and  then  filled  thaehairof  th.~
rereity  of  v  Be  waaasnt

to  P'uel.la  its  first oanon  of  the  cathedral  in  1085,

and

during  an  epul

ward he  was  tran-lat.il  ft)  Um capital,  and filial

high  oflices  both m  the  cathedral  ami  in  the  uni-

versitv.afterwhichhe  was  proiuote«l  to  tin-  l.ishopne

of  OaTana.  when-  he  suc«-.sd.sl  in  n-st.iring  }ieace

aaaong  the  revolted  popaJation  of  Tahnaj
the  king  of  Spain  thanking  hha  bi  n  »|«i*l  de-
oct..  1002. Be  lajajfied  m  June.  1554,  bis


anixiintment  to  the  »  ....  whuhhei

pied yntii hi-  death, lb- had l-cun im|K*tant
reform",  but  did  not  live  to  finish  them,

<  I  PFEE,  l'aul.  Indian  preacher,  b.  in  i:
in  M.-ntauk.  Long  Island,  T  March,  1811  I
a  member  of  the  Shmnecock  tnt>c  of  Indians  on


26


(TFFEE


CUITLAHUAT/.fN


Long  Island,  and  was  the  fourth  missionary  em-
ployed among  them  by  the  New  Fork  missionary
society,  preaching  there  thirteen  years.

CUFFEE,  l'iiiil.  philanthropist,  h.  on  one  of
the  ElizaUtli  isles,  near  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  in
1759;  d.  7  Sept.,  1818.  1 1  is  father  was  a  negro,
born  in  Africa,  who  had  been  a  slave,  and  his
mother  an  Indian.  He  followed  a  seafaring  life,
became  owner  of  a  vessel,  which  he  manned  en-
tirely with  negroes,  and  acquired  a  large  fortune.
He  was  an  influential  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends.  In  his  later  years  he  interested  himself
in  the  scheme  of  colonizing  American  freedraen
on  the  western  coast  of  Africa,  corresponded  with
friends  of  the  enterprise  in  England  and  Africa,
visited  the  colony  in  his  own  ship  in  1811  to  study
its  advantages,  and  in  1815  carried  out  thirty-eight
colored  emigrants  and  provided  means  for  estab-
lishing them  in  Africa.  He  applied  to  the  British
government  for  leave  to  land  other  companies  of
colored  people  in  Sierra  Leone,  but  died  before  the
permission  came.

CUICUITZCATZIN  (k wee-k weets-cah-tseen'),
twelfth  king  of  Texcoco,  crowned  in  1520.  He  was
a  brother  of  Cacamatzin,  or  Caminatzin,  who,  hav-
ing determined  to  make  war  against  the  Spaniards,
would  not  listen  to  the  entreaties  of  envoys  sent  by
Cortes.  Subsequently  the  conqueror  managed  to
have  him  dethroned  by  Moctezuma,  and  replaced
by  Cuicuitzcatzin,  but  this  king  ruled  his  nation
only  three  or  four  months,  as  Coanacatzin  suc-
ceeded him  in  1521.  After  serious  trouble  with
the  Spaniards,  he  was  imprisoned  and  taken  to
Tlascala,  and  escaped  thence  to  Texcoco,  where  his
brother  Coanacatzin  ruled.  But  the  latter,  think-
ing him  to  be  a  spy  for  the  Spaniards,  ordered  his
immediate  execution.

CUIENTUR(kwee-en'-toor),  Araucanian  cacique
of  the  province  of  Nancu,  Chili,  b.  there  in  1578 ;  d.
in  1027.  He  entered  the  Araucanian  army  as  a  pri-
vate, and  was  gradually  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  gener-
al after  rendering  great  services  to  the  Araucanians.
In  1618  he  succeeded  Loncotegna  in  the  command
of  their  army,  and  one  of  his  first  operations  was  to
defeat  a  Spanish  detachment  and  take  possession
of  their  400  horses.  In  the  following  year  ne  routed
the  Spaniards  under  the  mayor  of  Chilian  (who
was  kdled)  near  that  city,  and  afterward  pillaged
the  whole  province.  He  then  attacked  the  town  of
San  Felipe  de  Austria,  ransacked  other  neigboring
towns,  and  finally  took  up  a  position  in  the  Can-
grejeras  Pass,  to  oppose  the  Spanish  troops.  Com-
mander Rebolledo  first  defeated  him,  but  in  a
second  battle  was  utterly  routed  by  Cuientur.  This
Araucanian  chief  captured  Neculguenu  and  killed
every  man  of  its  garrison.  He  continued  his  op-
erations till  1625,  when,  being  tired  of  warfare,  he
resigned  his  command  and  retired  to  his  own  lands
for  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  used  to  call  himself
the  eldest  son  of  Fortune.

CUILLAMACHU  (kweel-yah-mah'-tchu),  Arau-
canian soldier,  b.  in  the  Uthanmapu  valley,  Chili,
in  1534 ;  d.  in  December,  1603.  He  was  cacique  of
Uthanmapu,  and  while  very  young  joined,  with  the
warriors  of  his  tribe,  the  rest  of  the  Araucanian
army.  Having  taken  part  in  many  battles  against
the  Spaniards,  he  was  given  the  supreme  command
in  154)3,  and  organized  a  large  army  at  Lumaco.
Two  years  later  he  attacked  and  took  Fort  Jesus,
and  then  spread  his  forces  about  Ua  districts
near  the  Spanish  settlements  in  1594,  caijsing  them
great  troubles.  In  1597  he  took  the  'important
fortresses  of  Puren  and  Lumaco,  and  on  22  Nov..
1598,  surprised  in  an  ambuscade  the  governor  of
Chili,  Loyola  (a  nephew  of  the  founder  of  the


Jesuit  order),  who  was  crossing  the  Curalava  val-
ley with  his  family,  sixty  officers,  and  three  pril
the  whole  party  perishing  after  a  desperate  resist*
■nee.  CuiOsmacha  immediately  ordered  that  not
onlv  all  the  Araucanians,  but  the  (uncos  and  .
(Juilliches  also,  rise  in  arms  to  kill  every  Spaniard  or
creole  found  outside  of  the  fortified  cities  or  towns  |
and  during  the  year  he  closely  invented  the  cities
of  Osorno,  Valdlvia,  Yillarrica,  Imperial,  Caflete,
Angol,  and  (ova,  as  well  as  the  fortress  of  Arauco.
In  the  mean  time  he  crossed  Biobio  river,  burned
the  cities  of  Concepcion  and  Chilian,  pillaged  p
every  populated  place  in  those  provinces,  and  re-
turned to  his  quarters  with  a  large  booty.  The
royal  troops  under  Gen.  Quifiones  had  several
undecisive  encounters  in  1599  with  the  Araucani-
ans along  the  banks  of  the  Biobio,  especially  at
Yumbel,  where  2,000  Indians  under  the  cacique
made  a  determined  resistance  against  2,000  Spanish
soldiers.  On  24  Nov.,  at  daybreak,  he  crossed
Callavalla  river,  at  the  head  of  4,000  men,  surprised
the  city  of  Valdivia,  and  obtained  plunder  valued
at  nearly  two  million  dollars.  He  then  set  fire  to
the  buildings,  killed  many  of  the  people,  attacked
the  ships  in  the  harbor,  and  returned  to  his  quar-
ters, near  the  Biobio,  with  all  the  Spanish  artillery
and  war  material,  and  over  400  prisoners.  In  1600
a  Dutch  expedition  tried  to  land  at  Valdivia ;  but
the  cacique  at  once  attacked  and  drove  it  away.  In
1602  the  Indian  chieftain  took  possession  of  the
city  of  Villarrica,  which  had  been  closely  besieged
for  nearly  three  years,  and  the  cities  of  Osorno  and
Imperial  also  surrendered  to  him  in  1603.  Cuilla-
machu  was  the  most  famous  of  the  Araucanian
generals,  and  the  only  one  that  succeeded  in  re-
establishing independence  in  his  country  after  it
was  conquered  by  the  Spaniards.  In  his  long  ca-
reer as  a  warrior  he  was  wounded  forty-four  times.
On  one  occasion  the  governor  of  Chili  invited  him
to  negotiate  for  peace ;  but  he  answered  that  he
would  never  submit  to  a  foreign  power  while  a
drop  of  blood  remained  in  the  veins  of  his  wasriors.

CUILLAVILU  II  (kweel-vah-ve-loo'),  cacique
of  the  Araucanian  Indians  called  Puelches,  b.  in
the  Yumbel  district,  Chili,  in  1580;  d.  3  Oct.,
1612.  He  was  noted  for  his  bravery,  gave  continual
trouble  to  the  Spanish  authorities,  and  fought
many  battles  against  Merlo,  the  governor  of  Chili,
and  against  his  successor,  Juan  Jaraquemada.  In
1612  Cuillavilu  received  a  letter  from  the  king  of
Spain,  Philip  III.,  suggesting  an  arrangement  for
peace  and  establishment  of  the  Christian  religion ;
but  he  paid  little  attention  to  it,  thinking  it  was
intended  to  delude  him  and  prepare  his  ruin,  and
at  once  directed  new  operations,  but  not  long  after-
ward was  killed  in  a  battle  near  Chilian.

CUITLAHUATZfN,  or  CUITLAHIATL
(kweet-lah-wah-tseen'),  tenth  Mexican  or  Aztec
king  (twelfth  king,  according  to  other  chroniclers),
b.  in  1490 ;  d.  12  Oct.,  1520.  Being  one  of  the  sons
of  Axayacatl,  he  was  also  the  lord  of  Tztapalapan
and  a  general  of  the  Mexican  army,  when  elected
king  upon  the  death  of  his  brother,  Moctezuma
II.  His  rank  of  generalissimo  was  won  in  the
battles  of  Atlixco,  Mixtecapan,  and  Tehuantepec
While  ruling  at  Tztapalapan,  he  improved  and  en-
larged that  city  by  means  of  important  public
works.  Before  and  after  the  occupation  of  the  city
of  Mexico  by  the  Spaniards  he  advocated  a  policy
of  resistance  to  the  invaders,  advised  other  native
princes  to  oppose  any  advance  made  by  Cortes,  and
also  sent  ambassadors  to  Tlaxcala  to  ask  aid  from
that  republic.  But  he  was  unsuccessful  in  this
attempt,  after  having  caused  Cortes  the  defeat  and
subsequent  troubles  that  gave  rise  to  the  events  of


CULBEBTO

"La  BOchc  tristc."  hii<1  died  ..f  small-pox,  which
had  recently  been  introdnoed  into  M.
slave  of  Narvaez. Cuitlahuat/.iu's  rah  lasted  but
three  months.

t  I  LBEBT80N, afatthew  Simpson,  clergy-

man.  i>.  in  Chambenborg,  l'a.,  18  .inn.,  \x\x-,  d.  In

China  in  August.  l*<i,.\ lie  was  graduated  at the

i s.  military  academy  in  1880, and  larved  with

the  rank  of  MOOnd  lieutenant  of  artillery  at  Rouse'l
Point  during  the  Canada  bonier  disturlmnces,  ami
as  assistant  pratanr  of  mathematics  at  thf  mili-
tary academy.  He  resigned  his  oonuniiaion,  18
April.  1841,  icndied  theology  at  Princeton,  and
upon  graduation  in  1X44  was  ordained  as  a  mis-
sionary tn  China,  and  lal Hired  in  that  country  until
his  death.  He  was  engaged  for  several  vears  iti
preparing  a  reviled  Chinese  translation  of  the  Bible
lie  published  "Darkness  in  the  Flowery
Kingdom,  or  Religious  Notions  and  Popular  Su-
perstitions in  North  China"  (New  York.  IK*)?).

GTLLOM.  Shelby  Moore,  eenntor,  b.  in  Hon*
tieello.  Wayne  co.,  Ky..  22  Nov..  lM'2!t.  Hil  father
settled  in  Tazewell  county,  111.,  in  1830,  where
he  became  prominent  among  the  pioneers  of  tin-
state,  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  a  trusted
friend  of  Abraham  Lincoln.  The  son  received  i
classical  education,  began  the  study  of  law  in
Springfield,  111.,  in  1853,  and  as  soon  as  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  was  elected  city  attorney.  He
practised  law  in  Springfield,  was  a  candidal.-  for
presidential  elector  on  the  Fillmore  ticket  in
UB8,  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1856  and  1800,
chosen  speaker  in  his  second  term,  a  mem  Iter
of  the  war  commission  that  sat  at  Cairo  In  1882,
and  a  member  of  congress  from  Illinois  from
4  Dec.,  1805,  till  8  March,  1H71,  representing  the
Springfield  district,  which  before  his  election  was
democratic.  During  his  third  term  he  served  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  territories,  con-
ducted an  investigation  into  the  question  of  polyg-
amy in  Utah,  and  secured  the  passage  of  a  bill  for
the  extirpation  of  polygamy,  which  failed  to  come
to  a  vote  in  the  senate.  In  18?2  he  returned  to
the  Illinois  house  of  representatives,  was  elected
speaker  in  1873,  and  in  1874  served  another  term
in  the  legislature.  After  his  return  from  Wash-
ington he  became  a  banker  at  Springfield,  He
was  a  member  of  the  Republican  national  conven-
tion in  1808,  and,  as  chairman  of  the  Illinois  dele-
gation, placed  Gen.  Grant  in  nomination  at  Phila-
delphia in  18?3  and  Gen.  Logan  in  1884.  He
was  elected  governor  of  Illinois  in  1870.  and  re-
elected in  1880,  serving  from  8  Jan.,  1877,  to  5
Fil>.,  1883,  when  he  resigned,  having  been  chosen
U.  S.  senator  as  a  republican,  to  succeed  David
Davis,  independent  democrat,  for  the  term  expir-
ing on  fj  March,  1889.  Mr.  Cullom  has  been  promi-
nently connected  with  the  question  of  railroad
regulation.  As  speaker  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives he  appointed  the  committee  that  drafted  the
stringent  railroad  law  of  Illinois,  which  was  one
of  the  first  states  to  take  action  on  the  subject.
Duing  hi*  service  of  six  vears  as  governor  it  be*
came  his  duty  to  appoint  the  Illinois  railroad  com-
missioners and  to  see  that  they  secured  the  en-
forcement of  the  law,  which  was  sustained  by  the
courts  and  practically  put  in  operation  during  his
administration.  As  senator  he  has  been  leiioni
and  petive  in  endeavoring  to  secure  national  li
lation  upon  the  BUDO subject, and  in  18H5.  as  chair-
man of  the  senate  colniuitt >n  interstate  com-
merce, conducted  an  investigation  Into  the  ques-
tion of  the  regulation  of  railroad  corporations  by
national  legislation.  His  report  upon  this  subject,
submitted  to  the  senate,  \H  Jan.,  1886,  is  an  elklxv-


(  t  I.l.lM


f|


l  iew  of  the  whole  eajhjeal  and  ha*  attracted
attention  at home  and  abroad.  r*»ultinic  in  the
passage  by  the  senate  of  the  bill th..
name,  which  was  referred  to  a
mittee  of  the  two  bouse*.
M  I  I  Ml.  <.e„r*e  Wasbinrtoa.  -.Idier.  b.  in
>>..  !*«♦;  d.  -h.-re,  Hi  Kalx,
He  was  graduated nt th.« t  .  S, military
academy  in  1888,  entered  the  engineer  corps,  »o-
pcrinteiidcd  the  at  ion*  and

other  pubik  erorl  nnt\  m

Boston  harbor,  organised  pooton-tra
army  in Mexico,  was  engaged b

Ktriii";  a  "  Memoir  on  Militarv  bridge*  with  India-
abber  Pontons,"  ami  from  im*  till  1kV>  was  in-
structor of  practical  military  engine-nine  at  thr
militarv  academy,  except  two  years,  during  which
he  travelled  abroad  on  nVlS~  loOTQ In \<>

oonetrnoted  for  the  IvnnsajvdspaataHsjl  tlmaassa>

office  in  N,w  V,,rk  city,  after  which  he  vu  em-
ployed for  five  \. arson  fortifications  and  harN.r
improvements  at  Charleston.  S.  ('..  ami  -
tended  works  at  New  Bedford,  Newport,  New  IxjO-
don,  and  the  eastern  entrance  to  New  York  harU.r.
On  9  April,  1801.  he  was  appointed  aidc-de^-amp
to  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  army.  He  »«.»
promoted  major  of  engineers  on  •'»  Ann},  1861,
commissioned  brigadier  general  of  volunteers  on
l  Nov..  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  Iv-jiartment

of  the  Missouri,  was  chief  of  staff  to  Qon.  Hal  leek

while  commanding  the  Departmenti  of  ti
souri  and  the  Mississippi,  and  getieral-in-chief  of
the  armies,  directed  engineer  oporertona  on  the
western  rivers,  was  for  some  time  in  command  at
Cairo,  was  engaged  as  chief  of  engineer,  in  the
■lege  of  Corinth,  and,  after  eeoomnefjylug  Geo.
llalleck  to  Washington,  was  employea  in  Ins;
fortifications,  examining  engineering  invention*,
and  on  various  engineer  boards.  He  was  also  a
member  of  the  V.  S.  sanitary  commiwion  from  1861
till  1804.  In  the  autumn  of  l^M  he  »n.«  employed
in  projecting  fortifications  for  Na«h\ille.  Tenn.,
which  had  been  selected  es a  l«seof  o|  >crations  and
depot  of  supplier  for  our  western  armies. From  8

Sept.,  1*04,  till  88  Aug,  1800,  he  was  Hipstlntsnd-
est  of  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  was  bre-
vetted  colonel,  brigadier,  and  major-general*  for
meritorious  services  during  the  rebellion  on  13
Manh,  1888,  ami  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer

service  on  1  Sept..  1*00.  He  was  a  member  of  the
hoard  for  improving  the  defences  of  New  York,
ami  then  of  the  Uwnl  for  fortifications  and
and  harlior  obstructions  required  for  the  national
defence  from  iNi»7till  18  Jan^  1874, when  he  was
retired  from  active  service,  after  which  he  resided

in  New  York,  and  devoted  himself  to  literary,
scientific,  end  militarv  studies.  He  was  chosen  in
that  vear  vice-president  of  the  American  geo-
graphical association,  and  had  been  president  of

Ogrephioal library  society  since 18NU. He
published  a  "Biographical  Register  of  th
ears  and  Graduates  of  the  united  state-.  Mili-
tary Academy,  from  1H  >."  afterward  as>
larged to  cover  the jn'riod until the  arm\
ganisatiou  of  1  >*«7.  with  a  supplement  continuing

ister  to  1H71»  (New  York.  lx?.»i;  a  transla-
t ion  of  Dunaroq's  M Elements  of  Military  Art  and
History"  <lv  'ems  of  Militarv  bridges"

"Sketch  of  Major-ti  hard  Mont-

gomery, of  the  Continental  ArniN  "Cam-

paigns and Engineers of the  NVar of 181

"Historical Sketch of  the Fortification
Defences  of  Narragansett  Itav  abase  the  Koundini
in  1038.  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island'
ingt-


m-lmg.

rWenV


CULPKI'ER


CULYER


CULPEPER,  John,  surveyor-general  ami  po-
litical leader  in  the  Carolina*.  i>.  in  England.  He
was  a  refugee  trom  the  southern  or  Clarendon
colony,  and  in  K57H  headed  an  insurrection  in  the
northern  or  Albemarle  colony  in  favor  of  popular
liberty.  The  grievances  that  led  to  the  uprising
were  the  interference  of  the  executive  in  elections,
and  the  imposition  of  excessive  taxes  on  com-
merce. Under  his  lead  the  people  deposed  the
president  and  deputies  of  the  proprietaries,  seized
the  public  funds,  appointed  new  magistrates  and
judges,  called  a  parliament,  and  took  all  the  func-
tions of  government  into  their  own  hands.  After
the  new  government  was  organized,  Culpeper  was
sent  to  England  to  negotiate  a  compromise.  He
was  there  indicted  for  high  treason,  but  was  ac-
quitted, on  the  ground  that  there  existed  no  regu-
lar government  in  Albemarle  at  the  time  of  the
rebellion.  He  returned  to  Carolina,  and  in  1680
laid  out  Charles  Town  (Charleston).

CULPEPER,  or  COLEPEPER,  Thomas,
Lord,  colonial  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in  England  ;
d.  there  in  1719.  He  was  one  of  the  royal  favor-
ites to  whom,  in  1673,  King  Charles  II.  granted  for

the  period  of
thirty-one  years
the  entire  ter-
ritory of  Vir-
ginia, depriving
the  royal  colo-
nists of  the  very
titles  of  their
lands.  Culpep-
er, in  1675,  pur-
chased of  the
Earl  of  Arling-
ton, his  co-gran-
tee, the  latter's
rights  between
the  Rappahan-
nock and  Poto-
mac rivers.  He
was  appointed
one  of  the  com-
missioners for
Jlantations  in
uly,  1675,  and
proclaimed  gov-
ernor of  Virginia  for  life.  He  came  to  the  colony
in  1680.  Under  his  administration  was  passed
an  act  of  indemnity  for  offences  committed  dur-
ing the  rebellion  under  Gov.  Berkeley ;  also  an
act  to  enable  the  governor  to  grant  naturaliza-
tion, and  one  to  prevent  the  frequent  meeting
of  slaves.  Returning  to  England  in  1683,  in  vio-
lation of  his  orders,  he  was  arrested  immediately
on  his  arrival ;  and,  as  he  had  corruptly  received
presents  from  the  assembly,  a  jury  of  Middlesex
found  that  he  had  forfeited  his  commission.  He
was  shrewd  and  capable,  but  enriched  himself  by
bribery  and  extortion.  His  estates,  consisting  of
lands  on  the  Isle  of  Wight,  manors  in  Kent,  and
the  tract  of  the  Northern  Neck  in  Virginia,  con-
taining 5,700,000  acres,  descended  through  his
daughter,  Catherine,  who  married  Baron  lairfax,
to  her  son,  Lord  Fairfax,  patron  of  Washington.

CULTZHAYOTL  (cooltz-ay-yot'-l),  Aztec  poet,
b.  in  1370;  d.  in  1421.  He  was  the  son  of  the
Tlaxcaltec  prince  Xentiple.  His  first  work  was  a
long  poem  entitled  "  Zempaxochitl."  The  Count
of  Regla,  as  descendant  and  heir  of  Hernan  Cortes,
has  preserved  the  original,  a  translation  of  which
was  made  by  Peredo,  who  calls  Cultzhayotl  the
Aztec  Virgil.  His  second  work,  "Huitzilopoxtli,"
;-  "^sidered  superior  to  the  first. Clavijero,  a


Erofound  scholar,  finds  in  it  many  features  resem-
ling  those  of  Dante's -  Dirine  Comedy." Cults-

hayotl  was  tin-  first  that  gave  a  vigorous  character
and  form  to  tragedy  in  .Mexico,  ami  had  the  war-
dances  replaced  by  dialogues  and  tableaux.  The
Aztec  king  ami  nobility  attended  the  performance
of  bis  tragedy,  "Minna  ;  but  the  noblemen  thought
the  play  was  a  satire  on  religion,  and  caused  the
poet  to  be  imprisoned  and  subsequently  buried
alive,  to  the  neck,  in  a  field  near  Chapultepec
According  to  Netzahualcoyotl,  a  lady  of  the  court
saved  him,  leaving  in  place  of  the  victim  a  Toltec
prisoner.  He  wandered  about  until  the  priests  of
the  Mitla  temple  offered  him  protection.  While
in  retirement  he  wrote  a  powerful  satire,  called
•  (  uiilacochitl,"  against  the  Moctezuma  dynasty
and  the  corrupt  nobility.  Fearing  that  the  Mitla
priests  might  assassinate  him,  he  took  refuge  in
Cholula,  where  the  people  made  his  arrival  the  oc-
casion for  a  magnificent  display.  But  he  soon  had
to  leave  Cholula  also,  and  hid  for  the  rest  of  his
life  in  the  Cacahuamilpa  cave,  a  description  of
which  is  found  in  his  poem,  "  Cacahuamitl."

CULWER,  Daniel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1793;  d.  in  California  in  1857.  He  was  the  first
American  that  went  to  upper  California,  and  the
first  that  built  a  house  in  San  Francisco  (on  the
same  ground  now  occupied  by  the  Palace  Hotel).
He  was  also  the  founder  of  the  town  of  Santa  Bar-
bara. At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war,  in
1847,  Culwer  went  to  New  Orleans,  organized  a
company  at  his  own  expense,  and  joined  the  expe-
dition under  Gen.  Scott.  When  the  American  navy
had  bombarded  Vera  Cruz,  Culwer  advanced  to-
ward Jalapa  and  defeated  a  guerilla  band;  but,
having  gone  farther  into  the  country,  he  was  cap-
tured by  the  Mexican  chief  Father  Jaranta,  who
was  about  to  have  him  hanged  at  Plan  de  Barran-
cas when  Sergeant  Lincoln,  of  the  volunteer  force,
saved  him.  lie  specially  distinguished  himself  at
the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  when  he  almost  effected
the  capture  of  Gen.  Santa  Anna,  and  did  take  his
richly  caparisoned  horse.  He  was  dangerously
wounded  at  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  and  again  settled  in
California,  where  he  resided  for  the  rest  of  his
life,  and  accumulated  a  fortune,  a  large  part  of
which  was  bequeathed  to  charity.

CULYER,  John  Yapp,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  18  May,  1839.  He  studied  survey-
ing and  architecture,  after  which  he  spent  three
years  in  general  engineering.  Subsequently  he  be-
came assistant  engineer  in  Central  park,  New  York,
and  during  the  civd  war  was  assistant  secretary  of
the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission.  He  also  served  for
a  time  on  the  defences  south  of  the  Potomac.  In
1865  he  returned  to  Central  park,  remaining  there
for  a  year,  when  he  was  appointed  assistant  engi-
neer in  charge  of  the  Brooklyn  parks,  and  from
1872  till  1886  was  chief  engineer  and  superinten-
dent. He  has  acted  in  the  capacity  of  associate
engineer  to  the  Albany  parks,  to  the  parks  and  the
riverside  improvement  in  Chicago,  and  to  the  state
capitol  grounds  in  Nashville.  He  was  a  member
of  the  first  rapid  transit  commission  in  Brooklyn,
and  later  engineer  of  the  sixth  rapid  transit  com-
mission, besides  being  connected  with  a  gnat  va-
riety of  general  railroad  work  and  public  improve-
ment. Col.  Culyer  has  invented  implements  for
improved  road  construction  and  for  the  trans-
planting of  large  trees.  He  is  a  member  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers.  For  more
than  twenty  years  he  has  been  a  contributor  to  sci-
eiititic.  literary,  and  art  journals,  and  he  lias  also
edited  educational  and  sanitary  journals.


KBBBLAVD

CUM  It  I  IM  VM». Frederic  William,
dian  architect,  b.  in  London.  England,  In  18
in  Toronto.  5  Auu ..  1881. Ho  wan  educated  at  tho
Collegiate tohooX  Dublin,  and subesqncntrt  at
i\  college,  uondon. After  oom  plating hi*

he  was  apprenticed  t<>  a  civil  engim
in 18M  appointee!  to  the  aiiglnaeilng  department

of  the  admiralty,  ami  mperintended  the  OOnetmo-
tion  of  the  dry  docks  ami  sea-walling  at  Chatham,
ami  assisted  Sir  William  Dniisonand  ('apt.  James,
hX  lv.  during  1845-T,  in  editing  "Tho  Professional
Papers  of  the  CORN  of  Koval  Kn
1*47  he  arrived  in  I'oronto,  Canada,  and  at  once
attained  prominence  as  an  architect  and  railway
smatraofeor. In  I0H  ha  undertook  the  •nperin-

tendenee  and  construction  of  the  Ontario.  Efcmeoe
and  Huron  railway  (subsequently  the  Northern
railway)  to  its  terminus  at  CollmgWOOd,  on  the
Georgian  bay,  of  which  road  he  afterward  beonflM

managing  director.  Baring  completed  tin-  oon-
struction.  he  resigned  in  1854,  and  gave  his  atten-
tion solely  to  architectural  work.  He  designed
the  plans  of  St.  .lames  cathedral,  the  normal
school,  and  Osgood  hall,  in  Toronto,  and  that  of  the
diversity  of  Toronto.  The  last  named  is  said  to
be  the  finest  specimen  of  Norman  Gothic  archi-
tecture on  this  continent.  In  1861,  at  the  time  of
the  "Trent"  affair,  he  organized  in  Toronto  the
regiment  now  known  as  the  Koval  Grenadiers.  be-
came  its  first  colonel,  and  retained  the  command
until  1864,  when  he  was  appointed  aide-de-camp
to  the  governor-general,  ceasing  to  be  such  by  his
resignation  on  the  departure  of  Lord  Dutferin.
At  the  time  of  the  Fenian  raid  in  1K66  he  had
charge  of  the  railway  service.  He  ropreaented
Ateoma  district  in  the  legislature  of  Ontario  in
1867,  and  in  1M71  in  the  dominion  parliament.

CUMING,  Sir  Alexander.  British  officer,  b.
about  1700.  He  was  sent  in  1730  by  the  English
government  on  a  mission  to  the  Creeks  and  Chero-
kees,  the  object  of  which  was  to  counteract  the
designs  of  the  French,  who  were  endeavoring  to
win  the  friendship  of  those  tribes,  in  pursuance  of
a  scheme  for  the  annexation  of  the  interior  regions
in  America  lying  between  their  colonies  in  Canada
and  those  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.

(TMMING,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in
Freehold,  N.  J.,  in  1796;  d.  in  Boston.  Ma-..  86
Aug..  1763.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Rev.  Samuel
Blair  (see  Blair),  and  received  his  education  |mrt-
ly  under  his  uncle's  direction.  He  was  licensed
to  preach  by  the  "New  Side"  presbytery  of  New-
castle in  1746.  He  was  the  first  Presbyterian  min-
ister that  preached  within  the  bounds  of  Tennessee.
He  was  ordained  in  1750  as  colleague  of  iter.  Mr.
Pemberton  in  New  York,  and  in  1753  l»oth  pastors
requested  a  dismission  on  account  of  troubles  in
the  church  in  respect  to  matters  of  ecclesiastical
order.  Mr.  Camming  was  relieved  on  66  Oct.,  ami
on  25  Feb..  17<»1,  was  installed  as  colleague  pastor
with  Dr.  S-wall,  of  the  Old  South  church.  Boston,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  He  published
his  installation  asiJUCO  (1781), and  "Animadversions
on  Hev.  Mr.  Cnawcll's  late  Letter."  etc.  (17<>3).

Cl'MMING.  Gilbert  W..  lawyer,  b.  in  Delaware

county, N.  V..  in  1H17. He  was  apprenti 1  to  a

carriage-maker,  but  spent  his  spare  hours  in  study.
He  began  to  study  law  in  1*:'.*.  and  became  prom-
inent in  Ins  profession.  During  the  anti-rent
troubles  of  1845  he  commanded  a  military  regi-
ment, and  Micceed.-d. in  restoring  quiet  He  re-
moved, in  i**>;s.  to  Janesville,  WW.,  and  in
Chicago.  In  Bapternber,  1861,  he  raised  the  61el
Illinois  regiment,  and  was  appointed  its  aoJonel.
He  was  afterward  assigned  to  the  command  of  a


MING


M


brigade,  and  did  pood  -  rvire  at  Island  Number
I  I'lnd.  and  Corinth.
<  I  MMI.NG.  Kate,  author,  >>.  about  1666. She

is  of  s-otti-l,  di-Mi'iit,  and  has  re»id.

Ala.,  since  her  childhood Dm

she  wa*  with  one  of  th<

itifcr  the  wounded  and  a^-i-'

held  hospital*  in  the  campaign*  m  T.  nnessaeTKen-

tm-ky.  and  Georgia,  when  tie  army  tu  retreating.

Kvery  evening  s|„.  iq«-nt  a  few  moment*  over  her

diary,  recording  the  incident*  that  bad  taken  placa

around her, She  published  **  HoMpital  I.ifr  in  the

Armv  ..f  Tennessee"  djouisvilla,  ht..  1H60L

CUM  MING,  William,  -ddier.  b.
aix.ut  17SH);  d.  in  An-iMa.  Ga..  in  Puhfsjajj,  1868.
Heetudledafl  the  litenfleld,  Conn.,  law-icbaol,  but
Inherited  a  fortune  and  never  practised.  He  was
appointed  major  in  the  nth  infantry  on  68
March.  lM:i,  and  was  wounded  in  the'  Imttlr  of
Chrysler's  Field,  11  Nov. He  was  made  adjutanl-

general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  on  16  Pah
u -in i^  severely  wounded  at  LundVi  Ijsjm  on  25
July, and  resigning 81  March,  ihi.v ii.  dedtead
the  appointment of quartcniuu4cr-grneral,  with
the  rank  of  brigadier-goneeal,  m  April,  jhim,  and

also  that  of  major-general,  tendered  liim  by  Preri-
ilent  1'olk  an  3  March.  1K47.  Col.  dimming  was
a  leader  of  the  Union  partv  in  the  nullification
Struggle,  and  his  quarrel  with  QeOTgS  McDttl
South  Carolina,  on  this  issue  was  notorious.  The
two  men,  attended  bj  a  long  train  of  friend*  in
their  own  equipagea,  ruahed  fn>m  one  point  to
another  in  the  attempt  to  find  a  place  of  tie
and  loudly  accused  each  other  of  U-t  raving  their
intentions  to  the  officer!  of  the  law.  They  were
widely  caricatured,  and  their  actions  »en-  watched
with  interest  all  over  the  country.  Thej  finally
succeeded  in  meeting  twice,  and  exchanged  three
shots,  by  one  of  which  McDoffia  was  wounded  in
the  hip  and  lamed  for  life.— His  brother,  Alfred,
governor  of  Utah,  b.  about  1868;  <1.  in  Augusta.  Ga..
'.»  <  »<t..  1*7:1.  was  a  sutler  during  the  Mnimn  war.
He  had  been  superinteodenl  of  Indian  affairs  on
the  upper  Missouri,  ami  in  1H57  President  Buchan-
an ap|Miiuted  him  governor  of  I'tah  territory,  and
sent  him  there  with  a  force  of  8j806  men  to  protact
him  in  the  discharge  of  hia  funcUona.  which  aos>
stituted the  famous  "I'tah  Expedition"  of  that
rear.  <>n  87  Nov.  the  governor  laaned  apnx-lama-
tion  declaring  the  territory  to  !«•  in  a  -;
rebellion,  and  this  documenl  was  sent  to  Salt  I.ake
City  bya  Mormon  prisoner, aooomparded  bj  ■
to  Brigham  Young,  evincing  a  willingness  to  tem-
porise. The  expedition  went  into  winter  quarter*
at  Camp  Scott,  on  Black's  Fork,  and  in  March.
oL  Thomas  L  Kane  arrived  in  the  oasnp,
having  been  sent  bv  the  president  a«  *\»*  iai
to  Brigham  Young.  The  relations  I.
Cumming  and  Oen.  AlUrt  Sidney  Johnston,  com-
mander of  tt xpedition.  had  lieoome  somewhat

strained,  and,  eoon  after  OoL  Kane'*  arrival,  that

gentleman,  taking  off.-m  -eat  a  fancied  slight.

a  challenge  to  (Jen.  Johnston  with  Gov.  dimming'*

consent During  the  spring  difficult  ie»  constantly

through  a  misunderstamling  on  Cumming  *
part  as  to  the  DOWaf  he poasessrd  over  the  I
On  s  March  Judge  Cradlelwiigli  BUM  rcquisitfon
for  soldiers  to  protect  his  court,  sitting  at  Proro,
during  the  trial  of  the  Mormons  indicted  for
compficitv in the Mountain Meadow*  massacre,

and  they  vara  furnished  bi  Bun,  Mnatom,  wbere-

up.u  flow,  dimming  protested  against  their  u»e.
and  on  J7  March  issued  a  pn*  lamatioti  denouncing
the  general's  action.  The  secretary  of  war  after-
ward  forbade  Gen.  Johnston  to  use  troops  for


30


CUMMINGS


(  TM  MINGS


such  purposes.  After  the  proclamation  of  par-
don to  the  Mormons,  in  accordance  with  t he  tem-
porizing policy  adopted  by  Buchanan's  iidminist ra-
tion. Gov.  Camming  objected  to  the  farther
advance  of  the  army,  but,  notwithstanding  his
protest,  it  was  marched  into  Salt  Lake  City,  and  did
much  to  preserve  order.  Gov.  Camming  held  his
office  till  1861,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Stephen
S.  Harding. — Alfred's  nephew,  Alfred,  b.  in
Augusta,  Ga.,  30  Jan.,  1829,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849.  He  was  aide  to
Gen.  Twiggs  at  New  Orleans  in  1851-'3,  was  made
first  lieutenant  on  3  March,  1855,  and  captain  in
the  10th  infantry.  20  July,  1856.  He  was  on  the
Utah  expedition  of  1859-'60,  and  on  19  Jan.,  1861,
resigned,  and  was  soon  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  Confederate  army.  He  rose  to  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  served  until  disabled
by  wounds  received  at  the  battle  of  Jonesboro.  Ga.,
31  Aug.,  1864.  After  the  war  he  became  a  planter
near  Rome,  Ga.

CUMMINGS,  Amos  Jay,  journalist,  b.  in  Conk-
ling,  N.  Y.,  in  1842.  His  father  edited  and  pub-
lished a  weekly  religious  paper  in  Irvington,  and
the  youth  entered  the  printing-office  at  the  age  of
twelve  years.  After  attaining  manhood,  he  trav-
elled and  worked  at  the  case  in  many  states  of  the
Union  and  in  Canada.  He  also  visited  Mexico,
Central  America,  and  Europe.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  a  compositor  on  the  New
York  "  Tribune,"  but  soon  joined  a  regiment  of  vol-
unteers, and  fought  in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg
and  Chancellorsville.  Soon  afterward  he  returned
to  work  at  the  "  Tribune  "  establishment,  becoming
successively  night  editor,  city  editor,  and  political
editor  of  that  paper.  At  present  (1887)  he  is  on
the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Sun."  In
1885-'6  he  was  president  of  the  New  York  press
club.  Mr.  Cummings  is  known  as  a  ready  extem-
poraneous speaker.  In  1886  he  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative in  congress.

CUMMINGS,  Andrew  Boyd,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  June,  1830;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  18  March,  1863.  He  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  midshipman  in  April,  1847,  and  was  suc-
cessively advanced  through  the  different  grades
until  he  became  lieutenant-commander  in  July,
1862.  During  the  passage  of  Forts  Jackson  and
St.  Philip,  and  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  he  was
executive  officer  of  the  "  Richmond."  During  the
subsequent  engagement  with  the  batteries  at  Port
Hudson  he  fell  mortally  wounded  while  cheering
the  men  at  their  guns.  He  was  removed  to  New
Orleans,  but  died  four  days  later.  Admiral  Porter
said  in  a  letter  written  at  that  time :  "  He  was  a
gallant  officer,  and  too  good  a  man  to  lose."  Ad-
miral Farragut  wrote :  "  Poor  Cummings  was  a
great  loas,  both  to  the  country  and  to  his  family."
CUMMINGS,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass..  29  Sept.,  1791 ;  d.  at  sea,  5  June,  1856.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,  and  during  1819-20
was  a  tutor  at  Bowdoin,  meanwhile  studying  at
Andover  theological  seminary.  In  February,  1821,
he  was  ordained  and  became  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  in  North  Yarmouth,  Me.,  holding
that  charge  until  1829.  Physical  infirmities  com-
pelled him  to  relinquish  preaching,  and  he  accepted
the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Mirror,"  at  that  time
the  organ  of  the  Maine  missionary  society.  Some
years  later,  owing  to  conflicting  opinions  on  the
slavery  question,  concerning  which  the  Maine  mis-
sionary society  was  unwilling  to  take  positive
ground,  the  paper  became  his  personal  property,  and
e  continued  in  editorial  control  of  the  "Mirror"
until  the  close  of  1855. A  few  months  later  he  sailed


for  Aspinwall,  on  a  visit  to  his  daughter  and  for  the
benefit  of  his  health.  On  the  return  voyage,  soon
after  tearing  the  isthmus,  he  died.  He  published  a
••  .Memoir  of  Dr.  Edward  Payson  "  (Boston,  1846).

CUMMINGS,  Ebcnezer  Edson,  clergyman.  1>. .
in  Claremont,  N.  H.,  9  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  Concord,
22  Feb.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Watcrville
(now  Colby  university)  in  1828,  and  ordained  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Salisbury,  N.  H.,  in  Sep-
tember of  the  same  year.  From  1832-'64  he  was
pastor  of  churches  in  Concord,  N.  H.  He  was
especially  active  in  promoting  the  educational
interests  of  his  state,  having  been  president  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  the  New  London  institution
from  its  beginning,  and  for  some  time  a  trustee  of
Colby  university.  In  1855  he  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Dartmouth.  Dr.  Cummings  published
several  sermons,  and  left  in  manuscript  "  The  Bap-
tist Ministry  of  New  Hampshire  for  the  First
Century  of  our  History."

CUMMINGS,  Jeremiah  W.,  clergvman,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  5  April,  1823 ;  d.  iri  New  York,
4  Jan.,  1866.  He  studied  at  the  College  of  the
Propaganda,  Rome,  where  he  took  the  highest
honors,  and  in  1848  returned  to  the  United  States.
He  was  first  stationed  at  the  old  cathedral  of  St.
Patrick,  on  Mott  street.  In  1856  he  built  St.
Stephen's  church,  and  was  its  pastor  until  his
death.  Father  Cummings  was  an  effective  preacher,
a  popular  lecturer,  and  a  promoter  of  sacred  music.
He  published  "  Italian  Legends  "  (New  York,  1859) :
"  Songs  for  Catholic  Schools  "  (1862) ;  "  Spiritual
Progress"  (1865);  and  "The  Silver  Stole,"  and
contributed  to  the  "  American  Cyclopaedia."

CUMMINGS,  John,  tanner,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  26  Feb.,  1785 ;  d.  there,  8  June,  1867.  He
early  established  himself  in  the  tanning  business,
devoting  his  winter  months  to  that  occupation,
while  his  summers  were  spent  in  farming.  His
hides  were  obtained  from  farmers  through  his  own
exertions  in  travelling  on  horseback  to  collect
them,  and  bark  was  brought  in  from  the  ad-
jacent country.  About  1830  he  began  the  manu-
facture of  high  grades  of  leather  as  a  special-
ty, and  gained  reputation  for  the  quality  of  his
foods,  supplying  manufacturers  throughout  New
Ingland.  Subsequently,  when  enamelled  leather
came  into  use,  he  became  one  of  the  largest  tanners
in  the  state.  He  continued  in  business  until  late
in  life,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son.
Mr.  Cummings  probably  taught  more  young  men
the  business  of  tanning,  aiding  them  to  establish
themselves,  than  any  other  leather  manufacturer
in  Massachusetts.

CUMMINGS,  Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  Falmouth
county,  Me.,  3  March,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university  in  1840,  and  then  taught  at
Amenia,  N.  Y.,  seminary,  becoming  its  principal  in
1843.  In  1846  he  joined  the  New  England  con-
ference of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and
was  stationed  successively  at  Maiden,  Chelsea,
Hanover  street,  and  Bromfield  street  (Boston)
churches.  He  then  became  professor  of  theology
in  the  Methodist  general  biblical  institute  in  Con-
cord, N.  H.,  remaining  there  for  the  year  1853-'4,
after  which,  until  1857,  he  was  president  of  Genesee
college  at  Lima,  N.  Y.  From  1857  till  1875  he
was  president  of  Wesleyan  universitv,  and  from
1875  till  1877  professor  of  mental  philosophy  and
political  economy  in  that  institution.  He  preached
at  Maiden  during  1877-9,  and  at  Harvard  street
church,  Cambridge,  during  1880-'l.  In  1881  he
became  president  of  Northwestern  university.
Evanston,  111.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in


1864  Bt  has  received  the

degrees  of  I).  I),  from  Weslcyan  nod  from !
i.  ami  of  LIa  I>.  from  the  Northwesters,  uni-
Dr.  Cummings'a  literary  work  Include!
the  editing  «'f Butlera  "Analogy  of  Religion"
(New  178)  ami  Domeroua  sennoua  ami  ad-

dresses, a  list  of  whiofa  i-  girtn  in  tin-  •■  Alitmni
.■•van  University."
CUMMINGS,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rarer-
hill,  Ma—.,  abonl  1816;  <l.  in  New  fork  city,  6
.Ian.,  1867.  Ha  entered  the  ministry  of  thfl  Chris-
tian denomination at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and

lalxuvd f<»r  many  vcars  in New  Jersey ami New

York.  From  IBM  till  1862  he  had  editorial  con-
trol of  "The  Christian  Messenger"  ami  "The  Pal-
ladium," the  central  organs  of  the  sect  of  which
he  was  a  incinU-r.  lie  was  a  determined  opponeul
of  slavery,  and  ■  friend  and  admirer  of  Horace
Mann,  whose  peculiar  educational  views  receivt<|
his  cordial  rapport

CUMMINGS,  Thomas  Seir,  painter,  h.  in  Kng-
land  in  1804.  He  came  to  New  York  in  Infancy,
entered  his  father's  counting-room,  studying  art  in
his  -pare  hours,  and  afterward  pursued  his  studies
with  Henry  Inman.  He  worked  at  his  profession,
that  of  miniature  portrait-painting,  until  the  in-
troduction of  photography,  numbering  among  his
sitters  many  distinguished  persona.  He  WM  one
Of  the  founders  of  the  National  academy  in  1826,
was  an  early  vice-president,  and  its  treasurer  in
1840-75.  The  schools  of  the  academy  owe  most  of
their  perfection  to  him,  and  he  was  the  instructor
of  many  who  afterward  became  prominent  artists.
Mr.  Cummings  was  for  a  long  time  connected  with
the  militia,  commanded  a  regiment  for  several
years,  and  in  \xi*  was  commissioned  brigadicr-
general  by  Gov.  Seward.  About  ls'><>  he  retired  to
a  farm  in  Connecticut.  He  published  "  Historic
Annals  of  the  National  Academv  from  its  Founda-
tion to  18»5"  (Philadelphia,  1865\

CUMMINS,  Ehenezer  Harlow,  clergyman,
b.  in  North  Carolinaabout  1700;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  17  Jan.,  1835.  He  received  a  collegiate  edu-
cation, and  then  studied  law.  For  several  years  he
served  in  the  state  legislature  of  Georgia,  but  suIh
sequently  entered  the  marine  corps.  loiter  he
studied  theology,  and  after  settling  in  Italtiinore
became  a  magistrate.  He  published  "Geography
of  Alabama'  (Baltimore,  1N1H)  and  "History  of
the  Lata  War"  (UttO}

CUMMINS,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  near  Ship-
panabwg,  Pa.,  in  1732:  d.  in  Greensborough,  Ga.,
22  Feb..  1832.  His  earlv  life  was  spent  on  a  farm,
and  he  received  a  collegiate  education  at  "  Queens
Museum."  in  Mecklenburg  county,  N.  C,  whither
his  family  had  removed  in  17?"J.  After  graduation.
he  was  a  teacher  in  Booth  Carolina  and  Georgia,
numharing  among  his  pimils  many  who  -ub-e
quently  l>eeame  famous,  including  Senator  William
Smith  ami  President  Jacheoo,  In  1776  be  was  an
ardent  patriot,  was  present  at  all  of  the  Mecklen-
burg whig  meetings,  and  at  the  exciting  BOOM
during  the  reading  of  the  celebrated  Declaration
in  the  Mecklenburg  court-house.  Meanwhile  he
studied  theology  under  Rev.  Dr.  James  Hall,  and
was  ordained  topreach  by  the  presbytery  of  ( >range
in  Daoambar,  17mo. Afterward  ha  tilled  the  office

Of  pa-tor  to  twenty  parishes  in  different  localities
in  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas.  In  177H  he  was  a
■aanbar  <>f  the  Booth  Carolina  convention  held  to
daoada  apon  the  constitution  of  the  United  states,
and  voted  for  its  adoption. The University  of

Georgia  con ferred  npon  him  the  dagn f  D.  D.

in  UML  He  published  sermons  ami  jMilitical  and
scientific  pamphlets.


n


^■JNJ I  '..»ld.  aajtataau  p r.

bishop,  b.  in  Kent

June. l*7o. ||..  w a*  graduated

lege,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  in  1H41.  and  eti

di-t  ministry,  but  Mil^-.juently  took  orders  in  the

Protestant  hpiseopol  church

i  and  i.riest  in  1867,  and  I  •.•coining  rector  of
ehurchc-  in  \  iryuua.  Marvlnml.  mid  Illinois.  He
was  consecraw-d  awistant  biahop.f  K

1866.  but  «»n  became  dhwatisfkd  with'  thr
state  of  things  m  the  Kpiw-o,*!  church,  chiefly  on
account  ..f  id,-  pn.-rexsof  ritualism,  and  in  1871
abandons!  his  office  and  took  st,.i»  t,',«nr,i  found-
inga  mw  sect,  designated  \>\  ,,  Reformed

Bpiaoopal  church,"  becoming  it«  first  bi-diop.  lb-
was  formally  dcjN>*<d  frt.m  the  Prot.-Mant  fidaau-
pal  mini-try,  under  the  camm  profiled  f->r

cases,  by  the  pn-si.iiim  bishop,  the  lit.  Ih-v.  Beo-

jamiii  BoaworU  Smith.

CUMMINS,  Marls  Susanna,  author,  b.  in
Salem. Mass..  !» April. 1h-.'7;  d. in Hor-hester,  1

Oct.. ISCli. She  was  the  daughter  of .lu.lk''

Cummins,  and  Wjoaifd  her  edoeatloa  at  Mrs.
Charles  Sedgwick's  school  in  Lanex

she  turned  her  attention  to  literature,  ami  beside
her  novels  contributed  various  articles  to  tl
lantic  Monthly  "  and  other  maga/m.-.  II
iHH.k.  "The  Lamplighter  "(IWon.  1  <*), achieved
great  popularity,  and  upward  of  40.000  ropie*
were  sole!  within  two  months.  It  passed  through
several  editions  m  this  country  and  in  BngJaod,

'and  its  entire  sale h  4 119,000  ropfaa

Her  later  publications  include  ••  MaM  Yaughan  "
(1KT>7),  which  is  considered  by  many  err

J  to  her  first  book  :  ••  Kl  Furei'dis."  a  ston  «.f  Pales-
tine and  Syria  (I860);  and  "  Haunted  Hearts''
(1W4).  Miss  Cummins  was  a  writer  of  great
power;  her  characters  were  drawn  with  skill,  and
there  was  always  a  motive  in  her  productions  aside
from  their  general  interest.

CUNARI).  Sir  Samuel,  founder  of  the  Cunsrd
steamship  line.  b.  in  Halifax.  N.  S.,  16  Nm..  17^7;
d.  in  Knglaml,  2H  April.  lHft'».  He  was  the  son  of
a  mechanic  and  became  a  Pttoceaafni  merchant  in
several  kinds  of  business.  In  1K{H  he  famed  the
Canard  company,  and  made  a  contract  with  the
British  government  to  carry  the  mails  fortnightly
for  seven  years  between  Liverpool.  Halifax,  and

Mo-ton.  The  "  Britannia."  "  Acadia."  "  Caledonia,"
and  "Columbia"  steamships,  of  1.2110  tons  register
ami  440  horse  power,  wen-  built  for  this  -
and  formed  the  first  Una  of  mail  steamers.  Mr.
Canard  waa  created  a  baronet, 8  March.  U
Hi-  eon,  Sir  Kdward.  b,  in  Halifax.  N  9  I
Jan..  1816;  .1.  in  New  York.  15  April,  1H«H».  waa
educated  in  his  native  province,  and  was  for  thirty
yean  agent  of  the  Cunard  line  of  steamers  at  New
York. He  succeeded  to  his  father's  title.

CUNKQUF.O  (COO-BO]  \raucaniaii  hen>-

ine.  t».  in  the  Manguena  district.  Chili,  in  the  latter
part  of  the  16th  century:  d.  ahoofl  IfttL  While
verv  roongahe  luailiad  yuc|«ilan.  an  Araucanian
offtosr,  ami began her  career  as  a  warrior  by  ae-

oompanytng  her  Imaoaod,  fighting  by  hi*  side.

against  the  Spanianis. She  aostlOfWjanad  herself

during  the  long  defen >f  I.iben. After  yuep»>

tan htul  Iteen  killed,  she  resolved to  avenj
death: and  in l'»»0  was  at  the  head  of  an  army
of Pulches,  with  which  she  attacked  ev.ry  Span-
ish settlement  in  Arauco,  and  pal  to  death  all  Ku-

ropeana  taken  ptsMoan  by  her  tmofw. The  icot-

amor  Of  Chili,  with  a  larp»  for  •  meet

her  army,  but  OOsttOjoao,  bt  remaining  in  weil-
,ho-.ii  |.o-nions  ami  ably  dins-ting  attaek*  ujjon
the  S|«uiianls,  fon^sl him to  retreat. Then  aha


32


CUNHA BARBOSA


CUBANTBO


moved  toward  the  fortress  of  Puchanqui,  defeated
and  killed  Mnj.  Aranda  and  part  of  his  troops
that  had  left  the  place  to  |>r»-\ cut  her  from  advanc-
ing. But  she  failed  to  take  the  fortress,  and  was
obliged  to  go  into  winter  quarters  near  the  city  of
Villarrica,  which  her  warriors  kept  besieged  until.
early  in  1591,  its  governor  came  out  with  a  large
number  of  men.  She  commanded  her  forces  dur-
ing several  attacks,  and  did  not  leave  the  field
until  the  Spanish  artillery  had  decimated  her
ranks.  After  this  campaign  she  retired  to  private
life.  Cunequeo  alwavs  went  on  horseback  among
her  officers,  fought  like  the  bravest  of  her  war-
riors, and  on  several  occasions  killed  Spanish
soldiers  with  her  own  hands.  Ercilla,  the  author
of  "  La  Araucana,"  devoted  many  pages  of  his
great  epic  to  a  description  of  her  prowess.

CUNHA  BARBOSA.  Januarlo  da  (koon'-yah
bar-bo'-sa),  Brazilian  statesman,  b.  10  July,  1780 ;
d.  22  Feb.,  1846.  He  was  chaplain  of  John  VI.,
and  afterward  professor  of  moral  philosophy.  On
15  Dec,  1821,  ne  established,  in  conjunction  with
Ledo,  the  "  Reverbero  Constitucional,"  a  political
journal,  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  favoring  Brazilian  in-
dependence. After  this  had  been  declared,  Cunha
was  arrested,  7  Dec,  1822,  and  banished  to  France.
To  repair  this  injustice,  he  was  appointed  in  1824
canon  of  the  imperial  chapel.  In  1826  he  became
a  member  of  the  assembv.  In  concert  with  Gen.
Cunha,  he  founded  the  Historical  and  geographical
society  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  also  edited  a  politi-
cal journal  favorable  to  the  government,  and  an'
agricultural  paper,  and  was  imperial  historiogra-
pher and  director  of  the  national  library.  He  left
a  small  volume  of  poems.

CUNHA  DE  AZEVEDO  COUTINHO,  Jos6
Joaquim  da  (koon'-ya  day  ah-thay-vay'-do  koo-
teen'-yo),  Brazilian  bishop,  b.  in  San  Salvador  do
Campo  dos  Goitacazes,  Lisbon,  8  Sept.,  1743;  d.  in
Rio  Janeiro,  12  Sept.,  1821.  After  studying  in  the
capital  of  his  province,  he  finished  his  education
at  Coimbra,  Portugal,  and  returned  to  his  country.
In  1784  he  went  to  Lisbon  as  deputy  to  the  In-
quisition, and  was  appointed  bishop  of  Pernam-
buco  in  1794,  where  he  at  once  devoted  himself  to
benevolent  work,  specially  the  building  of  hospi-
tals, also  founding  a  seminary  for  the  instruction
of  priests,  for  which  Queen  Mary  of  Portugal  gave
him  several  estates  that  had  belonged  to  the  Jes-
uits. He  was  appointed  bishop  of  Braganza  in
1802,  archbishop  of  Braga  in  1806,  and  bishop  of
Beja  in  1817,  and,  although  he  declined  to  be  re-
moved from  his  diocese,  he  was  obliged  to  serve
as  president  of  the  board  in  charge  of  monastic
affairs.  He  died  soon  after  his  election  as  dep-
uty to  the  Portuguese  cortes.  He  had  distin-
guished himself  by  his  patriotism  during  the  Na-
poleonic wars,  and  left  works  highly  esteemed  in
Brazil  and  Portugal,  which  have  been  translated
into  several  languages.

CUNHA  MATTOS,  Raimnndo  Jos6  da  (koon'-
yah-mah'-tos),  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Faro,  prov-
ince of  Algarve,  2  Nov.,  1776 ;  d.  in  March,  1840.
He  entered  the  Portuguese  army  in  1790,  served
three  years  in  the  south  of  France,  and  eighteen
years  in  Africa,  then  served  in  Rio  Janeiro,  and
was  afterward  acting  governor  of  St.  Thomas.  In
1817  he  returned  to  Brazil,  commanded  the  artil-
lery of  Pernambuco,  and  subsequently  governed  the
province  of  Goyaz.  He  published  a  work  on  the
interior  of  Brazil  (1836).  Removing  to  Rio  de
Janeiro  in  1826,  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,
directed  the  military  academy  of  Rio  in  1832,  and
was  made  commander-in-chief  of  the  Brazilian
army. He  was  secretary  for  life  of  the  Indust  rial


aid  society,  and  one  of  the  founders,  and  for  sev-
eral years  viee-| iresident,  of  the  Historical  society
of  Kio  de  Janeiro.

(TNMNGHAM,  Robert,  loyalist.  1>.  in  Ire-
land about  1  ?:!!>;  d.  in  Nassau,  W.  I.,  in  1818.  In
1769  he  settle<  1  in  the  district  of  Ninety-Six  (no*
Abbeville),  S.  C,  and  soon  became  a  judge,  lie  in-
curred the  enmity  of  the  whigs  by  his  disapproval
of  their  action  in  sustaining  the  cause  of  Massa-
chusetts and  in  the  adoption  of  the  non-impor-
tation act.  In  1775  he  was  imprisoned  in  Charles-
ton, and  after  his  release  joined  the  British  forces.
During  1780  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  placed  in  command  of  a  garrison  in
South  Carolina.  In  the  following  year  he  served
in  the  field  against  Gen.  Thomas  Sumter.  His
estate  was  confiscated  in  1782.  After  the  war  he
petitioned  to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  South  Caro-
lina, but  this  request  was  refused,  and  he  removed
to  the  Bahamas  and  settled  in  Nassau.  The
British  government  made  him  a  liberal  allowance
for  his  losses,  and  gave  him  an  annuity.

CUNNINGHAM,  William,  provost-marshal,
b.  in  Dublin  ;  d.  in  London,  10  Aug.,  1791.  From
his  confession,  published  at  the  time  of  his  death,
he  appears  to  have  been  the  son  of  a  trumpeter  in
the  dragoons,  and  to  have  been  born  in  tne  bar-
racks in  Dublin.  He  arrived  in  New  York  in
1774,  and  was  occupied  for  a  time  in  the  breaking
of  horses  and  in  giving  riding-lessons.  His  course
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  rendered
him  obnoxious  to  the  whigs  in  New  York,  and  he
fled  to  Boston,  where,  continuing  his  opposition  to
the  popular  movement,  he  attracted  the  attention
of  Gen.  Thomas  Gage,  who  appointed  him  provost-
marshal  to  the  royal  armv.  In  1778  he  had
charge  of  the  prisons  in  Philadelphia,  and  later  of
those  in  New  York ;  and  in  both  places  his  cruel-
ties to  the  prisoners  became  notorious.  The  de-
tails of  his  crimes  are  horrible.  Of  the  prisoners
under  his  care,  2,000  were  starved  to  death,  and
more  than  250  were  hanged  without  trial.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  went  to  England,  and  settled
in  Wales.  Later  he  resided  in  London,  where  he
became  exceedingly  dissipated,  and,  in  order  to  re-
lieve his  embarrassment,  mortgaged  his  half-pay,
and  subsequently  forged  a  draft.  For  this  offence
he  was  convicted:  and  executed.

CURANTEO  (coo-ran-tay'-o),  Araucanian  cacique
of  the  Promanco  tribe,  b.  in  Puren,  Chili,  in  1726;
d.  there  in  1785.  He  became  famous  among  the
Araucanian  warriors,  and  they  appointed  him  their
generalissimo  to  direct  the  war  against  the  Span-
iards in  1766.  He  began  operations  by  destroying
several  towns  and  settlements  of  the  whites.  At
the  head  of  8,000  Indians,  he  fought  a  battle  at
Tucapel  (1767)  against  the  Spanish  Gen.  Gonzala,
who,  after  a  long  and  tenacious  resistance,  was
forced  to  retreat  to  Chilian,  and  subsequently  be-
sieged by  Curanteo.  In  1768  he  fought  and  won
another  important  battle  in  the  Arauco  valley,  but
lost  a  leg  in  the  struggle.  In  a  fierce  battle  near
Angol  with  Gen.  Ponte,  governor  of  Chili,  in  1768,
he  was  badly  defeated.  From  that  time  until  1 772
Curanteo  had  many  encounters  with  the  Span-
iards, his  principal  purpose  being  to  damage  the
settlers  rather  than  obtain  victories  in  the  field.
In  April,  1773,  he  was  again  defeated  near  Qui  Hero
in  one  of  the  most  terrible  battles  known  in  the
history  of  Chili.  In  1780  he  won  a  lwttle  against
the  Spanish  army,  whose  commander  signed  a
treaty  of  peace  granting  the  Araucanian  chief
what  he  demanded.  Curanteo  retired  to  his  na-
tive town,  and,  although  his  body  was  covered  with
wounds,  attained  an  advanced  age. .


<  I  RBI  I  .  .I.nii. •  i.  idian  statesman,
\>.  in  Toronto,  M  Mot.,  188y.  He  iru  educated  at
Niagara,  Ontario,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
(.» the  bar  in  1h:>;{. id •  was  tpsahec  "f  t h«-  Oute*

issembli  from  91 Da  . 1871,  tfll  M  Karon,

.  when  In-  resigned  uiul  represent  ra  in

i h<-  legislative  oonnoi)  of  Canada  from  inh2  till

im,  1886. in  is;.-)  in-  introduced  measures  in

tin- Ontario legislature in favor of ihiiiiIuhmI

suffrage  in  boa]  parliamentary  elections,  f.-r  the

'•lishtneiitTif  ciiimilativi'  voting  in  in urii<-ipali-
ties,  ami  for  tin*  abolition  of  grand  juries.

<  I  KIM.  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  near  Peekskill,
rf.Y„  86  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city.  17  Aug..

Ho  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  in  l'-::;.
and  in  the  same  year  beOSUM  principal  <'f  Tr<>y
conference  academy.  He  was  called  to  a  profcs-
sorsliip  in the female college  at Macon.  <ia..  in

IMU,  and  in  1K41
entered  theOeorgia
conference  of  tin-
Met  liodist Kpix'o-

palohurah,  holding

pastorates  at  Ath-
ens. Savannah. and
Columbus. When

the  church  -.|>a-
rated  into  ■  north-
ern and  a  southern
liranch,  Mr.  Curry
joined  the  New
York  conference,
and  filled  impor-
tant stations  in
New  Haven.  Brook-
lyn, New  York,  ami
Hartford.  Wesley-
an  university  gave
him  the  degree  of
D.D.  in  1808,  and  from  1854  till  1857  he  was  presi-
dent of  Indiana  Asbury  university,  at  Qreenoastle,
Ind.  He  then  resumed  pastoral  work  till  1864,
when  he  was  chosen  to  the  editorship  of  the  New
York  "Christian  Advocate."  retaining  it  till  1878.
He  edited  the  "National  Repository  "  in  1N7»>-'80.
and  resumed  his  ministerial  duties  till  18H4.  when
he  became  chief  editor  of  the  "  Methodist  Review,"
baring  been  an  associate  editor  since  1881.  Syra-
cuse university  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I*>.  in
1878.  Besides  about  sixty  articles  in  periodicals,
Dr.  Currv  has  published  "New  York:  a  Histori-
cal Sketch"  (New  York,  1853);  -Life-Story  of
Bishop  D.  W.  Clark"  (1878);  "Fragments,  Re-
ligious and  Theological"  (1880);  and  "Platform
Papers"  (1880). fie  has nlso  edited Southev's

"Life  Of  John Wesley"  (1847).

CURRY,  ticorge  Law,  governor  of  Oregon,  b,

in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  •>  June.  1890:  d.  in  Portland,
Oregon.  88  .Inly.  1878, His  grandfather  was  ■  na-
tive of Kngland.  and his  father. George Curry,
commanded  the  Philadelphia  ••  Washington  Bines
as  first  lieutenant  in  the  battle  of  BlsQCnshnrg  in
1818. Young  Curry removed with his  family  to
Caracas,  Venezuela,  in  1884,  bul  soon  returned,  re-
siding mar  Holmesburg,  Pa.,  till  hi-  father's  death
in is-"). Fr..nt 1881 till 1S4(»  he  liv.-d  with his
uncle  in Huston,  where  he  was  apprenticed to  a
jeweller. In  ls:is  he  Was  president  of  the  Mechanic
apprentices'  library, and  delivered  several  addresses
ana  poems  before  the  association. He  went  U
Louis  in  1st::  ami  connected  himself  with  J<
M.  Field  in  the  publication  of  the  "  HereiUe." He
reinoyed  to  Oregon  city.  Oregon,  in 1848,  took
charge  of  the  "Oregon  Spectator,"  the  first  i
paper  published  on  the  Pacilic  coast,  and  in 1848

TOL. II. — 3


entity


:ci


/94u*uA-  G*^y


founded  the  "Oregon  Prm  Pram" h.  «a»  ,,_

tary  of  tie-  tanitorj  iii  1  "-VI.  and.  after
rernor  for  »'a*  ap-

!  to  that  office  m \<A.  and  I.-  ..|  it  •
admission  .-f  <  Oregon  into  the  ( m..n  in
administration  was  maraud  by  the  rni
uient  of  the  territory  and  by  several  !•

oi f  which— in  1855-  was  the  most  »

of  the  northwest  ooast Beside*'
triH.ps,  ■bout  8JBB0  volunteers  awn  k.  pt  in  the

Held for  several  month-,  a

gui-he<| himself by hi- -me,-  m ,.

|N-ace. He  wa- afterward  thanked  hi th. legtakv

ture-  of  Oregon  and  Washingtoi

Inimi  he  came  within  one  \..te  .,f  an  ele«-tion  t..  the

C.  S.  senate. In  |sw  he  worked  earnealli

half  of  the  Northern  Pacific  railroad,  which  he  bed

Bid  adTooatad  in  Bt  Louis  in  1848. i:

rctir.-d  to  hi-  farm  on  Willamette  rfn
suliseinieiitly  state  land  commissioner.

(  I  III:  \ .  .I.il.c/ I ..niiar  Mmiim  ...r.  b.

in Lincoln county, tin.,  !i June. 1888 He  re-
moved with  hi- father  to  Talladega  eeSJBty,  Ala..

in 1888, ww graduated  at  th. Unhren

Qeorgia  in  1*-W.  and  at  Harvard  lav*--h.«i|  m
1845.  After  entering  OB  the  practice  ,,f  bs>MO>
fes-ion  in  Talladega  county,  he  served  in  tie
ciin  war  as  a  private  of  TttSJ  ranger-  in  lH4fl,  Injt
resigned  on  account  of  hi-  health.  He  was  chosen
to  the  Alabama  legislature  in  i ^ 1 7.  is.vt,  and
l*.V>,  and  in  lKT>ti  was  an  elector  <>n  the  democratic
ticket. He  «as  then  elected  t<>  oongresj  without

opposition,  as  a  slate-rights  democrat,  and
from  7  I>cc.,  1M7.  till  81  Jan..  I*«n.  when  be  re-
signed,  having  previously joined  with  tie
Alabama  n  pre-cntatives  at  Washington  in  ndii—
ing  the  immediate  ■eosssion  of  the  state. He  was
a  deputy  from  Alabama  to  the  provisional  Confed-
erate congress,  a representative in the  fir-t  Con-
federate congress,  and in  isc,4-'.'i  served in  the
Confederate army, under  (on. Joseph K. John-
ston, as lieutenant-colonel of cavalry. At the
close "f the  war  he  was  ordained as  I llaptist
clergyman,  was  president  <>f  Howard  college,  Ala..
in  1866  "8,  and  professor  of  Kngli-h.  phut
and  constitutional  law  in Richmond  college, Va..
in  1888-,81. He  wa-  president  of  the  foreign  mis-
sion board  of  the  southern  Baptist  eonvenUon  in
is; i s.-,,  and  of  the  trustees  oi  Richmond  coUege
in 1888  '•*>. In 1881 '•") l»r. Currv wa- general
agent  of  the  Peebody  educational  fund,  and  he
has  "labored  in  behalf  of  public  school  edm
higher,  normal,  and Industrial,  for  all  the  people
of  both races, I>r.  Curry si  one  of  the  ssoal
effective  platform  speakers  in  the  country, ami  ha*
declined  numerous  invitation-  t<-  become  a  |
preferring to preach occasionally. An addr.—
made  bv  'him  before  the  K\  angelical  allium-.,  urg-
ing th.' complete  -.(Miration  of  churt'h  and
was  reprinted  end  distributed  in  Kngland
di-<-tal.li-hment  party. In  the  spring
Curry  was  appointed  U.  8.  minister  U
in  that  cepeotty  be  has  ssttied ereral  im|«>riant
(|ii.stions  that  have  been  pending  f.-r  years. It«v
cer  univer-itv.  Qeorgia,  pare  him  the  degree  of
LL.  I».  in  i si;;,  and  Boonseter  nniTersit]  I

I).  D.  in  1871. He  i-  acontril.utor  to  I

lid  bm  puUi-hi-d  s|H-cchc-  nml  |m»ii>i
Cl'KKY.  Olway.  jouniali»t.  b.  in (irtwawM,
Ohio,  88  March.  1N<M; d.  in lUmville. i:

II, removed with hil father  to Pleasant
Vallev  Ohio,  in  Ml,  and  hi-  early  eduoat*
interrupted bv Hie war. He went to binaural

: learned  the  carpenter's  trade,  ami  «
at  it  in  various  towns  till  1889.  at  the  same  time


34


CURTIN


CURTIS


Witting  poetry  for  the  newspaper*  Se  was  then  a
fanner  in  Union  comity  till  1889,  and  served  in  t ho
legislature  in  ISili-'T.  He  Incline  one  of  the  edi-
tors o£  the  "  llesjierian,"  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  in
L888,  and  in  ls:{)»  began  to  study  law  at  Marys vi lie.
He  was  again  in  t he  legislature  in  1842,  anil  in  that
year  bought  the  "  Greene  County  Torchlight,"  pub-
lished in  Xenia,  Ohio.  He  returned  to  Marysvillc
in  184S,  and  practised  his  profession  till  his  death,
except  in  1853-'4,  when  he  edited  the  "Scioto  Ga-
zette." in  Cliillieothe.  He  published  '"Love  of  the
Past."  a  poem  (Cincinnati.  1888).  See  Coggeshall's
"  Poets  and  Poetry  of  the  West."

CURTIN,  Andrew  Gregg,  governor  of  Penn-
sylvania, b.  in  Bellefonte,  Centre  co.,  Pa.,  22  April,
1815.  His  father,  Roland  Curtin,  emigrated  from
Ireland  in  1793,  and  in  1807  established  near
Bellefonte  one  of  the  first  manufactories  of  iron
in  that  region.  Andrew  studied  law  in  Dickinson
college  law-school,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,
and  soon  became  prominent.  He  early  entered
politics  as  a  whig,  laboring  for  Harrison's  election
in  1840,  and  making  a  successful  canvass  of  the
state  for  Clay  in  1844.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  in  1848,  and  a  candidate  for  elector  on  the
whig  ticket  in  1852.  In  1854  Gov.  Pollock  ap-
pointed him  secretary  of  the  commonwealth  and
ex-offlcio  superintendent  of  common  schools,  and
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  Mr.  Curtin  did  much
toward  reforming  and  perfecting  the  school  system

of  the  state.  In
his  annual  report
of  1855  he  recom-
mended to  the  leg-
islature the  estab-
lishment of  nor-
mal schools,  and
his  suggestion  was
adopted.  In  1860
he was the re-

Sublican  candi-
ate  for  governor.
The  democrats,
though  divided  in
national  politics,
were  united  in
Pennsylvania,  but
Mr.  Curtin  was
elected  by  a  ma-
jority of  32,000.
In  his  inaugural
address  he  advo-
cated the  forcible  suppression  of  secession,  and
throughout  the  contest  that  followed  he  was  one  of
the  "  war  governors  "  who  were  most  earnest  in  their
support  of  the  national  government. He  responded

gromptly  to  the  first  call  for  troops,  and  when  Gen.
atterson,  who  was  in  command  in  Pennsylvania,
asked  for  twenty-five  thousand  more,  they  were  im-
mediately furnished.  Gen.  Patterson's  requisition
was  afterward  revoked  by  the  secretary  of  war,  on
the  ground  that  the  troops  were  not  needed ;  but
Gov.  Curtin,  instead  of  disbanding  thena,  obtained
authority  from  the  legislature  to  equip  them  at  the
state's  expense,  and  hold  them  subject  to.  the  call
of  the  national  government.  This  bodyNof  men
became  known  as  the  "  Pennsylvania  Reserve,"  and
was  accepted  by  the  authorities  at  Washington  a
few  weeks  later.  Gov.  Curtin  was  untiring  in  his
efforts  for  the  comfort  of  the  soldiers,  answering
carefully  the  numerous  letters  sent  him  from  the
field,  and  originated  a  system  of  care  and  instruc-
tion for  the  children  of  those  slain  in  battle,  mak-
ing them  wards  of  the  state.  He  thus  became
known  in  the  ranks  as  "  the  soldiers'  friend."  Gov.


£S. ^Sti^i4>*+


Curtin's  health  began  to  fail  in  1863.  and  he  signi-
fied his  intention  of  accepting  a  foreign  mission
that  had  been  offend  him  M  soon  as  his  term
should  expire,  but  in  the  mean  time  he  was  re-
nominated, and  re-elected  by  15.000  majority.  In
November,  1865,  he  went  to  Cuba  for  his  health,
and  in  that  year  declined  another  offer  of  a  foreign
mission.  In  1869  Gen.  Grant  appointed  him  min-
ister to  Russia,  and  in  1868  and  1872  he  was  promi-
nently mentioned  as  a  candidate  f or  vice-president.
He  returned  home  in  August,  1872,  supported  Hor-
ace Greeley  for  the  presidency,  and  subsequently
joined  the  democratic  party,  by  which  he  was  elect-
ed to  congress  for  three  successive  terms,  serving
from  1881  till  1887.

CURTIN,  Jeremiah,  linguist,  b.  in  Milwaukee,
Wis.,  about  1835.  He  had  little  education  in  child-
hood, but  at  the  age  of  twenty  or  twenty-one  pre-
pared himself  to  enter  Phillips  Exeter  academy,
made  extraordinary  progress,  and  soon  entered  Har-
vard college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1863.  By
this  time  he  had  become  noted  among  his  classmates
and  acquaintances  for  his  wonderful  facility  as  a
linguist.  On  leaving  college  he  had  acquired  a  good
knowledge  of  French,  Spanish,  Portuguese,  Italian,
Rumanian,  Dutch,  Danish,  Swedish,  Icelandic,
Gothic,  German,  and  Finnish,  besides  Greek  and
Latin.  He  had  also  made  considerable  progress  in
Hebrew,  Persian,  and  Sanskrit,  and  was  beginning
to  speak  Russian.  When  Admiral  Lissofsky's  fleet
visited  this  country  in  1864,  Curtin  became  ac-
quainted with  the  officers  and  accompanied  the  ex-
E edition  on  its  return  to  Russia.  In  St.  Petersburg
e  obtained  employment  as  a  translator  of  polyglot
telegraphic  despatches,  but  he  was  presently  ap-
pointed by  Mr.  Seward  to  the  office  of  secretary  of
the  U.  S.  legation,  and  he  held  this  place  till  1868.
During  this  period  he  became  familiar  with  the
Polish,  Bohemian,  Lithuanian,  Lettish,  and  Hun-

farian  languages,  and  made  a  beginning  in  Turkish,
'rom  1868  till  1877  he  travelled  in  eastern  Europe
and  in  Asia,  apparently  in  the  service  of  the  Rus-
sian government.  In  1873,  at  the  celebration  at
Prague  of  the  500th  anniversary  of  the  birth  of
John  Huss,  he  delivered  the  oration,  speaking  with
great  eloquence  in  the  Bohemian  language.  Dur-
ing his  travels  in  the  Danube  country  he  learned
to  speak  Slovenian,  Croatian,  Servian,  and  Bulga-
rian. He  lived  for  some  time  in  the  Caucasus,
where  he  learned  Mingrelian,  Abkasian,  and  Ar-
menian. At  the  beginning  of  the  Russo-Turkish  war
in  1877,  he  left  the  Russian  dominions,  and,  after  &
year  in  London,  returned  to  his  native  country.
Since  then  he  has  been  studying  the  languages  of
the  American  Indians,  and  has  made  valuable  re-
searches under  the  auspices  of  Maj,  John  W.  Powell
and  the  bureau  of  ethnology.  He  is  said  to  be  ac-
quainted with  more  than  fifty  languages.

CURTIS,  Alfred  A.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Somer-
set county,  Md.,  in  1833.  He  began  his  studies  for
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1854,  support-
ing himself  during  his  course  by  teaching,  in
1856  he  was  ordained  deacon  and  sent  to  St.  John's
parish,  Worcester,  and  in  1859  was  ordained  prie>t .
At  the  close  of  the  year  he  had  charge  of  Catoctin
Furnace  parish,  Frederick  co.,  Md.  While  there
he  received  a  call  as  assistant  rector  of  St.  Lukes.
Baltimore,  where  he  ministered  until  18(54.  when
he  was  sent  to  officiate  at  Chestertown,  Md.  He
was  recalled  at  the  close  of  the  year  and  placed  in
charge  of  Mount  Calvary  church,  Baltimore,  where
he  remained  rector  until  December,  1870,  when  he
resigned.  He  went  to  England  in  1871,  was  re-
ceived into  the  Roman  Catholic  church  the  same
year  by  Cardinal  Newman,  returned  to  Baltimore,


<  UBTIS


«  I KTIS


m


^r^^:


and  entered  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice. lie  »-a>
ordained  by  Archbishop  Bayley  In  1874  being  ap*

pointed  his  Beoretnrv  and  assistant  at  the  cathedral,

ami  be  wm  created  bishop  of  Wilmington  in  ivs|'.

(  I  BTIS,  Alva,  physician,  b.  in  Columbia,  N.H.,

I.  in  Ohk)  in  lsM. ||,.  Isetured  in

the Botanic medical college <>f  Ohio,  ami from

was  editor  of  the  "  Botanico-medi-

cal  Beoorder,"  also  of  tl Journal  of  Education

and  of  Physiological  and  Medical  Refonna."  I>r.
Curtis  published  M Medical  DiaooaaionaM  (in;?:!):
tuns  on  Midwifery"  (1888);  "Theory  and
Praotioe  of  Medicine w  (1848,  repnbliahed  In  Eng-
land); and  •■  Medical  Criticisms  *  (IK56).

CURTIS,  Benjamin  Bobbins,  jurist,  b.  in
Watertown,  Mass.,  I  Nov.,  lS(d>:  d.  in  Newport,
K.  I..  1")  Sept.. is?  J. lie  was  graduated  at  llar-

1  in  1888,  ad-
mitted to  the  liar
in  ls;W.  and.  after
practising  for  a
short titnein  North-
field.  Mass.,  re-
moved to  Boston.
The  extent  and
readiness  of  his  at-
tainments, his  ac-
curacy, and  his
logical  mind,  soon
made  him  promi-
nent in  his  pro-
fession. In  is."»l
IVe-idcnt  Fillmore
appointed  him  to
the  IT.  S.  supreme
bench.  In  the  cele-
brated "  Dred  Scott"  case  he  dissented  from  the
decision  of  the  court  and  made  a  powerful  argu-
ment in  support  of  his  conclusions.  He  upheld
the  right  of  congress  to  prohibit  slavery,  and
declared  his  dissent  from  "that  part  of  the
opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  court  in  which
it  is  held  that  a  person  of  African  descent  can-
not be  a  citizen  of  the  United  States."  On  this
memorable  occasion  only  one  other  justice  of  the
seven  coincided  with  the  opinion  of  Judge  Cur-
tis. He  resigned  in  1857,  and  resumed  practice
in  Boston,  frecpuentlv  appearing  before  the  su-
preme court  at  Washington  in  important  cases.
He  was  for  two  years  a  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature,  but  took  little  part  in  politics,
devoting  himself  with  earnestness  to  hie  niufoarion
In  the  impeachment  trial  of  President  Johnson  in
1868  Judge  Curtis  was  one  of  the  counsel  for  the
defence.  The  answer  to  the  articles  of  impeach-
ment  was  read  by  him.  and  was  largely  his  work.
He  opened  the  case  in  a  speech  that  occupied  two
days  In  delivery,  and  that  was  commanded  for  legal
soundness  and  clearness.  He  was  the  democratic
candidate  for  IT.  S.  senator  in  1N74.  He  published
•  K' ports  of  Cases  in  the  Circuit  Courts  of  the
United  States"  (i  vols.,  Boston.  1854);  "  Dedetoni
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States."  with
notes  ami  a  digest  (22  vols.,  Boston);  and  "  Digest
of  the  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States."  from  the  origin  of  the  oonrl  to
Of  his  -Memoir  and  Writings"  (2  vols..
Boston,  1K80).  the  first  volume  contains  a  memoir
by  George  Ticknor  Curtis,  and  the  second  "Mis-
cellaneous Writings,'1  edited  bj  bis  son,  Benjamin
U.  Curtis.— iii^  brother,  George  Ticknor.  I
t).  in  Watertown.  Mass.,  '2*  Nov..  1812,  was  gradu-
Harvard  in  is;!-,'.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1886,  and  engaged  in  the  practice  of  the  law
in  Boston  till  1862,  when  be  removed  to  New  fork


While  in  Beaton,  Mr.  c.irti*  held  the  office.  '
eommiwioner.  and  a-,  mm  h.  in  1*.',]  to  hi*

master  a  fugitive  slave  named  Thorn,,
which  act  be  wasaevereh  denoun  ftl.,|i-

tfoaiete, He  also  served  for  two  ,,r  thr.-e  \.

1  anaoknaatts  lofislsfnra. i>ut im« »

politics  to  interfere  bttl little  with  his  i  i fnssion

and  his  historical  invent i^atii.u..

a  "  Digsal of Kuglish  and

Decisions"  (Boston,  i^:;»  i;  rolunu  -  il  snd

• of  the Deci  ;.,tis  of  tin-  reu-
nion Law  and  Admiralty  in  the  L'nited  Matea^fll

vols.. l840-*6); ..  RjghU  and Dul
Seamen  "  (1K41);  "  American  Convert
"Law of Copyrighl  Uw  of  p.,

(1849;  lih  ed.,  1878);  ••  KMuity  Precedents"
••  Insentor's  Manual." "Commentaries  on  tin
prudence. Practice, snd Peculiar  Jurisdiction  of

the  Courts  ,.f the I'lllted  States  •

14  History  of  the  Origin,  Formation,  and  Ad

of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  Stab
1855-'8):  "Life  of  Daniel  Webster"  (Nee York.
1870); "Life  of James Buchanan"  <I*KI); and
"Creation  or  Evolution  "  ( I  -

(TBTIS,  Calvin,  artist,  b.  in  Stratford.  Conn..
5  Julv,  \X'2'2.  He  studied1  art  in  the  National  acad-
emy in  1841.  and  also  under  Daniel  HuntingtOB.
After  painting  jM.rtraits  in  New  V..rk  f.>r  s,.uie
years,  he  went  to  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  in  18001  and
afterward  to  Stratford.  His  works  include  por-
traits of  Chief-Justice  Thomas  B.  Butler.  Gem.
W.  U.  Noble.  Judge  C.  B.  Bcardslcy.  and  Hex.  Dr.
Nathaniel  Hewitt. Mr.  Curtis  has  also  given  SOSM

time  to  landscape-painting lb-  has  safarsd  frosj

a  spinal  disease  for  thirty  years,  and  it  has  been
said  that  "every  touch  of  his  pencil  haa  baSB  at-
tended with  a  twinge  of  nervous  pain."

( TKTIS.  George  William, author,  b. in  Provi-
dence, B.  I..  84  Pebt,  1884  After  sttendiaj  a
school  in  Jamaica  Plain.  Mass..  he  removed  :
York  with  his  father  in  ls:t!t.  and  for  a  \«ar  was  a
clerk  in  a  mercantile  bouse  in  that  oitj.  lb-  with
his  elder  brother,  in  1848,  joined  the  community
of  Brook  Farm,  in  West  Boxburv,  Mitss..  and.  after
eighteen  months  of  study  and  farm  labor,  the
lirothers  went  to
Concord,  Mass.,
where  they  spent
eighteen  months
more  in  a  farm-
er's family,  after-
ward tilling  a
small  pure  of
land  on  their  own
account  for  sj\
months.  In  1848
Mr.  Curtis  went
abroad,  living  for
some  time  in  Italy
andCennany.and

afterward  travel-
ling in  Kgypt  and
Syria.  He  re-
turned t<»  this
country  in  \x~M.
and  s,M»n  after-
ward became  one  of  the  editorial  staff  of  tl
York  -Tribune."  Mr.  Curtis  was  one  of  the  editors
of  the  first  s,ries  ..f  ••  Putnam's  Morithh  "  flUSJ  it*

appearance  In  1858  till  it  ceased  toes

three  ream  after  it  was  establi-h.-d  the  BMi
paieed*  into  the  hands  of  the  firm  of  Di\.  Kdward*

n  winch  Mr.  Curtis  waa  a  ■paoiaj  i««rtncr.

pecuniarily  re*|>onsihle,  but  taking  no  pari
commercial management. In  the  spring  of  1857


^^v*


36


CURTIS


CURTIS


the  house,  which  had  also  undertaken  to  publish
books,  was  fOQBd  to  be  insolvent  for  a  large
amount,  and  Mr.  Curtis  sank  his  private  fortune
in  the  endeavor  to  save  its  creditors  from  loss,
which  he  finally  accomplished  in  1878.  In  1858  he
began  in  "  Earner's  Monthly  "  the  series  of  papers
entitled  the  -  Editor's  Easy  Chair,"  and  in  the  same
year  entered  the  lecture  field,  meeting  with  great
success.  He  soon  gained  reputation  as  a  popular
orator,  and  in  the  presidential  canvass  of  1856
spoke  in  behalf  of  the  republican  candidates.
Soon  after  the  establishment  of  "  Harper's  Weekly,"
in  1867,  he  became  its  leading  editorial  writer,
which  place  he  still  holds,  and  on  the  establishment
of  "  Harper's  Bazar"  in  1807  he  began  a  series  of
papers  under  the  title  of  "  Manners  upon  the  Road,"
which  was  continued  weekly  until  the  spring  of
187:3.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  na-
tional conventions  of  1860  and  1864,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con-
gress in  the  1st  New  York  district.  In  1862  he
dec  lined  the  office  of  consul-general  in  Egypt,
offered  him  by  President  Lincoln.  In  1867  he  was
elected  a  delegate  at  large  to  the  Constitutional  con-
vention of  New  York,  in  which  he  was  chairman
of  the  committee  on  education.  In  1868  he  was
nominated  a  republican  presidential  elector,  and
in  180!)  declined  the  republican  nomination  for
secretary  of  state  of  New  York.  Mr.  Curtis  has
always  been  an  earnest  advocate  of  civil-service
reform,  and  in  1871  was  appointed  by  President
Grant  one  of  a  commission  to  draw  up  rules  for  the
regulation  of  the  civil  service.  He  was  elected
chairman  of  the  commission  and  of  the  advisory
board  in  which  it  was  subsequently  merged,  but
resigned  in  March,  1873,  on  account  of  difference
of  views  between  him  and  the  president  in  regard
to  t  he  enforcement  of  the  rules.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  National  republican  convention  of  1876  that
nominated  President  Haves,  and  at  the  beginning
of  the  administration  he  was  asked  to  select  a  for-
eign mission,  which  he  declined,  and  he  also  de-
clined the  special  offer  of  the  mission  to  Germany.
Mr.  Curtis  was  chairman  of  a  meeting  of  independ-
ent republicans  that  met  in  New  York  on  16  June,
1884,  to  take  action  against  the  nomination  of
James  G.  Blaine,  made  by  the  Chicago  convention,
and  he  subsequently  supported  the  democratic  can-
didate, Grover  Cleveland.  Since  1864  Mr.  Curtis
has  Ween  one  of  the  regents  of  the  University  of
the  state  of  New  York,  and  is  now  (1886)  its  vice-
chancellor.  He  has  published  "Nile  Notes  of  a
Howadji"  (New  York,  1851);  "The  Howadji  in
Syria"  (1852);  "Lotus-Eating,"  letters  originally
written  to  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  from  various
watering-places  (1852);  two  volumes  of  selections
from  his  contributions  to  "  Putnam's  Magazine,"
entitled  "  Potiphar  Papers"  (1853)  and  "  Prue
and  I"  (1856);  and  "Trumps,"  a  novel,  which  had
appeared  in  "  Harper's  Weekly  "  in  1858-'9  (1862).
— His  half-brother,  Joseph  Kriilirhiim.  soldier,
b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  25  Oct.,  1*30;  killed  near
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  13  Dec,  1802,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard in  1856.  In  1857  he  became  a  member  of
the  New  York  Central  park  engineer  corps,  and
in  April,  1861,  was  appointed  engineer,  with  the
rank  of  captain,  in  the  9th  New  York  volun-
teer-. After  that  regiment  was  mustered  out,
he  became,  on  16  Sept.,  1861,  second  lieutenant
in  the  4th  Rhode  Island  volunteers,  and  was  pro-
moted to  first  lieutenant  on  2  Oct.  lie  served  with
Burnside  in  North  Carolina,  distinguished  himself
by  his  coolness  and  daring  at  the  capture  of  Roan-
oke Island,  7  Feb.,  1862,  and  on  9  June  was  ap-


pointed assistant  adjutant-general  on  Gen.  Rod-
man'-staff.  In  AugUfl  he  WM  promoted,  at  (ien.
Burnsidc's  special  request,  to  the  lieutenant-colo-
nelcy of  the  4th  Rhode  Island  regiment,  joined  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  with  it  in  the  -.uc-
oession  of  battles  between  the  Rappahannock  and
Washington.  In  the  battle  of  Ant ict am  hi
ineiit  Buffered  so  much  that  it  was  withdrawn  from
the  field  by  the  general's  command,  whereupon
Col.  Curtis  took  a  musket  and  cartridge-box  from
a  dead  soldier  and  did  duty  as  a  private  in  a  Penn-
sylvania regiment  till  the  close  of  the  battle,  lb-
was  killed  at  Fredericksburg  while  in  command  of
his  regiment,  the  colonel  having  been  disabled  by
a  wound.  See  a  memoir  by  George  William  Curtis,
in  John  R.  Bart  left's  "Rhode  Island  in  the  Rebel-
lion" (1807).— Joseph  Bridgham's  brother,  Ed-
ward, b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  4  June,  1838,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1859,  and  received  his
medical  degree  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1864.  He  had  entered  the  army  as  medi-
cal cadet  on  6  Sept.,  1861,  became  acting  assi-t.tnt
surgeon  on  5  May,  1863,  assistant  surgeon  in
1864,  and  was  brevetted  captain  and  major  oft
13  March.  1865.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in
1870,  and  began  practice  in  New  York  city.
During  the  later  years  of  his  army  service  he  was
in  charge  of  the  microscopical  section  of  the  medi-
cal museum,  and  was  especially  engaged  in  develop-
ing the  art  of  photographing  through  the  micro-
scope. He  became  lecturer  on  histology  in  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1870,  and  in
1873  was  given  the  chair  of  materia  medica  and
therapeutics,  becoming  professor  emeritus  in  1886.
He  was  made  assistant  surgeon  to  the  New  York
eye  and  ear  infirmary  in  1872,  surgeon  in  1874,  and
in  1876  became  medical  director  of  the  Equitable
life  assurance  society,  retiring  from  active  practice.
Dr.  Curtis  has  published  a  "  Catalogue  of  the  Mi-
croscopical Section  of  the  U.  S.  Armv  Medical  Mu-
seum (Washington,  1867),  and  "  Manual  of  Gen-
eral Medicinal  Technology"  (New  York,  1883). —
Another  brother,  John  Green,  became,  in  1873,
adjunct  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  College  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons,  New  York  city.

CURTIS,  Harvey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Adams,
Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  May,  1800 ;  d.  in  Galesburg,
111.,  18  Sept.,  1802.  He  was  graduated  at  Middle-
bury,  in  1831,  with  the  highest  honors  of  his  class,
and  studied  for  the  next  three  years  at  Princeton
theological  seminary.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
by  Troy  presbytery,  and,  on  18  Feb.,  1830.  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
Brandon,  Vt.  In  1841  he  accepted  an  appoint-
ment from  the  American  home  missionary  society
as  their  agent  for  Ohio  and  Indiana,  and  from  1843
till  1858  held  pastorates  in  Madison,  Ind.,  and  Chi-
cago, 111.  He  was  chosen  president  of  Knox  col-
lege, at  Galesburg,  111.,  in  1888.

CURTIS,  Josiah,  physician, b.  in  "Wethersfield,
Conn.,  in  1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840,
and  soon  afterward  became  principal  of  an  academy
in  Salem,  N.  J.,  and  later  taught  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  studied  medicine,  and  in  1843  was  gradu-
ated at  Jefferson  medical  college.  After  spending
a  year  in  lecturing  on  physiology  and  public  heall  h.
he  settled  for  practice  in  Lowell,  Mass.  In  1849
he  removed  to  Boston,  and  between  1850  and  1855
twice  visited  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  studying
the  sanitary  condition  of  the  large  cities.  In  1861
he  was  called  to  Washington  to  superintend  the
mortality  statistics  of  the  U.  S.  census  of  1860.
He  then''  entered  the  army,  and  remained  with  it
until  iso."),  when  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Knox-
ville,  Ky. In  1872  Dr.  Curtis  filled  the  place  of


CURTIS

surgeon,  mirri>sri>|ii-t,  and iuit unili^t to  the  I
geological  survey,  and  in  \*1'>  became  chief  medical
i  i>f  the  l'.  S.  India  1 1 « ■  has  pub-

lished numerous  articles  on  ventilation  and  Idnared
mil  is  the  author  of  a  report  on  the  "  ll>-
slasBachusetts  "  11840),  tad  earlier  re]
to  t lie  Massachusetts  leghuatureon  tin-  registration
of  births,  marriages,  and  deaths, He.  i-  noted  an
the  discoverer  of  collodion.
<  1  IMI>. Newton Martin.  soldier,  b. in De
tor,  st.  Lawrence  <•>>..  N.  y„  21  Mar,  1885. He
edooated  at  common  schools,  unci  al  Gouver-
pour  Weeleyan  seminary,  in  1854  '■">. He  beoaine
a  promineni  democrat,  was  |w>st  master  of  his  native

town  in  is">^  "<>i.  and  den iccratio  eandidabi  f<>r
assembly  in  i860; He  enrolled  a  votnntoat  oon>

panv  on  14  April,  INfd,  was  commissioned  captain
in  the 16th  HOW  York  regiment  on  7 May.  and

•erred  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. He  beoaine

lieutenant-colonel  and  then  colonel  of  tlie  14V.M
New  York  infantry,  and  during  the  Wattle  of  Cold
Harbor  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade
whose  leader  had  been  kille<l  in  the  action.  ||.
"was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteei
Oct..  1884,  and  for  his  services  at  the  capture  of
Fort  Fisher  was  promoted  on  the  field  to  briga-
dier-general  of  volunteers,  and  was  also  thanked
by  the  legislature  of  New  York.  He  wasbtvvetted
major-general  of  volunteers.  18  March.  1N«;.">,  and
assigned  to  duty  as  chief  of  staff  to  Sen.  BS.  0.  C
Ord.  On  1  July,  1865,  he  was  siren  the  command
of  southwestern  Yirginia,  with  headquarters  at
Lynchburg,  and  was  mustered  out  on  15  Jan.,  18(56.
He  was  collector  of  customs  in  the  district  of  Os-
wegatchie,  X.  Y.,  in  1866-' 7,  special  agent  of  the
U.  S.  treasury  from  1867  till  his  resignation  in
1SN0,  and  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  lK.s:{-',-,,
having  been  elected  as  a  republican.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  state  agricultural  society  in  1880.  and
has  been  secretary  and  trustee  of  the  state  agricul-
tural station  since  its  organization  in  that  year.

( TRTIS,  Samuel  Ryan,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  state,  3  Feb.,  180* ;  d.  in  Council  Bluffs,
Iowa,  26  Dec.,  1866.  He  removed  when  a  child  to
Ohio,  and  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1831,  but  resigned  from  the  armv  in
1832,  and  became  a  civil  engineer,  superintending
the  Muskingum  river  Improvements  in  1k:{7-'!>.
He  then  studied  law.  and  practised  in  Ohio  from
1841  till  1846.  He  had  become  a  captain  of  militia
in  1888,  was  lieutenant-colonel  in  18d7-'42,  oolonel
in  1843-'45,  and  in  1846  was  made  adjutant-geii-
eral  of  Ohio  for  the  special  purpose  of  organising
the  state'i  quota  of  volunteers  for  the  Mexican
war.  He  served  in  that  war  as  colonel  of  the  8d
Ohio  regiment,  and  was  commandant  of  (amargo,
a  large  military  depot,  holding  it  on  1*  Feb..  1*17.
against  (ien.  Urrea,  and  then  pursuing  the  enemy
bj  forced  marches  through  the  mountains  toRaim  ».
Mexico,  thus  opening  Gen.  Taylor's  communica-
tions. After  tin-  discharge  of  his  regiment  he
served  on  Gen.  Wool's  staff,  and  as  governor  of
Saltillo,  Mexico,  in  1K47-X  He  then  engaged  In
engineering  in  the  west,  and  in  1N.V>  settled  as  a
lawyer  in  Keokuk,  Iowa.  While  a  resident  of  this
place  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  republican,
and  ■erred  two  terms  and  part  of  a  third,  from
1857  till  1861,  being  a  menioet  of  the  committers
on  military  affairs  ami  the  1'acilic  railroad.  He
Was  also  a delegate (TOO)  Iowa to the peace  ( -

■  of  February,  1861.  He  resigned  from  .  on-
gress  in  1861  to  become  colonel  of  the  8d  Iowa

ment,  and  on  17  May  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-evneral  of  volunteer-,  being  M  the  tir>t  li-t
sent to the  senate for  confirmation. He took


37


f  the  large  camp  of
Loafi  m  August  and  September -
the  southwestern  di»t  Missouri  from  88

l>.v.. 1861,  till February,  1868,  and the  «noy  of

tthwest  till  August.  1861
at  Pea  Ridge.  Ark.,  he  gained  a  deeMve  victory

I'm.  e  ,,i,d  MoCllUooh. BoWMpt
general  of  volunteer*  on  ji  '
14  July  till  29  August  occupied Betas
having  marched  over  one  thoueead  mile*  through
wikiarneeses  and  swamps. While  on  lean
noatj  from  IB  Aug,  nil .;  s68.  he  wee

president  of  the I'm  j 1 1 « railroad a  a
Chicago. Ho  was  at  the  head  of  the  Departatent
of  the  Missouri  fn-in  Septemlier, 1862,  til
1888,  and  of  that  of  Kansas  from  i  Jan.,  181
7  Feb.,  1865,  oonunanding  at  Fort  Leavenworth
during  the  Pries  raid  of  October,  !*«;».  and  aiding

in  the defeat and pur-nit of  Gen. Price's  army.

He  commanded  the  DepartuMul  of  the  Northwest

from  in  Feb.  till  86  July,  186  auuia-

sioner  to  negotiate  treaties  with  various  Indian
tribe*  from  August  till  rfllTWlUs.  1866,  Bttd  to
examine  the  I'nion  Pacific  railroad  till  Apr.

Cl'RTIS,  Thomas,  uloiglluan,  b,  in  Kngland
about  17m<»;  a. in  l*x. h,  nl to  the  United

States  in 1821*.  was  [mstor  for  *OBM  years  of  the
Went  worth street Baptist church in  ("liar
S.  ('..  ami  suheequeutlv  eateblishtd  a  young  ladies'
school  al  Limestone  Spring. I»r.  Curii*wa«aman
of  extensive  knowladjn  and  very  j«»»erful  as  a

preacher. While  in  Kngland  he  »it«  the  pul
of  the  "  Fncvdopidia  Jtetropolitana." He  per-
ished in  a  burning  steamer  on  the  Potomac  rfvar.

His  -on.  Thomas  F„  b.  in England,  M
1815;  <1.  in  Cambridge,  Hart.  0  978, was

educated  at  a  southern  College,  and  studied  the-
ology. After  holding  a  pastorate  near  Boston  for
several  years,  he  accepted  the  chair  of  then!
Lewisburs  university.  IV.  but  resigned  in
and  in  1m<»7  removed  to  Cambridge,  Mas*  lb-
suffered  with  softening  of  the  brain  for  some  tines
before  his  death.  I»r.  Curtis  published  "Corn
amnion:  the  Distinction  between  christian  and
Church  Fellowship*';  "Progress of  Itoi.tiM  Prin-
ciples in  the  last  Hundred  S'cars";  and,  after  his
resignation.  "The  Human  Element  in  the  Inspira-
tion of  the8acred  Scriptures,'' in  which  be  t---k
similar  views  with  Bishop  Colonon,  but  went  be-
vond  him  in  some  particulate,  repndiating  both
the  inspiration  and  authenticity  Of  much  of  the
old  Testament  endued  of  the  V

(TKTIS.  William  Kdmnnd.  jurist,  b.  in
Litchfield.  Conn.,  in  1884;  d.  i"  Wetertown,
Conn.  <»  July,  1880.  Hewas  graduated  at  Trinity
in  ls+i.  admitted  to  the  Ur  in  1K47,  and  or.,
in  New  York  city,  where  be  lOSS  rapidly  in  his
profession.  In  1*71  he  wa*  elected  Judge  Of  the
New  York  supreme  court,  ami  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  chief  justice  of  the  superior  i-oiirt.  lb-
was  commissioner  of  the  Uxml  of  education,  and
for  four  vean  it"  president,  and  n
of the geographical SOCSStT. •ludc- Curtis re-

oeived  the  degres  of  LL  I>.  fn-m  Trudtj  in  1868.
CCBT18S, vi. b \ Mlin,  i«-t.  i».  »  IViufirt,

Conn.. 1">  S|.t.. 1S.1). Her  father. Hatnel  Allm.

«it"  a  ■aa-oaptain  of  Providanoaj  B,  1.  In  1858
she  nauried  DuaM  B,  Curtis-,  n  I  umal-

i-.t and -H.n  afterwanl rensOVed  »ith him |0  a

farm  in  Madison,  Wis. Her  flrsl

Home t«. I»ie."  apis-ansl in "Near- '

1848. She bat  published  "Home lUllwU'  (Bc«-

ton,  1880),  and  contributed  to  |«-rnaiioals  ~

the  elgnatare  of  ••  NilU>."


:w


cruTiss


crsniN(i


CURTISS, Samuel Ives, educator, b. in

Union,  Conn.,  5  Feb..  184  L  lie  VU  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1867,  and  at  Union  theological  semi-
nary in  1870,  nmnd  in  missionary  work  in  New
York,  ami  in  1  s  70  *•„•  was  connected  with  t  lie  Fifth
avenue  Presbyterian  church.  He  travelled  in
Ireland  and  Scotland  in  1872-'3,  was  ordained  by
the  New  York  presbytery  in  1H74,  and  in  1874-'8
was  pastor  of  trie  American  chapel  at  Leipsic,  of
whicn  he  was  one  of  the  founders.  While  in
Leipsic  he  attended  lectures  at  the  university,
receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  I),  in  1876,  and  wus
afterward  made  a  licentiate  by  Berlin  university.
Iowa  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1878,
and  in  the  same  year  he  became  professor  of  bibli-
cal literature  in  the  Congregational  theological
seminary,  Chicago.  In  1879  he  was  transferred
to  the  chair  of  Old  Testament  literature  and  in-
terpretation. He  is  the  author  of  "The  Name
Machabee,"  his  doctor's  thesis  (Leipsic,  1876);
a  translation  of  Bickell's  "Outlines  of  Hebrew
Grammar  "  (1877)  ;  of  Delitzsch's  "  Messianic
Prophecies  "  (Edinburgh,  1880) ;  and  "  Old-Testa-
ment History  of  Redemption"  (1881);  "The
Levitical  Priests"  (1877);  "De  Aaronitici  sacer-
dotii  atque  thorae  Elohisticae  origine,"  his  licentiate
thesis  (Berlin,  1878) ;  "  Ingersoll  and  Moses  "  (Chi-
cago, 1879) :  and  contributions  in  the  "  Current
Discussions  in  Theology  "  (1883  et  seq.).

CURWEN,  Samuel,  loyalist,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
28  Dec,  1815;  d.  there,  9  April,  1802.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1735,  and  studied  for  the
ministry,  but  became  a  merchant  in  his  native
place.  In  the  winter  of  1774-'5  he  was  a  captain
in  Sir  William  Pepperell's  expedition  against
Louisburg.  In  1759  he  became  impost  officer  for
Essex  county,  Mass.,  and  in  1775  was  judge  of  the
admiralty  court.  From  1775  until  1784,  as  a  loyal-
ist, he  resided  abroad,  returning  to  his  native  place
in  the  autumn  of  1784.  His  "Journal  and  Let-
ters "  (New  York,  1842)  contains  interesting  and
valuable  information  concerning  the  lives  of  loyal-
ist exiles  while  abroad.

CUSACK,  Mary  Frances,  philanthropist,
known  as  the  Nun  of  Kenmare,  b.  near  Dublin,
Ireland,  6  May,  1830.  She  spent  most  of  her  early
life  in  England,  and  began  to  write  when  very
young.  She  entered  an  Anglican  religious  sister-
hood, soon  afterward  became  a  Roman  Catholic,
and,  returning  to  Ireland,  joined  at  Newry,  in
1859,  a  community  of  Franciscan  nuns,  known  as
the  Irish  Poor  Clares,  engaged  in  teaching  poor
girls.  Two  years  later  she  established  a  convent
of  the  Sisters  at  Kenmare,  one  of  the  most  desti-
tute parts  of  Ireland,  and  in  1884,  in  a  personal
interview  with  Pope  Leo  XIII.,  obtained  permis-
sion to  leave  the  Poor  Clares  and  found  a  new
order,  the  Sisters  of  Peace,  intended  for  the  estab-
lishment and  care  of  homes  for  friendless  girls,
where  domestic  service  would  be  taught  and
moral  habits  be  inculcated.  She  opened  the  first
house  of  the  new  order  at  Nottingham,  England,
and  in  1885  a  similar  house  in  Jersev  City,  N.  J.,
the  first  foundation  of  the  Sisters  of  Peace  in  the
United  States.  Her  active  efforts  for  the  relief  of
the  wretched  peasants  of  Kenmare  brought  her
into  controversy  with  the  Marquis  of  Lansdoune,
the  Earl  of  KenmareV  and  some  others  of  the
greater  landlords  of  thaWegion,  and  with  a  section
of  the  Catholics  of  England ;  but  she  seems  to
have  enjoyed  from  the  beguiling  the  sympathy  of
most  of  the  leading  Catholics,  lay  and  clerical,  of
her  own  country.  She  was  in  the  United  States
in  1886.  She  has  published  more  than  fifty  works,
chief  among  which  are  a  "Student's  History  of


Ireland":  "  Woman's  Work  in  Modern  Society";
lives  of  Daniel  O'Coiinell.  St  Patrick.  St.  Colum*
ba,  and  St.  Bridget;  "The  Pilgrim's  Wai  to
Heaven  " :  "  Jesus  and  Jerusalem  " ;  and  "  The
Book  of  the  Blessed  Ones."

(TSHING,  Caleb,  statesman,  b.  in  Salisbury:
17  Jan.,  1800;  d.  in  Newburyport,  M
Jan.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,
and  for  two  years  was  a  tutor  in  mathematics  and
natural  philosophy.  He  then  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  settled  in  Newburyport.  He
rose  rapidly  in  his  profession,  and,  although  busily
engaged  with  his  practice,  found  time  to  devote  to
literature  and  politics,  and  was  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  periodicals.  In  1825  he  was  elected  a  repre-
sentative to  the  lower  house  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature,  and  in  1826  a  member  of  the  state  sen-
ate. At  this  time  he  belonged  to  the  then  repub-
lican party.  In  1829  Mr.  Cushing  visited  Europe,
and  remained  abroad  two  vears.  In  1833  he  was
again  elected  a  representative  from  Newburyport
to  the  Massachusetts  legislature  for  two  years,  but
in  1834  was  elected  from  the  Essex  north  district
of  Massachusetts  a  representative  to  congress,  and
served  for  four  consecutive  terms,  until  184:!.  He
supported  the  nomination  of  John  Quincy  Adams
for  the  presiden-
cy, and  was  a
whig  until  the
accession  of  John
Tyler.  When  the
break  in  the  whig

Sarty  occurred,
uring  the  ad-
ministration of
President  Tyler,
Mr.  Cushing  was
one  of  the  few
northern  whigs
that  continued  to
support  the  presi-
dent, and  became
classed  as  a  dem-
ocrat. Soon  af-
terward he  was
nominated  for
secretary  of  the
treasury,  but  the
senate  refused  to
confirm  him.  He  was  subsequently  confirmed
as  commissioner  to  China,  and  made  the  first
treaty  between  that  country  and  the  United
States.  On  his  return  he  was  again  elected  a  rep-
resentative in  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  in
1847  he  raised  a  regiment  for  the  Mexican  war
at  his  own  expense,  became  its  colonel,  and  was
subsequently  made  brigadier-general.  While  still
in  Mexico  he  was  nominated  by  the  democratic
party  of  his  state  for  governor,  but  failed  in  the
election.  From  1850  till  1852  he  was  again  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  of  his  native  state,  and,  at  the
expiration  of  his  term,  was  appointed  associate
justice  of  the  state  supreme  court.  In  1853  Presi-
dent Pierce  appointea  him  U.  S.  attorney-general,
from  which  office  he  retired  in  1857.  In  1857,
1858,  and  1859  he  again  served  in  the  legislature
of  Massachusetts.  In  April,  1860,  he  was  president
of  the  Democratic  national  convention  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  and  was  among  the  ssoedew  from  that
body  who  met  in  Baltimore.  At  the  close  of  1860
he  was  sent  to  Charleston  by  President  Buchanan,
as  a  confidential  commissioner  to  the  secessionists
of  South  Carolina;  but  his  mission  effected  noth-
ing. Mr.  (  ushing  was  frequently  em  gloved  during
the  civil  war  in  the  departments  at  Washington,


CUSHIXG


IIINci


m


and  in  1866  was  appointed  one  of  the  thr -. »n»-

mbM  revise  and  oodify  1 1 •«-  lawi  .if  oon*

gres-  8  ha  wih  sent  to  Bogota1  i<>  ami

diplomatic  difficulty.  In  1872  be  wu  otn-  ..f  the
counsel  for  thfl  United  StuteH  at  the  (iencva  con.
noe  for  tin-  settlement  "f  the  Alabama  "laim*.
tninatcd  for  tin-  office  of  chief
ju-t ii*-  of  the  United  States;  but  the  nomination
wa.s  »ut>se<|Uently  withdrawn.  A  Mar  later  he  VM
nominated  and  OOttfirmed  a.s  minister  t<>  Spain,
whence  he  returned  home  in  1^77.  lli>  publica-
tions Include  ■  "  Hietorj  of  the  Town  "f  Newbury-
jM.rt  "  (1888);  "Tin-  Practical  Principles  ..f  politi-
cal Boonomyn  (1888);  "Hiatorieal  and  Political
•  w  >>f  the  Late  Revolution  in  France  "(2  rola>,
Boston,  ls^>>:  "  Reminiscences  of  Spain "(2  vols.,
Boston.  1888);  "Growth  and  Territorial  Progress
of  th»>  I'nited  States"  (18JHI);  "Lift- of  William  II.
Harrison"  (Boston.  1840);  and  "Tin-  Treaty  of
Washington  n  (New  York.  l*7:i).

<  I  Ml  INK,  Frank  Hamilton,  ethnologist,  b.
in  Northeast,  Brie  co..  Pa.,  22  July*  in">7.  He
manifested  in  early  childhood  a  love  for  arehaxdog-
ical  pursuits,  and  at  the  age  of  eight  years  Dana
to  collect  fossils  and  minimis,  made  a  complete
Indian  costume,  and  lived  in  a  l>ark  hut  in  the
woods.  He  learned  from  observation  that  wherever
Indian  encampments  had  been  long  established  the
soil  and  vegetation  had  undergone  a  change,  which
materially  assisted  him  in  his  search  for  relics.  At
t  he  age  of  fifteen  he  had  discovered  the  process  of
making  arrow-heads  from  flint  by  pressure  with
bone.  In  1*70  his  father  removed  to  Medina.  N.
V..  where  the  son's  researches  found  new  ground
and  a  greater  wealth  of  material.  In  the  town  of
Shelbv  were  ancient  remains  of  fortifications  rich
in  relics,  and  thev,  with  ancient  fortifications,
burial-grounds,  and  camp  sites  in  the  count ie-  of
Madison  and  Onondaga,  were  carefully  aearohed,  a-
well  as  the  Hamilton  group  of  rocks.  In  the  spring
of  1875  he  became  a  student  in  Cornell  university.
but  spent  most  of  his  time  as  assistant  to  Dr.  Charles
Kau  in  the  preparation  of  the  Indian  collections  of
the  National  museum  for  the  Centennial  exposition
at  Philadelphia,  and  was  curator  of  the  entire  col-
lection until  the  close  of  the  exhibition,  when  he
was  appointed  curator  of  the  ethnological  depart-
ment of  the  National  museum.  During  the  sum-
mer of  1876  he  gained  his  first  knowledge  of  the
Pueblo  Indians,  and  joined  Maj.  J.  W.  Powell  in
his  expedition  of  1879  to  New  Mexico,  as  assist  -
ant  ethnologist  of  the  U.  S.  bureau  of  ethnology.
of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  The  expedition
spent  two  months  among  the  Zufii  Indians,  and
Mr.  Cushinir.  at  his  own  request,  was  left  there.
He  adopted  the  costume,  habits,  and  life  of  the
race,  and  for  three  years  lived  strictly  the  life  of
an  Indian  among  the  Indian-.,  studying  their  hab-
its, language,  and  history.  During  the  second  year
of  his  sojourn  he  had  so  far  made  himself  one  of
the  tribe,  and  gained  the  esteem  of  the  chiefs,  that
he  was  formally  adopted  and  initiated  into  the
sacred  esoteric' society  of  priests,  the  "Priesthood
of  the  How."  Iii  L882  he  visited  the  east  with  a
party  of  mx  Zurtis,  who  came  for  the  purple  of
taking  water  from  the  Atlantic  ocean,  or  "Ocean
of  Sunrise,"  as  a  religious  ceremony,  and  carrying
it  to  their  temple  in  the  Pueblos.  Four  of  the
Kollhl  returned,  while  Mr.  Cashing  remained  with
the  other  two  during  the  summer  in  Washington,

for  the  purpose  of  writing,  with  their  aid,  his ■

trihution  to  the  nureau  of  ethnology  SO  Bufli
fetiches.  In  Beptember  of  the  same  year  be  re-
turned to  Zofii;  l>ut.  in  the  spring  of  1**4.  failing
health  obliged  his  return  for  two  years  to  the  east.


II.'  Imxight  with  him  |  ma  to  aid  hire  in

the  preparation  of  a  dictionary  and  grammar  of
the  Ball  language,  and  translations  of  mvth  and

basal  stones,  hen,  legends,  songs,  and  ritual-. Mr.

luiditmr*  publication*  ,u,d  eontrilaiti

odiml literature include -Anti.  •dean*

County" (Washington. Is.

(18811:  "The  Relationship  between  7m  r -

and  Mythic  s».i.'m»M^..,;  "  The  Nation  of  ft*

Willow  Ueaatam  m  Bafl  "

"Studies  of  Ancient  I'  imic  Art.  a

trnliveof  Zufli  ColtOrS-OtOWth  ".I^J,;  a,,,i

Breadstufl
ClSHINtJ,  Jonathan  IVter.  sdanassf;

Rochester.  N.  II..  12  Mar.  h.  1788 1  ±  III  Raleigh.
18  April.  lHjn.  In  his  hnyhiaal  he  w  a-  ap-
prentice! ;  I, ut.  by  skilfully  managing  the  proceeds
of  his  oN.rwork,  be  peronased  ■  portioa  of  Ins
time,  and  immediately  entered  Phillip*  I
academy.  Bf  working  a  pOftiOJi  Si  «a<h  ilav  and
by  teaching,  he  paid  his  way  through  collegi
graduate.!  at  Dartmouth '  in  1M7.  His  health
failed, and he went south.  U-camc a tutor m

Hampden  Sydney  ooUage  in  the  Norsmber  '

ing  his  graduation,  and  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  philosophy  two  yean  later.  This  chair  he
held  for  two  years,  when  he  became  the  \-i-
of  the  college.  Hy  his  exertions,  the  institution,
which  had  0600  sadly  disorganize!  and  broken
down,  was  built up  again  ;  hut the  laU.r  and  re-

s|M)iisiiiiiity  of  the  enterprise  exhausted  his  strength
and  hastened  hi>  death.

CUSHING,  Luther  Stearns,  Jurist.  I,,  in  La>
nenburg.  Mass.,  J-J  June.  IskkI;  d.  in  Boston,  22
June,  1868.  He  was  the  only  graduate  at  the  Har-
vard law-school  in  1M26.  For  some  fSSJI  after
leaving  college  be  was  amoeiatsd  with  Charles
Sumner  and  Ueorge  S.  Hillard  in  the  «slit«.rshiii  of
"The  American  .lurist  ami  I>aw  Magazine'  in
Boston,  when  in  1K12  he  was  made  clerk  of  the
house  of  representatives,  an  office  which  he  held
for  fourteen  years.  In  1S44  he  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature,  then  f<>r  four  years  was
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  m  itoaton,
after  which  he  became  reporter  of  the  decisions  of
the  supreme  court  of  the  commonwealth,  and  pre-
pared twelve  volumes  (.V,  |,,  88  m<  lu-n,  i  of  law
reports,  extending from l*-">o  t..  the time  of  his

death. In  1k4*  he  became  lecturer  on  Roman  law
in  Harvard  law-school,  and  tilled  the  chair  until
his  death. His  name  is  l.ot  known  in  c«>ni
with his "Manual of Parliamentary Pn.
(Boston, 1844),  which  immediately  Us -nine  an  au-
thority  for  proceedings  in  deliU-rative  assemblies.
He  also  published  a  M  Treatise oa  Trastes  Process"
(1887);  "  Treatise  oa  Bemedial  Lew"(lC
lish  translation  of  Serigny's  "  Recti!  den  I'.  -
law  of  possession  mslatioa  "f  PotbJers

-De  la  rente,"  contract  of  sale  (1838):  translation
of  Mattennaier  on  "  Kff.vt  of  Drunkenness  on
Criminal Bssponeibility  " (1*41>: translation  of

Domat'a  "Lee  toil  riruei  dans  hav  ordrs  natu-
rel"  (1850);  "Reports  of Controvert!

Cases  in  MassjMdiusetta"(188B)j  "  Intr>-lu.  I
the  Study  of  Roman  Civil  Uw"(lH  l"L*i

Parliame'ntaria  Americana."  a  comprehfniuA*
on  parliamentary  law

CUSHING,  Nathaniel,  soldier. u  In  Pamhrohe,
Mass..  H  April.  1758  ;  d.  in  Marietta,  OWo,  m  Au-
gust. tsl4.  Be  joined  the  f..reesthat  went  from
Masswhusettt  in  1775.  tiecame  a  lieuten..
Pr.wers  regiment  in  Jtsjf  Of  that  jmt,  was  ad-
vaneed  to  a  taptainev  in I

md  captured  forty  of  the  D-  Un.w  loyal-
fa  lu  -.  after  maiix fruitless  attempU


40


cushing


CUSHING


had  been  made  by  others.  He  j>art icipat.-il  in
many  engagements,  and  received  in  1788  the  luv-
vet  <>f  major.  At  toe  close  of  the  war  he  removed
to  Belpre,  Ohio.

CUSHING,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston,
:n  1725;  d.  there  in  1788.  He  was  the  son
of  a  wealthy  merchant,  in  whose  counting-house
Samuel  Adams  was  for  a  short  time  employed.  I  le
fell  under  the  influence  of  Adams,  and  presently
became  prominent  among  the  popular  leaders  who
were  preparing  the  way  for  the  Revolution.  In
May,  1706,  he  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts
assembly,  and  immediately  afterward,  when  James
Otis,  who  had  been  chosen  speaker,  was  refused  by
Gov.  Bernard,  Mr.  Gushing  was  chosen  speaker  in
his  stead.  He  was  speaker  of  the  house  until  1774,
and  as  such  occupied,  in  the  eyes  of  the  British,  a
prominence  greater  than  his  abilities  entitled  him
to.  Dr.  Johnson,  in  one  of  his  silly  pamphlets
about  American  affairs,  asserted  that  one  of  the
objects  of  the  Revolution  was  to  place  a  diadem  on
the  head  of  Thomas  Cushing.  He  was  not  fitted
for  leadership,  and  on  several  occasions  showed
himself  weak-kneed.  In  1772,  along  with  Hancock,
he  opposed  the  formation  of  committees  of  corre-
spondence, and  afterward  refused  to  serve  on  one
to  which  he  had  been  appointed.  At  the  same
time  he  is  described  by  John  Adams  as  possessing
a  rare  faculty  for  procuring  secret  intelligence,
which  made  him  useful  to  the  patriot  leaders.  He
was  elected  in  June,  1774,  to  the  first  Continental
congress,  and  in  February,  1775,  to  the  second.
He  was  one  of  those  whom  the  king  instructed
Gage,  in  April,  1775,  to  seize  and  send  over  to  Eng-
land, to  be  tried  for  treason.  In  July,  1775,  when
Massachusetts  formed  a  new  government,  Mr.
Cushing  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  council.  In
the  Continental  congress  he  opposed  a  declaration
of  independence,  and  consequently,  in  the  third
annual  election  of  delegates,  19  Jan.,  1776,  he  did
not  receive  a  single  vote,  but  Elbridge  Gerry  was
elected  instead.  In  1783  and  several  following
years  he  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Massachu-
setts. He  was  a  member  of  the  convention,  held
in  January  and  February,  1788,  that  ratified  the
Federal  constitution.

CUSHING,  Thomas  Humphrey,  soldier,  b.  in
1755 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  19  Oct.,  1822.  He
served  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  beginning  as
a  sergeant,  was  in  Arnold's  naval  battle  on  Lake
Champlam,  and  for  his  bravery  was  successively
advanced  until  in  July,  1812,  he  had  reached  a
brigadier-generalship.  In  January,  1816,  he  was
appointed  collector  of  customs  in  New  London.
Some  time  after  this  he  became  involved  in  a  quar-
rel with  William  J.  Lewis,  member  of  congress
from  Virginia,  and  the  ball  from  Mr.  Lewis's
weapon  struck  Gen.  Cushing's  watch.  The  differ-
ences between  the  two  gentlemen  were  amicably
adjusted,  and  Lewis,  stepping  up  to  the  general,
said :  "  I  congratulate  you,  general,  on  having  a
watch  that  will  keep  time  from  eternity."

CUSHING,  Thomas  Parkman,  merchant,  b.
in  Ashburnham,  Mass..  in  1787;  d.  in  Boston,  23
Nov.,  1854.  He  carried  on  business  in  Boston,  and
bequeathed  the  bulk  of  his  fortune,  supposed  to
amount  to  $150,000,  for  the  maintenance  of  two
schools  in  his  native  town.

CUSHING.  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Scituate.
Mass.,  1  March,  1732 ;  d.  there,  13  Sept.,  1810.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1751,  studied  law
with  Jeremy  Gridley,  became  attorney-general  of
Massachusetts,  was  appointed  judge  of  probate  of
Lincoln  county,  Me.,  in  1768,  became  judge  of  the
Massachusetts  superior  court  in  1772,  chief  justice


in  1777,  and  in  1780  was  chosen  the  first  chief
justice  of  Massachusetts  under  the  state  constitu-
tion. At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  >t<»< «<l
almost  alone  among  the  superior  officials  in  rap-
porting  the  cause  of  independence.  His  grand-
father and  his  father  (both  named  John)  were
judges  of  the  superior  court,  and  his  father,  whom
he  succeeded  as  chief  justice,  presided  over  the
trial  of  British  soldiers  for  the  Boston  massacre  of
r>  March.  l?7o.  On  SJ7  Sept.,  1789,  Judge  Cushing
was  appointed  an  associate  justice  of  the  (J.  S.  su-
preme court.  President  Washington  nominated
him  chief  justice  in  1796,  but  he  declined,  lie
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences  in  1780.  In  1788  he  was  vice-
president  of  the  Massachusetts  convention  that
ratified  the  federal  constitution.

CUSHING,  William  Barker,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Delafield,  Wis.,  4  Nov.,  1842;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  ft,  17  Dec,  1874.  He  was  appointed  to
the  naval  academy  from  New  York  in  1857,  but
resigned  23  March,  1861.  In  May,  1861,  he  vol-
unteered, was  appointed  master's  mate,  and  on  the
day  of  his  arrival  at  Hampton  Roads  captured  and
brought  into  port  a  tobacco-schooner,  the  first
prize  of  the  war.  He  was  attached  to  the  north
Atlantic  blockading  squadron  during  the  war,  and
repeatedly  distinguished  himself  by  acts  of  bra-
very. He  was  commissioned  lieutenant  on  16  July,
1862.  In  November,  1862,  he  was  ordered  in  the
steamer  "  Ellis  "  to  capture  Jacksonville.  Fla.,  in-
tercept the  Wilmington  mail,  and  destroy  the  salt-
works at  New  Juliet.  He  captured  a  large  mail,
took  two  prizes,  and  shelled  a  Confederate  camp,
but  was  unable  to  cross  the  bar  that  night,  and  in
the  morning  ran  aground.  The  crew  transferred
everything  except  the  pivot-gun  to  one  of  the  cap-
tured schooners,  and  sailed  to  a  place  of  safety,  a
mile  and  a  half  away ;  but  Cushing  remained  with
six  volunteers  on  board  the  steamer  until  she  was
disabled  by  a  cross-fire  from  the  shore,  when  he  set
her  on  fire  and  made  his  escape  to  the  schooner  in
a  row-boat.  He  distinguished  himself  the  same
year  on  the  Blackwater  and  in  the  sounds  of  North
Carolina.  In  1863  he  added  to  his  reputation  for
bravery  and  j  udg-
ment  by  an  ex-
pedition up  the
Cape  Fear  and
Little  rivers  and
operations  on  the
Nansemond.  His
most  brilliant  ex-
ploit was  the  de-
struction of  the
Confederate  iron-
clad ram  "Albe-
marle "  on  the
night  of  27  Oct.,
1864.  This  power-
ful vessel  had  suc-
cessfully encoun-
tered a  strong
fleet  of  U.  S.  gun-
boats, and  fought
them  for  sev-
eral hours  with-
out sustaining
material  damage.  There  was  nothing  able  to  cope
wit  h  her  in  the  sounds.  Cushing  volunteered  to  de-
stroy her.  and  with  a  steam  launch  and  a  volunteer
crew  he  ascended  Roanoke  river,  towing  an  armed
cutter.  The  river  was  lined  with  sicken  to  guard
against  just  such  an  attack  as  this:  but  Cushing's
luck  did  not  desert  him,  and  he  was  within  a  few


tf./Z^LJLr


CUSI1M  \N


« I -UMAX


41


MbemorleM  before  hi  wandleoovi

ng  c»iT  the  Ixmi  that  was  in  tow,  he  ordered  its

i  picket-pod mar  by,  while,  with  it

full  bead  of  ■team,  he  drove  the  launch  straight
at  tin-  huge  balk  <»f  the  ir«m-«-luil.  who*,-
rushed  to  quarters  and  at  once  opened  iln>.  The
launch  replied  effectively  with  bet  bowitser.  \
rafl  of  heavy  log!  surrounded  the  larger  vessel,
hut  tin-  launch  was  driven  over  them,  and  !>v  the

time  "in-  had  received  her  death-wound  from  the
"Albemarle's"  guns  Clashing  had  oooUj  swung
the  torpedo-boom  under  tin-  great  ship's  overhang

and  exploded  tin-  charge.  A  large  bok  was  blown
in  tin-  Iron-dad's  side,  she  sank  at  hat  moorings,
and  was  never  raised.  Telling  his  companions  to
l<»ik  nut  for themselves,  Cushing  left  ha  -"inking

launch  and  swam  down  stream,  manning  tin-  l>ank,
thoroughlj  exhausted,  half  a  mile  below. As  soon

aj  ha  recovered  his  strength  be  plunged  into  the

denes  swamp,  anil  after  many  hours  of  tedious
Wading  came  out  upon  the  shore  of  a  creek,  where,
with  his  usual  good  luck,  he  found  a  pickct-lmal,
and  at  11  I'.  M.  the  following  night  reached  a  l'.  S.
gun-lxiat  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Of  the  gallant
fellows  who  ri-ked  their  lives  with  him.  onlv  one
escaped  besides  himself.  Two  were  drowned,  and
most  of  the  others  captured.  Lieut.  Cushing  did
not  expeot  to  return  alive  from  this  enterprise.
When  he  set  out  to  destroy  the  ram,  he  said
laughingly  to  the  companions  he  was  leaving,
"Another  stripe,  or  a  coffin."  Five  times  the
secretary  of  the  navy  officially  wrote  him  com-
mendatory letters,  and  for  the  "Albemarle"  af-
fair he  received  the  thanks  of  congress,  and  was
promoted  lieutenant-commander,  27  Oct.,  1864,
At  Fort  Fisher,  under  a  constant  and  heavy  fire,
he  buoyed  out  the  channel  in  a  small  skiff,  and
continued  the  work  for  six  hours  till  he  had
completed  it.  At  the  final  assault  on  Fort  Fisher
he  led  a  force  of  sailors  and  marines  from  the
••  Mnnticello"  in  an  attack  on  the  sea-front  of  the
fort,  and  amid  an  unceasing  fire  at  short  range,
which  cut  down  his  men  in  windrows,  he  crossed
a  hundred  yards  of  sand,  rallied  his  men.  and  lent
such  efficient  assistance  to  the  troops  that  In-fore
midnight  the  fort  was  surrendered.  After  the  war
he  served  in  the  Pacific  and  Asiatic  squadrons,  be-
ing in  command  of  the  steamer  "  Lancaster"  in
l888-*7,  and  of  the  "  Maumec,"  in  the  Asiatic
squadron,  in  lHlJH-'D.  On  the  return  of  the  "  Mau-
mee"to  the  United  States,  Lieut. -Com.  Cushing
was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  commander.  81  .Ian..
1872,  being  the  youngest  officer  of  that  rank  in  the
navy.  He  was  allowed  leave  of  absence,  hut  his
health,  which  had  been  impaired  by  overexertion,

failed  completely,  and  he  died  of  brain  fever.

(TSHMAN.  Charlotte  Suunders.  actress,  h.
in  Boston,  Mass..  88  July,  1816;  d.  there,  is  Feb..
1ST'».  She  was  a  descendant  in  the  eighth  genera-
tion from  Robert  Cushman.  Her  father  rose  from
poverty  to  be  a  successful  West  India  merchant,
DUt  lost  his  fortune,  and  died,  leaving  his  family
in  straitened  circumstances.  Charlotte  was  a  re-
markably bright,  sportive  child,  excelling  her
schoolmates  and  developing  a  voice  of  remark-
able compass  and richness,  with  a  full contralto

register. Two  Mends  of  her  father,  one  of  them

John  Mackey,  in  a* host-  piano  factory  Jonas  Chick-
ering  was  then  foreman,  provided  her  with  theln^t
musical  instruction.  She  sane  in  choirs,  and  aided
in  the  support  of  the  family  from  the  age  of  twi  !ve.
When  Mrs.  Joseph  Wood' visited  Boston  in  \XU.
('apt.  Mackey  Introduced  Miss  Cushman,  who  sang

with  her  in  two  of  her  concerts.  Through  Mrs.
Wood's  influence  she became  an articled pupil


to  .lames  (,.  M<»-der.  that  lady's  musical  director,
and  andet  his  instruction  'made  h.  r  first  ep-
oncra  in  the  I  n-roont  theatre  a*
the  Countess  Alnwvrra  in  the  ■  Ifnrrksn  of  Figa-
ro'' with  great  success,  and  her  second  aa  Lucy
llcrtrain  fa
Manm-ring."  She
went  with his(.,iii.

patty  to  New  Or-
leans, where  hSt
voice,  which  had
U-cu  strained  I  \
the  soprano  parts
assigned i,, |,,r

suddenly  failed.
Seeking  the  ooun*

srl of James ||.

Caldwell,  manager
of  the  prindpal
theatre  of  New  Or-
leans, she  was  ad-
vised by  him  and
by  Barton,  the  tra-
gedian, to  In-come
at; actress, and

fiveli  the  juirt  of
,adv  Macbeth  t«>
study,  in  which  she  mads  her  sposntnotS  with
complete  success  in  1885.  Going  to  New  York.
she  declined  a  trial  at  the  Park  theatre,  to  enter
into  a  three  years'  engagement  with  Thomas  Ham-
hlin.of  the  Bowery  theatre,  when-  shcap|<can-d  for
a  season  in  leading  tragic-  roles.  Mi-
brought  her  mother,  who  had  supported  the  family
by  keeping  a  boarding-house,  t"  New  York;  hut
soon  after  this  the  theatre  WSJ  burned,  and  her
wardrobe,  for  which  she  wits  in  debt,  was  destroyed.
Miss  Cushman  then  secured  an  sngagemonl  in  Al-
bany,  where  she  acted  for  five  months,  and  made
many  acquaintances  among  politician*  through  her
relative,  (iov.  Many,  then  in  the  V.  S.  senate  |
vinced  that  she  had  not  ■erredaproper  apprentice-
ship in  her  art.  she  applied  to  the  manager  of  the
Park  theatre  for  any  place  that  might  U- vacant,
was  engaged  to  do  general  utility  btsamess,  and
soon  made  her  mark  as  a  leading  actress.  This
engagement  lasted  from  1887  till  18401  In  1861
she  assumed  the  management  <>f  the  Walnut  street
theatre  in  Philadelphia,  which  she  retained  till  1*4-1.
when  sin-  accompanied  Mr.  Macready  on  «  tour  in
the  northern  states,  in  tin-  0OUTSS  of  which  she  un-
dertook the  higher  ranp-  of  tragic  |.arts  with  great
success.  She  was  an  ardent  student,  and  rapidly
added  new  characters  to  her  list,  sii-h  as  Klvira,
Bianco,  Helen  McGregor,  Kmilia.  Umrti  Kathenne.
Cardinal  Woohtey,  Ophelia,  Pauline.  Viola,  and
Katharine  in  "Turning  of  the  show."  She  was
powerful  and  electric  m tregadr, mestssful  in  the
depicting  of  every  passion,  gnat  in  shaki-spearian
character., and in her yOUttg clays was

guished  ss  a  performer  in  high  ooensdf  parti

88  Oct..  1844 Miss  Cushman  SSilsd for  Kngland.

In  London  sin-  Inimoflislofj  sohleved  n  triumph-
ant succ-ess  in  the  parts  of  I^ady  Marbeth
Mud.  Mrs.  Holler,  maims  in  MFnsk\"aod  Emilia.

She  sent  for  her  familv.  and  lagan  h.  r  BStOBal  sea-
son at  the  Hay  market  as  Bomeo,a  |«art  she  had
ehoSSU  in  order  to  brin.;  out  her  sister  as  Juliet.
The  power  of  her  impersonation  i  sensa-

tion in  London,  and  afterward  in  Dublin,
her  sister's  gmes  and  U-«uty  add.-d  t«>  the  suc-
cess. Slu-  plavcd  other  male  companion  parts
with  h.r  sister,  achieved  a  great  success  as  Julia
in  "The  Hunchback,"  Meg  Herri  lies,  a  part  that
she  had  liM  umtSJ—d  at  the  Park  t  heat  r


42


(TSHMAN


CUSHMAN


York,  in  1841,  Nancy  Sykes,  Lady  Gay  Spanker,
ami  otter  characters,  constantly  added  to  her
professional  reputation,  and  made  warm  friends
in  the  intellectual  society  of  England.  In  Au-
gust, 1849,  she  returned  to  the  United  States
and  played  throughout  the  country.  She  Ux)k  her
farewell  at  the  Broadway  theatre,  15  May.  L8BS,
visited  friends  in  England,  and  travelled  on  the
continent,  but  began  playing  again  in  December,
1858.  Her  lmuse  in  Mayfair  became  a  centre  of
art  ist  ic  and  literary  society,  and  during  the  dra-
matic S6MOO  she  acted  with  undiminished  popu-
larity in  London  and  the  provinces,  while  part  of
her  winters  she  passed  in  Rome.  In  1857  she  re-
turned to  the  United  States  and  performed  during
the  winter  and  the  spring  of  1858,  and  returned  to
Koine,  establishing  herself  in  a  spacious  perma-
nent winter  home  in  January,  1859.  In  1860  she
again  acted  in  New  York,  and  appeared  on  several
occasions  for  the  benefit  of  the  Sanitary  commis-
sion. During  the  last  six  years  of  her  life  Miss
Oushman  developed  a  remarkable  ability  as  a  dra-
matic reader,  giving  scenes  from  Shakespeare,  bal-
lad poetry,  dialect  poems,  and  humorous  pieces
with  a  success  not  less  decided  than  her  early  his-
trionic triumphs.  In  1871,  after  a  residence  in
Europe,  she  resumed  her  career  in  the  United
States  as  a  reader,  besides  fulfilling  several  dra-
matic engagements.  Her  farewell  appearance  was
announced  at  least  seven  times  in  as  many  differ-
ent years.  Her  final  performance  in  New  York  at
Booth's  theatre,  where  she  played  the  part  of  Lady
Macbeth,  was  signalized  by  social  and  literary  dem-
onstrations. Sue  took  a  similar  demonstrative
farewell  in  the  same  character  in  Philadelphia  and
other  cities,  and  her  career  closed  in  Boston,  at  the
Globe  theatre,  on  15  May,  1875.  After  a  reading-
tour  to  Rochester,  Buffalo,  and  Syracuse,  she  re-
tired with  a  large  fortune  to  her  villa  at  Newport,
where  she  was  seized  with  her  final  illness,  and  in
October  went  to  Boston  and  placed  herself  under
medical  treatment.  An  obelisk  copied  from  Cleo-
patra's Needle  was  placed  over  her  tomb  in  Mount
Auburn  cemetery  in  1880.  See  "  Charlotte  Cush-
man,  her  Letters  and  Memories  of  her  Life,"  edited
by  Emma  Stebbins,  the  sculptor,  who  was  her  inti-
mate friend  and  companion  at  Rome  for  several
years  (Boston,  1878). — Her  sister,  Susan  Webb,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  17  March,  1822 ;  d.  in  Liverpool,
England,  10  May,  1859,  made  her  dibut  on  the
stage  in  April,  1837,  at  the  Park  theatre.  New  York
city,  as  Laura  Castelli  in  Epes  Sargent's  play, "  The
Genoese,"  and  achieved  an  immediate  success.  She
played  Desdemona  to  George  Vandenhoff's  Othel-
lo, Grace  Harkaway  to  her  sister's  Lady  Gay
Spanker,  and  other  prominent  parts  in  New  York
and  Philadelphia,  and  made  a  remarkable  success
in  "  Satan  in  Paris."  In  England  her  impersona-
tion of  Ophelia  was  regarded  as  of  the  first  rank,
her  Juliet  ran  200  nights,  and  in  her  old  and  many
new  characters  her  acting  was  greatly  admired  for
its  grace  and  delicacy.  In  1847  she"  retired  from
the  stage,  and  in  March,  1848,  married  Dr.  James
Sheridan  Muspratt.  of  Liverpool,  the  distinguished
chemist  and  author.

CUSHMAN,  Elisha,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kingston,
Mass.,  2  May,  1788;  d.  in  Hartford,  C^nn.,26  Oct,
1838.  He  abandoned  the  carpenter's  trade  to  be-
come a  preacher  at  the  age  of  twenty,  was  licensed
by  the  Baptist  church  in  Kingston  after  a  short
Ooone  ot  study,  and  ordained  a  pastor  in  Hartford.
He  took  a  prominent  part  in  establishing  the  Con-
necticut Baptist  missionary  society  in  1814.  which
was  reorganized  as  the  Baptist  convention  in  1822,
and  in  1822  founded  and  edited  a  denominational


journal  called  the  "  <  'hri-tian  Secretary." In  1825
he  resigned  his  charge  in  Hartford  to  become  pastor

of  a  church  in  Philadelphia,  bat  returned  to  Con-
necticut in  1899,  and  after  preaching  in  Fairfield
became  pastor  of  the  church  in  New  Haven  in  ls:Jli
In  L888  lie  removed  to  Plymouth,  Mass.,  I  nit  on  the
failure  of  his  health  in  1838  returned  to  Hartford
a  few  weeks  before  his  death,  for  the  purpose
sinning  the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Secretary."
CUSHMAN,  Pauline,  spy,  b.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  10  June,  1833.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a
Spanish  refugee,  who  became  a  tradesman  in  New
Orleans,  and  afterward  an  Indian  trader  at  Grand
Rapids,  Mich.  After  reaching  womanhood  she  re-
turned to  the  south  as  a  variety  actress,  and  at-
tracted attention  bv  her  beauty.  When  acting  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  in  March,  1863,  she  was  offered  a
bribe  if  she  would  give  a  toast  to  Jefferson  Davis
during  the  performance,  and,  on  informing  the
provost-marshal,  Col.  Moore,  was  induced  to  carry
out  the  plot.  She  was  afterward  employed  by  the
government  as  a  detective  to  discover  the  sout  hern
sympathizers  and  spies  in  Louisville,  and  their
methods  of  conveying  information  and  medical
supplies  across  the  lines,  and  frequently  also  as  a
scout.  Securing  a  theatrical  engagement  at  Nash-
ville, where  she  was  welcomed  as  a  secessionist,  she
Serformed  valuable  services  for  the  army  police  in
etecting  thefts  from  the  government  stores,  trade
in  contraband,  and  the  practices  of  guerillas.
Thence  she  was  sent  beyond  the  lines  in  May,  1863,
ostensibly  as  a  rebel  sympathizer,  in  order  to  gain
information  of  the  strength  of  the  Confederate
forces  and  fortifications,  the  extent  of  their  sup-
plies, and  their  contemplated  movements.  She  was
captured,  taken  to  the  headquarters  of  Gen.  Bragg,
and  sentenced  by  a  court-martial  to  be  hanged  as
a  spy,  but  was  left  behind  at  the  evacuation  of
Shelbyville,  where  she  was  found  by  the  Union
troops.  The  fame  of  her  adventures  extended  over
the  country,  and  after  her  escape  from  imprison-
ment she  was  given  by  the  soldiers  the  title  of
major,  and  was  accoutred  as  an  officer.  Her
knowledge  of  the  roads  in  Tennessee,  Georgia,  Ala-
bama, and  Mississippi  was  of  great  service  to  the
Army  of  the  Cumberland.  See  her  "  Life,"  by  F.  L.
Sarmiento  (Philadelphia,  1865).

CUSHMAN,  Robert,  Plymouth  pilgrim,  b.  in
Kent,  England,  about  1580 ;  d.  in  England  in  1625.
With  John  Carver  he  was  instrumental  in  effecting
the  emigration  of  the  pilgrims  to  Holland,  where
he  joined  them  after  they  had  been  in  Leyden  sev-
eral years.  He  became  a  leading  member  of  the
community  in  Leyden.  and  took  a  deep  interest  in
the  project  of  settling  in  an  English  colony.  In
1617  he  was  sent  with  Deacon  Carver  to  London  to
negotiate  with  the  Virginia  companv,  which  had
secured  a  grant  from  the  king  of  all  the  territory
between  boundaries  200  miles  north  and  200  miles
south  of  Point  Comfort,  for  permission  to  settle  on
their  lands,  and  to  apply  to  King  James  to  grant
them  liberty  of  conscience  there.  The  king  would
only  grant  them  permission  to  settle,  and  refused
to  issue  a  charter  under  his  seal,  though  he  prom-
ised not  to  molest  them.  Cushman  undertook  a
subsequent  mission  to  England  for  the  same  object
with  Elder  Brewster  in  1619,  when  a  patent  was  ob-
tained in  which  the  king  granted  toleration  for
their  form  of  religion  so  long  as  they  remained
faithful  subjects.  The  arrangement  with  the  Lon-
don merchant  adventurers  was  concluded  through
his  agency.  He  and  Carver  then  returned  to  Bag-
land  to  colled  subscriptions,  make  purchases,  and
prepare  for  the  voyage.  They  chartered  the  "  May-
flower," and,  while  Carver  was  busy  with  the  ship


(TS1CK


CCBTKIt


m


Soothuapfeoo,  Ooriunan,  at  the  ■oMattafloa  <>f

1 1 1 « -  adventurers,  altered  1 1 1 « -  ii^rtt'iiicnt  on  hi*  own

responsibility,  abandoning  tlir  two  days  ■  «><k  f<»r
tlu'ir  private  affairs  that had  bssfl  reserved  to  thc

Oftltmwti  in  iln'  original  contract, Boberl  Oush-

maii.  who  was  given  the  office  of  assistant  govern-

mbarksd  with  his  family  on  the**  Speedwell"

OB  "> Aug.,  1620.  when the two  vessels  began the

gether;  lint  wlnn  the  M  Mayflower sailed

Again  alone  OB  0  Sept..  with  only  a  |>art  of  the  OOfja.

psny,  he  remained  behind  t"  ad  ae  their  financial
agent  in  England  and  lend  then  supplies.  In  1681
be  published  ■  pamphlet  on  M  Immigration  to  Ajneri-
Bfging  tin*  advantages  <>f  that  country  for
settlement,  ami  in  .1  til  v  he  Sailed  for  New  England

in  the  •'Fortuni',"  taking  with  him  hi*  only  eon,
Thomas,  and  arriving  81  Nov.  He  returned  to
Bnrope  to  manage  tin*  business  of  the  colonists
there,  l>ut  left  hie  son  in  the  family  of  Gov.  Brad-
lord.  Before  his  departure  he  preached  on  the
-Sin  and  Danger  of  Self-Love,"  '.»  Dec,  1681,  noted

as  the  first  discourse  delivered  in  New  Kngland
that  was  published  (London,  1688).  It  was  re-
printed in  Huston  in  1 724,  in  1?H0.  and.  with  a  bio-
graphical sketch  by  Judge  .John  Davis,  in  17s:,
(Plymouth).  It  is  also  contained  in  the  "(ushman
Genealogy,  and  was  photo-lithographed  from  one
of  the  three  existing  examples  in  INTO.  On  VI  I >« -« -..
1681,  he  sailed  for  Kngland,  and  oontinued  ae  agent
for  the  colonists  in  London.  On  the  voyage  be
was  captured  and  plundered  by  tin*  French,  and
taken  to  France,  but  released  after  two  weeks1  de-
tention. On  his  arrival  in  Kngland  he  published
an  eloquent  vindication  of  the  colonial  enterprise,
and  an  appeal  for  Christian  missiona  to  the  North
American  Indians.  In  1628,  with  Edward  Wins-
low,  he  obtained  from  Lord  Sheffield  a  grant  of
territory  on  <  'a|>e  Ann,  where  a  new  band  of  Puri-
tans made  the  Iir*t  permanent  settlement  with-
in the  limits  of  the  Maasarihiianttii  bay  colony. —
His  son.  Thomas,  b.  in  England  In  1  606;  <1.  in
Plymouth,  Ma**.,  n  Dee.  1888.  He  married  Mary,
third  daughter  of  Isaac  Allerton,  alnnit  1685.  lie
was  always  the  confidential  friend  of  Gov.  Brad-
ford, and  became  ruling  elder  of  tin*  church  on  the
death  of  Brewster  in  104!>. His  wife  survived  him,

and  was  the  last  of  the  •*  Mayflower  "  passengers,
dying  in  1099  at  the  age  of  ninety  year*.  A  large
granite  monument  to  the  metnorv  of  the  first  t  'ush-
inmis  was  erected  at  Plymouth.  Mass.,  by  their  de-
scendants in  1858.

(TSICK.  Nicholas,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Oneida.
N.  Y..  in  i  780 :  d.  in  TusoaroFS  village,  near  Niagara,

N.  V..  88 Oct.  1S40.  His  Indian  name  was  **  Kayh-
natho." In  the  war  of  the  Revolution  be  served  <>n

the  American  side  five  year*,  and  at  onetime  saved

tin*  life  of  (ien.  Lafayette.  Cusick  belonged  to
tin*  Tuscarora  trilie. — His  nephew.  Ouvid.  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  with  four  illustrations,  entitled
M Sketches  of  the  Ancient  History  of  the  Six  Na-
tion*" fLockport,  N.  V.,  It

(TSTKK,  George  Armstrong,  soldier,  b.  in
New  Burnley,  Harrison  <"..  Ohio,  5  Dec,  is:t!>:  d.
in  Montana. 'J.")  .lu ne.  into.  He  was  graduated  at
the  l".  S.  military  academy  in  June,  1*01.  and  re-
ported f>>r  duty' at  Washington.  Gen.  Winfleld
Scott  ■.'ave  him  despstohes to  carry  to  Qen.  Irwin

MoDowelL  then  in  command  of  the  Army  of  the

Potomac,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  as  lieutenant  in
the  6th  cavalry,  and  participated, on  the  dav  of  In*
arrival  at  the  front,  in  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Bun.
Gen.  Philip  Kearny  selected  him  a*  hi*  tir*'  aide-
de-camp,  and  he  afterward  served  00  the  >tafT  of
William  F.  Smith.  While  on  this  duty  he
was given charge  of  the balloon  ascensions,  to


make  reennouwancex. In  May,  1868, Gen. George

I'. M <  lellan  was  SO  impr.— •

perseverance  that  he  showed  in  wading

hominy  alone,  to  ascertain  what  would  !■ a  nafr

fonl  for  the  army  to  cn-w.  and  with  hi*  courage  in

reconnoitring  the  enemy'-  ;

other side,  thai he  ww'  appointed aid. --de-camp,

with  tin* rank  of  captain.  t<.  date  fr..m |fl

1868. ('apt.  Caster  applied  at  on  i-iadou

to  attack the psohst>BOa1 hf  had  ju»t di«

aml  at  daylight  the  next  morning  surprised  the
enemy,  drove  them back,  sapturing  Nime  prison-
er* and the flr*t color* that w.
Army  of the  Potomac After  I  rlian't

retirement  from  command  of  the  army.  <  a|
ter was dixharpd fr<>m hi* volunteer  appoint-
ment and  returned  to  hi*  regiment a*  lieutenant.

lb*  had  served  there  but  a  snort  time  «h<
Alfred  Pkasonton,  <>n  i.*»  May,  i*o:t.  made  him

aide-de-camp  00  hi*  staff.  For  daring  gallantry  in
a  skirmish  at  Aldie  and  in  the  action  at  Brandy
Station.  SJ  well  a*  in  the  1+tfHg  oj -rat  inn*  i>f  the

Bappahannock  campaign,  be  was  sppotntod  brigs-
dier-general  of  volunteers,  dating  fn>m  .i*  Juna,
1H(«.  and  as-
signed to  du-
ty as  com-
mander of  the
Michigan  bri-
gade. At  (iet-

tysburg  his
brigade,  to-
gether with
thoseof  Gregg
and  Mcintosh,
defeated  Gen.
Stuart-
forts  to  turn
the  left  Hank.
Porthisaction
be  was  brevet-
ted  major  in
the  U.S. army,

to date from

:{  July.  1868.
At  Culpepper

Court  -  House

he  was  wounded  by  a  spent  Udl.  which  killed  bis

bone. He  ti>ok part in  Gen,  Sheridan's  cavalry
raid towanl Biclnnoi.il.  in May. lsM.  and was
brevet  ted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  and  meri-
torious serrkses  in  the  battle  of  Yellow  '!
11  M.iv. In  (Jen.  Sheridan's  second  raid  on
m I  the Michigan brigade made a ui«-t pl-
iant flght  at  Trevillion  Station;  but  so  great  was
their |«*ril that the colors  of the  brigade  were
only  saved from  capture  by  Gen.  Coster's  tear-
ing' them  from  the  standard,  held  in  the  grasp  of
a dving color-sergeant,  and  concealing the flag
in liis  bosom. On 18 Sept.. 1*M. hs  SSJSI made
brcMtHoloncl,  F.  S.  armv.  for  gallantry  at  the  Ut-
tle  of  Winchester,  and  on  19  Oct  he  was  bn
major-general of volunteer* f->r gallantn
meritorious  sen  1ms  at  Whsehestsr  and  Pnhers
Hill. On  80  Sept.  hs  assumed  emnmsad  «>f  the
8d  division  "f  cavalry,  with  which  hs  (ought  the

brilliant kittle  of  WoodstOOk  OH  9  <M..  where  he

wa*  eonfrouted  by.  hi*  former  essanmass  at  West
Point,  the  Confederate  tj,.n.  Bosssei  Bs  wots
the  enemy  twenty-sis  mil.*,  capturing  even  thing
they  had' on  wh<  one  gun. At ^  c*dar

Creel  bs  confronted  the  enemv  from  the  flrst

attack in the morning <»'■->■ •'••' K'

I  division  recaptured,  before  the  day  was

over gun*  and  colors  that  hail  been  taken  from


44&**£z.


44


CUSTER


CUSTER


the  army  earlier  in  the  fight,  together  with  ( 'on-
federate  flags  and  cannon.  After  this  brilliant
success  Gen.  Custer  was  sent  to  Washington  in
charge  of  the  captured  colors,  and  recommended
for  promotion.  In  the  spring  of  1805,  when  Gen.
Sheridan  moved  his  cavalry  toward  Richmond
again,  the  3d  division  fought  alone  the  battle  of
Waynesboro.  The  enemy  s  works  were  carried,
and  11  guns,  200  wagons,  1,600  prisoners,  and  1?
l>at tie-flags  were  captured.  On  reaching  Fred-
riekshall  Station,  Gen.  Custer  found  that  Qen.
Early  had  rallied  from  his  retreat  at  Wavnesboro
and  was  preparing  for  another  attack.  lie  there-
fore sent  a  regiment  to  meet  him  at  once.  Gen.
Early  was  nearly  capt  ured,  his  command  destroyed,
and  a  campaign  ended  in  which  he  lost  his  army.
every  piece  of  artillery,  and  all  his  trains. For

fillant  and  meritorious  services  at  the  battles  of
ive  Forks  and  Dinwiddie  Court-House,  Gen  Cus-
ter was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  to
date  from  13  March,  1865.  In  a  general  order  ad-
dressed to  his  troops,  dated  at  Appomattox  Court-
House,  9  April,  1865,  Gen.  Custer  said:  "During
the  past  six  months,  though  in  most  instances  con-
fronted by  superior  numbers,  you  have  captured
from  the  enemy  in  open  battle  111  pieces  of  field
artillery,  65  battle-flags,  and  upward  of  10,000
prisoners  of  war,  including  seven  general  officers.
Within  the  past  ten  days,  and  included  in  the
above,  you  have  captured  46  field-pieces  of  artil-
lery, and  37  battle-flags.  You  have  never  lost  a
gun,  never  lost  a  color,  and  never  been  defeated ;
and,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  engagements
in  which  you  have  borne  a  prominent  part,  includ-
ing those  memorable  battles  of  the  Shenandoah,
you  have  captured  every  piece  of  artillery  which
the  enemy  has  dared  to  open  upon  you."

Gen.  Custer  received  the  first  flag  of  truce  from
the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  was  present
at  the  surrender  at  Appomattox  Court-House.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  for  his  services  in  the
last  campaign,  and  appointed  major-general  of
volunteers,  to  date  from  15  April,  1865.  He  par-
ticipated in  all  but  one  of  the  battles  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  After  the  grand  review  he  was
ordered  to  Texas,  to  command  a  division  of  cav-
alry. In  November,  1865,  he  was  made  chief  of
cavalry,  and  remained  on  this  duty  until  March,
1866,  when  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service,  to  date  from  February,  1866.  He  then  ap-
plied to  the  government  for  permission  to  accept
from  President  Juarez  the  place  of  chief  of  Mexi-
can cavalry  in  the  struggle  against  Maximilian.
President  Johnson  declined  to  give  the  necessary
leave  of  absence,  and  Gen.  Custer  decided  to  accept
the  lieutenant-colonelcy  of  the  7th  cavalry,  his  ap-
pointment dating  from  28  July,  1866.  He  joined
his  regiment  at  Fort  Riley,  Kansas,  in  November,
1866,  and  served  on  the  plains  until  1871.  On  27
Nov.  he  fought  the  battle  of  the  Washita,  in  Indian
territory,  and  inflicted  such  a  defeat  upon  the  In-
dians that  the  entire  tribe  of  Cheyennes  were  com-
Selled  to  return  to  their  reservation.  He  was  or-
ered,  with  his  regiment,  to  Kentucky,  in  1871,
where  he  remained  until  1873.  In  the  spring  of
that  year  he  was  sent,  with  the  7th,  to  Fort  Rice,
Dakota,  and  from  there  accompanied  an  expedition
to  the  Yellowstone.  On  4  Aug.  he  fought  the
Sioux,  with  his  regiment,  on  the  Yellowstone,  near
the  mouth  of  Tongue  river,  and  on  the  11th  had
another  engagement  three  miles  below  the  mouth
of  the  Big  Horn.  In  July,  1874,  the  government
ordered  an  expedition,  commanded  by  Gen.  Custer,
into  the  Black  Hills,  which  resulted  in  a  hitherto
unexplored  region  being  opened  to  miners  and


frontiersmen.  On  IS  May.  1878,  Gm  Outer  com-
manded his  regiment  in  a  campaign  against  the
confederated  Sioux  triln-s.  The  Indians  were  dis-
covered encamped  on  the  Little  Big  Horn  river,  in
a  region  almost  unknown.  Eleven  tribes, number-'
ing  nearly  9,000,  had  their  villages  on  and  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Little  Big  Horn.  The  government
expedition  consisted  of  1,100  men.  1  he  strength
of  the  enemy  not  being  known,  Gen.  Custer  was
ordered  to  take  his  regiment  and  pursue  a  trail.
He  arrived  at  what  was  supposed  to  be  the  only
Indian  village  on  25  June,  and  an  attack  was  made
by  a  portion  of  the  regimenl  numbering  fewer  t  ban
200  cavalry,  while  Gen.  Custer,  with  277  troopers,
charged  on  the  village  from  another  direction.
They  were  met  by  overwhelming  numbers,  and
Gen.  Custer,  with  his  entire  command,  was  slain.
The  officers  and  men  were  interred  upon  the  bat-
tle-field, and  in  1879  it  was  made  a  national  ceme-
tery. A  monument  recording  the  name  and  rank
of  all  who  fell  was  erected  by  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment on  the  spot  where  Gen.  Custer  made  nis  last
stand.  In  1877  his  remains  were  removed  to  the
cemetery  at  West  Point,  N.  Y.

He  was  nearly  six  feet  in  height,  broad-shoul-
dered, lithe,  and  active,  with  a  weight  never  above
170  pounds.  His  eyes  were  blue,  his  hair  and  mus-
tache of  golden  tint.  He  was  a  man  of  immense
strength  and  endurance,  and,  as  he  used  neither
liquors  nor  tobacco,  his  physical  condition  was  per-
fect through  all  the  hardships  of  his  life.  Eleven
horses  were  shot  under  him  in  battle.  At  the  age
of  twenty-three  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general,
at  twenty-five  a  major-general.  The  close  of  the
war  reduced  his  command  from  thousands  to  hun-
dreds ;  but  his  enthusiastic  devotion  to  duty  was
not  diminished,  and  his  form  was  seen  at  the  head
of  his  men  in  his  Indian  service  just  as  it  had
been  during  the  civil  war.  ne  reverenced  religion,
he  showed  deference  to  the  aged,  he  honored
womankind,  he  was  fond  of  children,  and  devoted
to  animals.  His  domestic  life  was  characterized
by  a  simplicity,  joyous  contentment,  and  fondness
for  home  that  was  surprising  when  it  is  remem-
bered that,  out  of  the  thirty-seven  years  of  his  brief
life,  fourteen  were  spent  in  active  warfare.  One  of
his  friends  wrote  his  history  under  his  name  in  one
sentence,  "  This  was  a  man."  In  1871  Gen.  Custer
began  to  contribute  articles  on  frontier  life  to  the
"  Galaxy,"  which  were  published  in  book -form  un-
der the  title  "  My  Life  on  the  Plains"  (New  York,
1874).  He  was  engaged  on  a  series  of  "  War  Me-
moirs "  for  the  "  Galaxy  "  at  the  time  of  his  death.
He  occasionally  contributed  articles  on  hunting
to  "Turf,  Field,  and  Farm"  and  "Forest  and
Stream."  His  life  has  been  written  bv  Frederick
Whittaker  (New  York,  1878).— His  wife,"  Elizabeth
Bacon,  whom  he  married  in  February,  1864,  was
with  him  at  the  front  during  the  last  year  of  the
war,  and  also  accompanied  him  in  his  nine  years'
service  on  the  western  frontier.  She  has  pub-
lished "Boots  and  Saddles,  or  Life  with  Gen.
Custer  in  Dakota"  (New  York,  1885),  and  "Tent-
ing on  the  Plains,  or  Gen.  Custer  in  Kansas  and
Texas,"  with  a  sketch  of  his  life  (1888).— His
brother,  Thomas  Ward,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Rum-
ley,  Harrison  co.,  Ohio,  15  March,  1845 ;  d.  in
Montana.  25  June,  1876.  After  repeated  attempts,
which  failed  on  account  of  his  youth,  he  succeeded
in  enlisting  as  a  private  in  an  Ohio  regiment,  and
served  in  the  west  until  he  was  made  aide-de-camp
on  his  brother's  staff,  then  with  the  Army  of  the
Potomac.  His  appointment  as  second  lieutenant
in  the  6th  Michigan  cavalry  dated  tyrni  8  Nov.,
1864. His  horse  was  often  neck  and  neck  with  that


01

->f  hi-  brother  in  tin-  famous  cavalry  charges,  an. I
in  the  fljghl  at  Naiiio/iii,.  Church,  2  April.  |8«1

eajrtureda  Ceufedeeute  Bag. At  Ballot

April,  he  captured  a  second  flag;  but WM  ih
the  standard-U-arcr  and  severely  wounded  in  UM
He  m  preparing  In  charge  again,  when
•lopped  by  in-  brother  end  told  to  go  t<>  the  rear

aii'l  hare  hi-  wound  <in--.  i|.  \-  lie  paid  no  at-
tention to  this  request,  it  became  necessary  lot
Ben.  Cuter  to  order  him  under  arre-t  before  i„.
oonld  check  Ins  ardor. He  received  a  medal  from

congress  for  tin'  capture  of  the  colors  at  Sailor's

k. In  the  spring  >>f  1866  be  ^wmpanlgd

Ban.  Custer  to  Texas  ami  served  on  the  stall  until

mustered out of service ill November. II

red  the  bra  vote  of  eaptain.  major,  and  Ueuten-
ant-eoloncl. On  88  Feb,  I860,  be  was  appointed

second  lieutenant  in  the  1st  infantry  of  the  regu-
lar army,  and  on  2S  July  was  promoted  to  i4  tir-t
lieutenancy  in  his  l.rother's  regiment,  the  Tth  cav-
alry, with  which  die  served  on  frontier  duty  until
he  fell  baaVde  his  l>r<»ther  in  the  battle  «>f  the'  Little
B%  Horn. When  he  was  asked  his  opinion  of  his

brother,  just  before  0m  Anal  eatnpaign,  Gen.  Cue-

tBK  mid:  "If  you  want  to  know  my  opinion  of
Tom,  I  can  onlv  say  that  I  think  he  should  be  the
general  and  I  the  captain."

(TSTINK,  Adam  Philippe  (kus-teen).  Count
dc.  French  soldier.  I>.  in  Met/,  4  Feb..  1710;  d.  in
Paris.  18  Am;.,  1788.  After  Barring  M  a  captain
in  the  seven  years'  war.  he  became  a  colonel  in
1772.  He  tOOK  part  ill  the  American  Revolution-
ary war.  and  was  quartermaster-general  of  the
French  forces  in  America  in  177H-XJ.  He  iraa
present  at  Cornwallis's  surrender  at  Yorktown,  and
on  his  return  to  France  in  17Xi  was  made  mest  re-
de-camp and  governor  of  Toulon.  In  17s«»  he
was  deputed  to  the  states-general  by  the  nobility
of  Met/,  and  advocated  the  cause  of  reform.  lie
subsequently  commanded  the  army  of  the  north.
received  in  June,  1792,  the  command  of  the  army
of  the  lower  IJhine,  and  after  some  snocoSBOB  again
took  command  of  the  northern  army  in  May.  1 7!»::.
from  which,  however,  he  was  soon  recalled  by  the
committee  of  safety  and  placed  at  the  har  of  the
revolutionary  tribunal,  and.  notwithstanding  a
spirited  d. 'fence,  was  sentenced  to  be  guillotined.

(  ISTIS,  (Jeorge  Washington  Parke,  author.
1).  at  Mount  Airy.  Md..  :«)  April.  1781;  d.  at  Ar-
lington House.  Fairfax  co„  Via-  10  <><•(..  1  s.~> 7.  His
father.  Col.  John  Parke  Custis,  the  BOD  of  Mr-.
Washington  by  her  first  husband,  was  aide -de-
camp to  Washington  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown.  and
d.5  Nov..  17*1,  aged  twenty-eight The  sou  had

his  early  home  at  Mount  Yernon.  pursued  his  classi-
cal studies  at  St.  .John's  college  and  at  Princeton,
and  remained  a  member  of  Washington's  family
until  the  death  of  Mrs.  Washington  in  1808,  when
he  built  Arlington  House  on  an  estate  of  1,000
acres  near  Washington,  which  ho  had  inherited
from  his  tether.  After  the  death  in  1858  of  his
sister,  Eleanor  Parke  Custis,  wife  of  Maj.  Law-
ranee  Lewis,  he  was  the  sole  surviving  member
of  Washington's  family,  and  his  residence  was  for
many  years  a  favorite  resort,  owing  to  the  inter-
esting relics  of  that  family  which  it  contained.
Mr.  Custis  uiarriisd  in  early  life  Mary  Let  Pit*
hugh.  of  Yirginia,  and  left  a  daughter,  who  mar.

Sober!  K.  Lee. The  Arlington  eon-

ted  during  the  civil  war.  and  is  now  bald  ae
national  property,  and  is  the  site  of  a  national  sol-
dier-' cemetery. The  house  j-  represented  in  tl  •
com  pan  vim,'  illustration. Mr.  Custis  was  in  his  early

an  eloquent  and  effective  s|H>aker. He  emote
orations  and plays,  and  during his latter years


CCT1I


ia


executed  a  inuuU-r  of  large  painting*  of  Ravohv
Uonan  1-attl.-.  Hi-  ••  Kt^lbetions  of  Waahia*
ton, originally  contributed  National  In-


telligencer," was  published  in  U«.k-f«.nn.  with  a
memoir  by  his  daughter  and l»<

Lossfcajj  (N'eNv  Fork,  i^mm.

(TTIHSII,  James,  chemist,  b.  in IYnn*v|va-
nia;  d.  at  West  point,  N.  V..  |fi  !>,.,. |sjg,
oernlng  his  early  history,  very  little  is  km  •>
cept  that  he  taught  chemistry. He  WMSfmoteted
to  the  army  with  the  rank  of' assistant  ajN.t1
general  in 1814,  served  first  in  Philadelphia,  wa>
afterward  stt ached  to  the  northern  division  of  the

army,  and was  chief  medical  officer  of  tl,.
military  academy  and  the  |m>m  at  Wot  point  from
June,  1880,  till  November,  I88L On  the  n-organi-
zation  of  the  army  he  became  assistant  surgi^iii  n,,d
acting  professor  of  chemistry  and  minerak
West  Point,  in  which  capacity  he  continued  until
his  death. He  was president of  the  Columbian
chemical society in Philadelphia, wrote -
pa|>crs  in  the  earlier  volumes  of  Silliinan's  ••  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Sciences."  and  was  the  author  of
u  Useful  Cabinet  Philosophi  of  Bxneri-

mental  Chemistry  "  1 1818);  and  "Treatise on  Pyro-
technics" (Philadelphia,  1885).

CUTHBEBT,  Alfred,  senator,  b,  in  Savannah.
0a„  alniiit 1781:  d.  near  MontioeUo,  <ia..  »  Julv,
IHotf. He  was  graduated  at Princeton  o.;..
1808,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  l«tr,  and
began  to  practise  in Montieelta,  Jasper  <•"..  <»a.

He  was  first  elected  to  the  stale  legislature,  then  a
representative  from  (Jeorgia  in  the  1  .'tth  mid  14th
conurre-ses.  serving  till  l*.ii.  when  he  n  -
He  wis  again  elected  to  the  17th.  18th, and  18th
congresses,  serving  from  :i  Dec,  1881,  till  J  March,
lb-  u;ls  elected  I".  S.  senator  from  «••

in  pla< f  John Forsyth,  who  resjgued  27  June,

1884,  and  eras  re  elected  for  a  full  term,  -
from  18  Jan..  1*::.-).  till  :i  March,

<  I  illllKKT.  James  llazzard.  usMfjausU,  h.
in  Beaufort,  s.  (X,  18  I'-..  1888.  Hi  awe  gradu-
ated  at  Princeton  m  \s4-i.  studied  theotoaw  under
hi-  uncle.  Bar.  Richard  Fuller.  D.  I>..  and  b
in  1—47  pa-tor  of  the  Went  worth  street  IVnptiM
ohuroh,  Cherieston,  s.  c.  In  1888  he  «as  i-aJIwl  to
the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Iiaptist  sJmrah,  Philadel-

phia.  Pa.,  where  he remained until  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  in  188L Bi  turning  to  the  aoutbl

,  lied for  some  vears  in Augusta,  (ia.,  and

in  [888  beeame  \^^\<<r  of  the  1st  Beptisl  ehurrh
m  Washington,  l>.  c..  when-  he  still  ssmetni
lb-  ha-  received  the  djagne  of  i>.  i>.  from

He is  the  author  of
Life  of  Richard  Fuller.  I>.  I1  rk.  1*7»>.

(I  TIIHKRT.  John A..  )  int.  b.  m  Savannah.
Mobile.  Ala..  22
Hi-  father  WSJ  a  colonel  in  the  Revolution-


46


CUTLER


(TTLER


ary  army.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  lso;,.
and  in  1809  became  a  law  student  in  New  Fork.
In  1810  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  Geor-
gia, from  Liberty  county,  which  be  continued  to
represent  for  years.  During  the  war  of  1819  In
commanded  a  volunteer  company  to  protect  the
coast.  In  1818  Georgia  elected  her  representatives
in  congress  on  one  general  ticket,  and  Cuthbert  was
thus  chosen.  At  that  time  the  Missouri  question
occupied  the  attention  of  congress,  and  Judge  Cutli-
bert  took  an  active  and  zealous  part  in  maintain-
ing the  southern  side  of  it.  In  1831  he  became
editor,  and  subsequently  proprietor,  of  "  The  Fed-
eral Union,"  a  paper  published  at  Milledgeville,
Ga.,  and  in  1837  removed  to  Mobile  to  practise  his
profession.  In  1840  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
county  court  of  Mobile,  and  in  1852  appointed
judge  of  the  circuit,  court.

CUTLER,  Benjamin  Clarke,  clergyman,  b.  in
Roxburv,  Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.
Y.,  10  Feb.,  1863.  He  was  for  some  time  a  clerk  in
the  mercantile  house  of  Messrs.  Andrews  &  Co.,
Boston.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1822,
studied  theology  under  the  direction  of  Bishop
Griswold,  and  by  him  was  ordained  deacon  in  No-
vember, 1822.  His  first  settlement  was  in  Quincy,
Mass.,  where  he  remained  about  seven  years,  but
left  on  account  of  failing  health,  and  spent  the
winter  of  1830  in  Savannah.  He  returned  to  New
England  on  horseback,  and  subsequently  passed  a
year  as  rector  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  Leesburg,
Va.  In  the  summer  of  1832  he  took  charge  of  the
first  city  mission  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  New
York:  and  in  April,  1833,  accepted  a  call  to  St.
Anne's  church,  in  Brooklyn,  where  he  spent  the
last  thirty  years  of  his  life.  In  1835  he  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Columbia.  He  left  a  vol-
ume of  sermons  (Philadelphia,  1857).

CUTLER,  Elbridge  Jefferson,  educator,  b.  in
Holliston,  Middlesex  co.,  Mass.,  28  Dec,  1831 ;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  27  Dec,  1870.  In  1865  he  was
appointed  professor  of  modern  languages  at  Har-
vard, a  chair  which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  a  brilliant  writer,  and  an  able
though  generous  critic  His  published  works  were
"War  Poems"  (Boston,  1867)  and  "Stella"  (1868).
A  memoir  of  Prof.  Cutler  was  published  by  Andrew
P.  Peabodv  (Cambridge,  1872).

CUTLER,  Enos,  soldier,  b.  in  Brookfield,  Mass.,
1  Nov.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Salem,  14  July,  1860.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1800,  and  was  a  tutor  there
for  one  year.  He  studied  law,  and,  being  called  to
the  bar,  settled  in  Cincinnati.  He  joined  the  army,
and  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the  7th  infantry
in  1808,  rising  by  successive  promotions  to  be
colonel  of  the  4th  infantry  in  1836.  He  resigned
on  30  Nov.,  1839.  He  saw  service  in  the  war  of
1812,  in  the  first  Seminole  campaign  with  Gen.
Jackson,  and  in  the  Creek  war.

CUTLER,  Ephraim,  pioneer,  b.  in  Edgarton,
Martha's  Vineyard,  Mass.,  in  1767;  d.  in  Ames-
town,  Ohio,  in  1853.  His  early  life  was  spent  in
Connecticut  on  a  farm,  where  he  acquired  a  knowl-
edge of  mathematics  and  surveying.  In  1788  he
was  appointed  agent  of  the  Ohio  company,  and
soon  afterward  engaged  in  mercantile  business
until  1794.  Finding  his  ventures  unprofitable,  he
removed  to  Ohio,  where  he  had  an  interest  in  some
land.  His  journey  thither  required  mote  than
three  months,  and  was  delayed  by  privations,  ad-
venture, and  sickness.  On  his  arrival  in  Ohio,
Gov.  St.  Clair  appointed  him  judge  of  quarter
sessions  and  judge  of  common  pleas.  In  1797
Judge  Cutler  exchanged  his  possessions  for  an  es-
tate in  the  township  of  Ames,  where  he  spent  the


remainder  of  his  life.  He  erected  a  log  cabin  in
the  wilderness,  planted  a  tew  acres  of  com.  and  re*
assumed  the  duties  of  his  judgeship,  periodically
making  his  way  through  the  wilds  to  Marietta  to
attend  court.  He  says  that  during  seven  years,  in
which  he  served  in  three  courts,  his  "dividend  was
not  sufficient,  but  in  a  single  instance,  to  pay  the
weekly  board."  He  early  interested  himself  in
education,  and  stimulated  the  people  of  Ames
and  Dover  townships  to  establish  a  public  library.
The  necessary  funds  were  obtained  by  the  sale  of
furs  procured  by  native  hunters.  This  is  thought
to  have  been  the  first  incorporated  public  library
in  the  west.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  Judge
Cutler  wrote :  "  More  than  sixty  individuals  have
grown  to  maturity  within  this  circle,  two  have  be-
come professors  in  colleges,  three  are  ministers  of
the  gospel,  one  of  them  a  bishop,  at  the  head  cf
them  Thomas  Ewing,  several  judges  of  courts,  and
one  general."  His  last  public  service  was  in  1839
as  a  delegate  to  the  whig  convention  at  Harrisburg.
He  was  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  First
Settlement  of  Amestown  in  Athens  County,  Ohio,"
and  "  The  First  Settlement  of  Athens  County,"  etc.,
both  published  in  Hildreth's  "  Pioneer  Settlers."

CUTLER,  Hannah  Maria  Tracy,  physician,
b.  in  Becket,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  25  Dec,  1815.
She  is  a  daughter  of  John  Conant,  and  was  edu-
cated in  the  common  school  of  Becket.  In  1834
she  married  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Tracy,  who  died  in
1843.  Subsequently  she  prepared  herself  for
teaching,  and  was  matron  of  the  Deaf  and  dumb
asylum  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1848-'9.  In  July,
1851,  she  visited  England  as  a  newspaper  corre-
spondent at  the  World's  fair.  She  was  also  at  the
same  time  a  delegate  from  the  United  States  at  the

Seace  congress  in  London,  and  while  in  England
elivered  the  first  lectures  ever  given  there  on  the
legal  rights  of  women.  In  1852  she  married
Samuel  Cutler  and  removed  to  Illinois,  where  she
labored  assiduously  for  the  reform  of  the  laws  re-
lating to  women.  She  was  president  of  the  West-
ern union  aid  commission,  Cnicago,  111.,  in  1862-'4.
In  1873  she  visited  France,  in  company  with  her
son,  J.  M.  Tracy,  artist,  and  remained  there  till
1875.  After  her  graduation  as  a  physician  at  the
Homoeopathic  college  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1879,
she  settled  at  Cobden,  111.,  where  she  has  practised
with  success.  She  is  the  author  of  "Woman  aa
she  Was,  Is,  and  Should  be"  (New  York,  1846);
"  Phillipia,  or  a  Woman's  Question "  (Dwight,
III,  1886) ;  and  "  The  Fortunes  of  Michael  Doyle,
or  Home  Rule  for  Ireland  "  (Chicago,  1886).

CUTLER,  Henry  Stephen,  musician,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  7  Oct.,  1824.  He  was  organist  and
choir-master  in  Trinity  church,  New  York,  from
1860  till  1868.  He  compiled  "The  Psalter,  with
Chants"  (Boston,  1858);  "Trinity  Psalter"  (New
York,  1863);  and  "Trinity  Anthems"  (1868).  The
last  named  contains  several  of  his  own  composi-
tions. In  1864  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of
Doctor  in  Music  from  Columbia.

CUTLER,  Lizzie  Petit,  author,  b.  in  Milton,
Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  in  1836.  She  was  instructed
until  her  fourteenth  year  at  a  seminary  in  Char-
lottesville, Va.,  after  which  her  education  was  con-
tinued very  irregularly.  Her  first  novel,  "  Light
and  Darkness"  (New  York,  1855),  was  republished
in  London  and  translated  into  French.  This  was
followed  bv  "  Household  Mysteries,  a  Romance  of
Southern  Life "  (1856).  and  "  The  Stars  of  the
Crowd,  or  Men  and  Women  of  the  Day  "  (1858).
As  Miss  Petit  (her  maiden  name),  she  gave,  in  1860,
a  series  of  public  readings.  About  1858  she  mar-
ried Mr.  Cutler,  a  New  York  lawyer.  *


CUTLER


47


(I  I  I  I  It.  Lvsandcr.  ->l.li.r.  1>.  in  Maine  about
180*t:  (I.  in  Milwaukee,  \\  iv.  80  July,  1806.  He
Offend  bit  -  rvices  to  the  government  at  1 1 1 . -  be-
ginning of  th.-civii  war, ana  wm  itvea  oonimand
of  the  titli  Wisconsin  regiment,  which  !><•  speedily

brought  into  a  state  <  >f  discipline,  ami  rendered  OM
of  tht'  U'-t  iii  tlit-  stTvit-e.  OuhocqUQUtlj  In-  was  in
coiiiiiiainl  of  the  "  Iron  Brigade  "  (originally  v
dith's),  of  tin-  Arinv  of  tin'  Potomac,  to  which  his
meni  was  attached,  and  won  the  promotion  of
brigadier-  and  afterward  major-generaL  He  was
wounded.
(I  III  i:.  >l  i  ii  .i  — «*h.  clergyman,  b.  in  Kil-
linglv.  Conn.,  :5  May,  1742;  d.  in  Hamilton.  Mass.,
He  "wits  graduated  at  Vale  in  1780,
after  which  ho  engaged  in  the  whaling  business,
and  opened  a  store  in  Kdgartown.  Martha's  Vine-
yard. Meanwhile  he  continued  his  studies,  princi-
iMill y  legal,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Massachusetts
bar  in  17<i7.  He  conducted  a  few  eases  in  the  court
of  common  pleas,  but,  finding  the  piufasslnil  un-
congenial, he  jjave  it  up  and  removed  to  Dedham,
where  he  studied  theology  under  the  direction  of
the  Bar.  Thomaf  Ilulch.  whose  daughter  he  had
married.  In  1770  he  was  licensed  and  preached
for  six  months  as  a  candidate  at  the  Hamlet  parish
(then  a  |«rt  of  Ipswich,  bat  since  17!»:!  the  town
of  Hamilton).  tie  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Congregational  society  in  this  parish  on  11  Sept.,
1771,  and  remained  associated  with  this  organiza-
tion until  his  death.  Soon  after  the  battle  of
Lexington  he  addressed  the  minute-men,  then
muttering  in  Ipswich,  and  accompanied  them  on
hoi-diack  to  Cambridge,  where  be  saw  the  British
as  they  retreated  into  IJoston.  He  received  a  com-
mission as  chaplain  in  September,  177<>,  and
served  under  Col.  Kltenczer  Francis  in  the  11th
Massachusetts  regiment.  For  his  gallantry  in  the
action  in  Rhode  Island, on  28  Aug.,  177H,  he  was
presented  with  a  tine  horse  bv  his  commander.
Toward  the  close  of  the  war,  when  the  physician
of  the  Hamlet  parish  was  employed  in  the  army.
and  the  people  were  without  proper  medical  ad-
vice, Mr.  Cutler  at  once  applied  himself  to  the
study  of  medicine,  and  soon  mastered  the  science
sufficiently  to  practise.  For  several  years  there-
after his  attention  was  divided  between  the  physi-
cal and  spiritual  wants  of  his  congregation.  About
this  time  his  mind  was  directed  to  the  study  of
botany  by  casually  meeting  with  an  English  work
on  the  subject,  and  he  was  the  tirst  t<>  examine
the  flora  of  New  England.  Over  850  species  were
inspected  by  him.  ami  classified  according  to  the
Linmean  system.  His  papefl  published  on  this
subject  are  the  first  attempts  at  a  scientific  de-
scription of  the  plants  of  New  England.  In  1 7s  l.
with  six  others,  lie  ascended  the  White  mountains.
and  his  party  is  said  to  have  l»een  the  tir-t  to  reach
the  summit.  With  the  instruments  that  Dr.  Cut-
ler carried,  it  was  computed  that  Mount  Washing-
ton was  10,000  feet  abore  the  level  of  the  SO  BO
error  of  alxmt  8,400  feet.  Two  years  later  he  be-
came  associated  with  a  Dumber  of  Revolutionary
officers  who,  owing  to  the  uncertain  condition  of
affairs,  had  determined  to  settle  In  the  west,  and

formed  the  Ohio  company  for  the  purpOM  of  hav-
ing their  Ixuinty  lands  located together. He  was

appointed,  with  Maj.  Winthrop  Sargent,  agent  of
the  company,  and  in  this  capacity  visited  Wash-
ington, wlnre  he  contracted  with  the  authorities
for  l.ono.noo  acres  of  land  northwest  of  the  i
river,  obtaining  also  an  additional  giant  of  000,000
-  as  an  allowance  for  bad  lands  and incidental

charges. On  his  return  I ie,  an expedition  was

fitted  out  for  the  intended  sett  lenient. He  hat!  a


large  wagon bnflt and ootatad  with  black  ran

which  was  (minted  in  white  |.
for  Marietta  on  the  Muskingum.'

wen-  engaged  to  eeenasnanf  It  and  so  a*«i.t  m  the
sett  lament  and  defence  of  the  nee  count

left  Cutler's house,  their lltimtier  was

-i\i\,  ami  after  a  long  journey  they  reached  their

destination,  where,  under  (ten.  iCuf'u- I

7  April.  1788.  the  settlement  of  Marietta  was  »*-

gun. Cutkrmade  the  trip  in  a  sulky,  end  travelled

in  twenty-nine'  days  ■  distal

ing  his  Ita]  in  the  west he  examined  the  fortiAra-

tnd  mounds  in  the  neighborhood,  whka  he

regarded a-  the  work  of  a |>eople  m<

than  any  existing  t  n>«  -  ..f  Indian-.. Aft.  r  n-ii.aiti-

mg  a  abort  time  in  Marietta  he  determined  to  w>
turn  home,  and.  bidding  farewell  to  the  eolom  hi
did  so  much  toward  establishing,  he  departed  for

New  England. In  175*1 the  degree  of  I.I..  I>.  wan

conferred  on  him  by  Vale, in  ITM  he  wi
dered  ■  noiiiinisoioii  sj  judge  of  the  sapramo  eonrt

of  the  Ohio  territory,  but  d.-<  lined  it.  Later  he  wan
elected  to  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and  thai

was  sent  to  oongrem  at  ■  federalist,  serving  from
7  Deo,  1801,  till  :i  March,  iniy  During  ble  pre-
vious  stay  in  Washington  be  drafted  for  Nathan
Dane  the  celebrated  ordinance  of  17s7.  wl,
eluded  slavery  from  the  northwest  territory.  He
declined  a  re-election  to  oongrem  in  lUM.ai Id
tinned  until  his  death  t>>  be  pastor  of  theebaroh  in
Hamilton.  He  was  elected  a  member  "f  the  Amer-
iuiu  academy  in  17M,  and  contributed  the  follow-
ing papers  to  its  "Proceedings'':  "On  the  Tran-
sit of  Mercury  over  the  Sun.  18  Nov.,  1788  "•  »Oh
the  Eclipse  of  the  Moon,  88  March,  1788,  and  of
the  Sun  in  the  following  April  "  ;  "  M.  t.s.n.logi-
cal  Observations,  17M  i  and  -lb-marks

on  a  Vegetable  and Animal IiiM-ct." He  was  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society, end
of  other  learned  and  scientific  bodies. The  chap-
ter on  trees  and  plants  in  Belknap's  ••  Hist
New Hampshire"  was  prepared by  him,  SJ
by  Dr.  William  I>.  Peck, He  was  also  the  author
of  a  "Century  Discourse,**  delivered  at  Hamilton.
27  Oct..  l h 1 4." See  his  H Life,  Journals,  and  Cor-
respondence,*' by  William  P.  and  .lulia  I*.  Cutler
(8  vols..  Cincinnati.  1888k— His  son.  Jervtl
mer.  b.  in  Bdgaitown,  Martha's  Vineyard,  Maaa..
Ut  Sept,  1708;  d.  in  Evansville,  Ina,  88  Jane,
1844. He  was  one  of  the  pkmeers  from  New  Kng-
land.  letl  bv  (Jen. Kufiis Putnam,  who  settled  ill
Marietta. Ohio, in 1788. He  was mi off
the  militia,  and  also  in  the  regular  army. He  ac-
quired the  art of  engraving,  ami for yean
voted  his  time  to  this  pursuit, in 1888  Mr.  Cut-
ler removed  to  Nashville,  Tenn.. and  in  1M1  settled
in  Evansville He  published  "  Topogrepbieaj  Dt
BCriptionof  the  Western  Countrv.  with  an  Account
.,f  the  Indian  Tribes " (181«k

(TTLKK.  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charl.-s-
town.  Mass..  in  1888;  d.  in  llostoii.  in  August,  1785.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  17l>t.  It-came
pastor  "f  a  Congregational  soci.lv  in  Stratford,
Conn.,  in  1710,  and  s-m  acquired  »  high  reputa-
tion as  a  preacher.  Vale  college  having  bOCOOM
established  in  New  Haven.  Mr.  Cutler  was  ap-
nointed  r.-ct,.r  in  1711».  and  entered  Bpon  hi*  du-
ties with  zeal  and  .-n.-rgv.  It  was  not  long,  how-
ever, before  the  new  motor,  having  read  soma
standard  church  works  in  the  .-..liege  library  (such
M  those  of  Marrow.  Patrick,  Smth.  Sh.rl.-  k
was  persuaded  that  Presbyterian  and  Cngrega-
tiona]  ordination  was  invalid.  A  disoaamoa  »»»
held  on  this  snttjed  bj  the  college  library  ■


48


CUTT


CUTTER


ber,  1722,  when  the  rector  and  Mr.  Johnson,  of
St  nit  ford,  upheld  the  divine  right  of  episcopacv.
Of  course,  Mr.  Cutler  could  not  remain  in  Yale
college,  and  the  trustees  promptly  voted  liis  dis-
missal. He  thereupon,  in  company  with  Mr.  .John-
son and  Mr.  l5rownc.  sailed  for  England,  in  No\em-
lier,  \1'2'2,  was  ordained  by  the  bishop  of  Norwich,
in  March,  1728,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  both  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  He  was  ap-
pointed missionary  by  the  Propagation  society,  re-
turned to  America,  and  took  charge  of  Christ
church.  Boston,  which  was  first  opened  for  public
worship  on  '2U  Dec.  Dr.  Cutler  continued  in  this
place  during  his  long  and  useful  life,  always  a  con-
sistent churchman,  yet  rarely  engaging  in  contro-
versy. He  published  several  single  sermons,  and
was  one  of  the  most  influential  and  learned  of  the
Episcopal  clergy  in  colonial  days.

CUTT,  John,  colonial  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire, b.  in  England  in  1625;  d.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  27  March,  1681.  He  came  to  this  country
with  his  brothers,  Richard  and  Robert,  before  1645.
Richard,  b.  in  1627,  settled  on  the  Isles  of  Shoals
and  became  a  fisherman,  but  afterward  removed  to
Portsmouth.  Robert,  b.  in  1628,  became  a  noted
ship-builder  in  Kittery,  while  John  established
himself  in  Portsmouth  as  a  merchant,  becoming
also  a  farmer  and  a  mill-owner,  and  acquired  a  large
property.  During  the  union  with  Massachusetts
ne  was  sent  as  deputy  to  the  general  court,  and  was
one  of  a  committee  from  Portsmouth  appointed
under  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts  and  against
the  claims  of  Capt.  John  Mason.  He  was  appointed
president  of  the  province  by  Charles  II.  in  1679,
and  continued  in  that  office  until  his  death,  when
he  was  succeeded  by  Richard  Waldron.  The  de-
scendants of  these  brothers  (who  now  spell  the
name  Cutts)  include  all  the  families  on  both  sides
of  the  Piscataqua. — Charles,  senator,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  81  Jan.,  176!);  d.  in  Fairfax  coun-
ty, Va.,  25  Jan.,  1846.  He  is  fourth  in  descent
from  Gov.  John  Cutt's  brother  Robert. He  was

fraduated  at  Harvard  in  1789,  studied  law  with
udge  Pickering,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In
1804  he  was  elected  to  the  New  Hampshire  legis-
lature, becoming  speaker  of  that  body  during  the
same  year.  He  was  elected  a  senator  from  New
Hampshire,  served  from  8  Dec,  1810,  till  3  March,
1813,  and  subsequently  was  appointed  senator  to
fill  a  vacancy  during  a  recess  of  the  legislature,
holding  office  from  24  May  till  21  June,  1813.
Prom  1814  till  1825  he  was  secretary  of  the  U.  S.
senate. — Richard,  politician,  b.  on  Cutts  island,
near  Saco,  Me.,  22  June,  1771 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  7  April,  1845.  He  was  a  first  cousin  ot
Charles,  and  was  descended  from  Robert.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1790,  after  which  he
studied  law,  but  was  diverted  to  business,  was  ex-
tensively engaged  in  commerce,  and  spent  some
time  in  Europe.  On  his  return  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  serving  in
1799  and  in  1800.  He  was  elected  as  a  democrat  to
congress,  and  with  subsequent  re-elections  served
continuously  through  six  terms,  from  7  Dec,  1801,
till  3  March,  1813,  but  was  finally  defeated  by  Cy-
rus King,  when  a  candidate  for  the  13th  congress.
In  June,  1813,  he  was  appointed  superintendent-
general  of  military  supplies,  an  office  which  he
continued  to  fill  until  it  was  abolished,  in  March,
1817,  after  which  he  was  appointed  second  comp-
troller of  the  treasury,  remaining  as  such  until
1829.  He  continued  to  reside  in  Washington  in
retirement  until  his  death.  In  1804  he  married
Anna  Payne,  sister  of  President  Madison's  wife. —
His  son,  James  Madison,  b.  on  Cutts  island,  near


Saco,  Me.,  29  July,  1805  :  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,
11  May,  1863.  lie  was  educated  in  Washington,
and  was  destined  forthelmr.  but  the  war  of  1*1:2
swept  away  much  of  his  father's  property,  and
young  Cutts,  then  a  student  in  William  Wirt's  of-
fice, was  compelled  to  give  up  his  studies.  He  was
appointed  in  the  treasury  department,  becoming
chief  clerk  in  the  second  comptroller's  office,  ami
ultimately,  during  Buchanan's  administration]  seo-
ond  comptroller.  This  office  he  held  until  his
death,  through  the  administration  of  President
Lincoln.  His  daughter  Ada  married,  first.  Senator
Stephen  A.  Douglas,  and,  several  years  after  his
death.  Col.  Robert  Williams,  U.  S.  A. — Another
son,  Richard  Duminicus,  surveyor,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  21  Sept.,  1817;  d.  there,  13  Dec,
L888.  He  was  educated  at  Georgetown  college,
and  entered  the  coast  survey  in  1843,  remaining  in
its  service  for  over  forty  years.  His  first  efforts
were  directed  toward  raising  the  standard  of  topo-
graphical work,  which  he  accomplished  with  emi-
nent success.  Of  late  years  the  higher  scientific
work  of  the  survey  has  occupied  his  attention,  and
his  operations  have  extended  to  all  parts  of  the
country.  The  shores  of  the  Chesapeake,  the  coasts
of  the  Pacific,  the  plains  of  Texas,  and  the  moun-
tains of  New  England  equally  bear  testimony  to
his  professional  ability.  To  him  the  navigators  of
the  Pacific  are  indebted  for  the  first  surveys  of
San  Francisco,  San  Diego,  and  Monterey  bays,  and
some  other  minor  harbors  on  the  coast.  In  1855
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  surveyor  upon  the  Inter-
national fisheries  commission  for  the  settlement  of
the  limits  of  the  fishing-grounds  between  the
United  States  and  the  British  dominions  in  North
America.  In  the  civil  war  he  was  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  and  received  the  brevet
rank  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  Match.
1865.  In  1873  he  was  one  of  the  U.  S.  commis-
sioners to  the  Vienna  international  exposition,  and
in  1883  he  attended  the  International  geodesic
conference  in  Rome,  which  was  convened  for  the
purpose  of  considering  a  universal  prime  meridian
and  the  unification  of  time.  He  held  at  his  death
the  office  of  first  assistant  superintendent  of  the
coast  survey,  having  direct  charge  of  the  office  and
topography.  In  1845  he  married  Martha  Jefferson
Hackley,  granddaughter  of  Thomas  Mann  Ran-
dolph, of  Tuckahoe,  Ga.

CUTTER,  Ammi  Rnhamah,  physician,  b.  in
North  Yarmouth,  Me..  4  March,  1735 ;  d.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  8  Dec,  1819.  His  father,  the  first
minister  of  that  town,  was  chaplain  of  a  New  Eng-
land regiment  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  174o.
His  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1752.  and
afterward  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Clement  Jack-
son, of  Portsmouth.  He  was  surgeon  of  Col.  Rob-
ert Roger's  rangers  until  they  were  disbanded,  and
in  1758  surgeon  of  the  New  Hampshire  troops  in
the  successful  expedition  against  Louisburg.  He
was  physician-general  of  the  eastern  department,
stationed  at  Fishkill  from  April,  1777,  until  the
beginning  of  1778,  when  he  resumed  practice  at
Portsmouth.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  New  Hamp-
shire constitutional  convention,  a  Whig,  and  long
president  of  the  New  Hampshire  medical  society.

CUTTER,  Cabin,  physician.  !>.  in  Jaffrey,  N.
H.,  in  1807 ;  d.  in  Greene.  Me.,  25  March.  1872.  He
was  a  pupil  at  t  he  New  Ipswich  academy,  and  after-
ward taught  in  Wilton.  N.  EL,  and  A'shby.  ffllf
In  1829  lie  studied  medicine,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Rochester,  X.  II..  front  1881  till  1888,  in
Nashua  from  1834  till  1837.  and  in  Dover  from
1888  till  1841.  Between  184:2  and  1886  Dr.  Cutter
visited  twenty-nine  states  of  the  Union,  delivering


CUTTU:


IB


in.  ilicnl  UotUTSS. In  1*1?  In-  In-u'hii  tin-  compilation

of  "Cutter*!  Physiology,''  a  text-book  for  ichooli

nml  OOJlegSS,  of  which,  prior  t«.  1*71,  eboul  600.000
rs  liml  I  teen  sold.  It  Im-  Ufii  translated  into
several  oriental  languages.  In  1*50  I »r.  Cutter
was  chosen  to  convey  n  supply  of  Sharp**!  rifles  to
Kansas,  a  hazardous  task,  which  was  successfully
performed.  Later  i ri  the  same  year  he  led  into
Kansas  the  Worcester  armed  company  of  -i\t>
men.  ami  also  the  fon-e  known aa  "Jin  Lanes

army,"  which  he  commended  f'»r  nearlv  a  year.  He
was"  president  nf  the  military  council  in  Kansas,
anil  instriiinental  in  tin*  rapture  of  Col  Titus.  In
1881  Dr.  Cotter  became  surgeon  of  the  fist  Massa-
chusetts infantry,  and  served  in  the  national  army
marly  three  years.  He  was  twice  wounded,  and
made  prisoner  at  Bull  Eton.  During  most  of  hie
term  of  tail  lee  be  had  charge  of  the  medical  depot
<;f  the  !»th  arniv  corps  as  surgeon-in-chief.

i  I  I  TKR,  Charles  Annul,  author.  1».  14  March.
1887.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1866,  MM
appointed  librarian  of  the  Boston  athemeum  in
January,  1889.  an  office  that  he  now  (188(1)  holds.
He  has  prepared  a  new  classification  for  libraries,
and  written  "  Rules  for  a  Printed  Dictionary  Cata-
logue" (Washington  bureau  of  education,  1876);
"Boston  Athemt'um  :  How  to  get  Books,  with  an
Explanation  of  the  New  Way  of  marking  Books"
•  u.  1882);  and  edited  "Catalogue  ol  the  Li-
brary of  the  Boston  Athenamm,  1807-71 "  (5  vols.,
Boston,  1874-'82).  Since  Januarv.  1881.  he  has
edited  the  "  Library  Journal  "  of  Now  York.

CUTTER,  neorge  Washington,  poet,  b.  in
Massachusetts  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Washington.  I).  ('.,  '24
Doc.,  1805.  He  studied  law,  and  followed  his  pro-
fession with  success  in  Kentucky  until  alwut  1845.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  raised  a  company  of
infantry,  of  which  he  became  captain,  ami  which
subsequently  was  included  in  the  2d  Kentucky  vol-
unteers under  Col.  McKee.  Later  he  married  Mi--
Drake,  an  actress  of  Cincinnati,  and  for  a  time
made  his  home  in  Covington,  Ky.  Afterward  he
became  interested  in  politics,  and  was  known  fa-
vorably as  an  eloquent  orator.  His  services  wen'
rewarded  with  a  clerkship  in  the  treasury  depart-
ment, an  office  that  he  retained  during  several  ad-
ministrations. "  The  Song  of  Steam,  "  The  Song
of  the  Lightning,"  and  "E  Pluribus  Cnum,"  are
his  best-known  pieces.  He  published  "  Buena  Vis-
ta and  other  Poems"  (Cincinnati,  1848);  "  Song  of
Steam  and  other  Poems"  (1857);  and  "  Poems,  Na-
tional and  Patriotic"  (Philadelphia,  1857).

CUTTING,  Francis  Brockholst,  jurist,  h.  in
New  York  city  in  1805;  d.  there,  M  June,  1870.
He  studied  at  Columbia,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  rapidly  rose  to  distinction  in  his  profession.
In  18150  he  "was  elected  a  member  of  the  state  legis-
lature, as  a  democrat.  From  1840  till  185:1  he  de-
voted himself  to  his  large  and  lucrative  practice  in
his  native  city,  and  from  1853  till  1855  represented
one  of  its  districts  in  congress,  where  he  was  a  war
democrat.  <  >n  the  renomination  of  Abraham  Lin-
coln for  the  presidency,  he  aided  in  his  re-election.
and  thereafter  was  active  in  supporting  the  cause
of  the  Onion.  After  the  war  Mr.  Cutting  retired
from  politics  and  quietly  pursued  hi-  profession.

(  I  [TING,  Hiram  Adolplms.  geologist,  b  in
Conc.nl,  \'t.,  M  D.c.  1886.  "After  years  s|*>nt  in
teaching  the  natural  sciences  in  the  Vermont
Methodist  seminary  at  Montpelier,  and  in  Nor-
wich university,  he  was  appointed  in  1*71  curator
of  the  state  cabinet  of  natural  history,  and  in
became  state  gsologJsl  of  Vermont.  In  1886  li"
was  made  secretary  of  the  Board  of  agriculture.
and  in  Inni  fish  commissioner.  He  has  made  nu-
rou  ii. — 4


experiment!  <-n  the  growth  "f  plants,  the
ind  proper  method!  of  fertilizii

mid  van. .ii-  ohssn

ti'iu«  include  ••  Mining  in  Vermont  "  (Montpettar

logical  Tabic*  ui
Vermont  "

"Farm Pests, including lium-la, Pungt,
ami  Animalcules"  (Manch.

Building  Stones,  al»o  on  Plant  (1  Montpe-

lier. 186  ti  riant-.  Fertilization,  In-

-.<t-.  Fbrestii,  Farm  Hon*
tures  on  Milk,- Fertilization
title  Leotures*  <inn4);  "Farm  [awto**"

and  also  "RepOttl  Of Oeologjsl and Curat

state  Cabinet*  (1874  "80  ;  "Biennis]  K.  |«>rts  of

Fish  Commissioners  of  Vermont  "  (INNI J

and  "Vermont  Agricultural  Reports"

Prof.  Cutting  has  for  inanv  year*  Isetnrsd  during

the  winter  months  ..n  "The 'Bible:  it-  Hi-tnryand

Scientific  Relation*";  "God  in  Creation."  |

(TTTINIi.  Jame-  kmhroae,  inventor,  b.  in
Massachusetts  in  1N14;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mem.  Ill
July,  1807.  His  early  years  wen-  *|>ent  in  Harer-
hill.  Mass..  when-  he  fired  in  straitened  circum-
stances. He  invented  a  new  blS  hllS.  a
the  patent  received  sufficient  encouragement  to
settle  in  Bust i m.  where  he  then  devised  several  im-

firoved  processes,  but  deriving  no  bnputtnnt  benefit
rom  them,  and  soon  lost  all  his  Uiupattl.  After-
ward turning  his  attention  to  the  new  art  of  mak-
ing daguerreotypes,  he  dis.ov.nd  the  process  of
making  picture!  on  glass,  which  after  li
name  he  called  ambrotypes.  This  ha  at  ones  |*t-
ented,  and  then  dnsnssd  of  his  rights,  l«'th  in  this
country  and  abroad.  He  established  an  aquarium
in  Boston,  and  subsequently  the  itipiarial  gardens.
CUTTING,  Sewall  SiluMrr.  sdnestor, h,  in
Windsor.  Vt..  lil.Ian..  18l:l;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  V..
7  Feb,  1888.  He  was  ^raduat.-d  at  the  I'nivendty
of  Vermont,  and  in  1N.'50  was  ordained  pa-tor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  West  Boylston,  Mass.,  but  soon
removed  to  Southhridge.  Mass..  when-  he  n-mained
eight  years  as  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  that
place.  In  1845
ne  aesilinul  edi-
torial charge  of
the"Bapti>t  Ad-
vocate" in  New
York,  changing
its  name  to  the
"New  Vork  Re-
corder." In  his
hands  the  pa-
per at once  rose

m  ehsraeter  and

greatly  increased
in  circulation.  In
I860  he  n-tin-d
from  the  "  Re-
corder." and  was
for  a  short  time
secretary  of  the
American  and
Foreign  BJbls  so-
ciety. From  lM'.t
till  1861  he  was
editor  of  the
"Christian  Review," and  from  1861  till  lxiu  was

M  the  editorial  -taff  of  the  "Watchman  and I

(lei  t..r."  published  in  Boston.

vear  he  was  recalled  to  the  edi

\\.rk  Recorder." In  1865,  in

Fdwanl  Bright,  he  bought  tl

ti-t Register." consolidating

crder," ami changing the  name  to  "  '1 1


C/?4iZZZ^


In the la-t -named

rshipof  \\\'

n  with  Dr.

V..rk  "  Bnp-

it with the ■  Re-


60


CUTTS


CUYLER


!gLt|


amincr."  In  the  same  year  he  was  called  to  the
orshipof  rhetoric  and  history  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Rochester,  a  chair  which  he  held  until
1868.  He  was  the  first  secretary  of  the  Baptist
educational  commission,  an  association  formed  in
1867  "  to  promote  education  and  the  increase  of
the  ministry  in  the  Baptist  denomination."  In
1870  the  scope  of  this  commission  was  enlarged  by
affixing  "  American  "  to  its  name  and  extending
its  care  to  the  interests  of  higher  education  in
general.  Of  this  enlarged  commission  Dr.  Cut  t  tag
remained  secretary.  This  organization,  having  ac-
complished its  aim,  discontinued  its  agency  in
18T(i.  From  September,  1876,  till  May,  1879,  Dr.
Cutting  was  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can Baptist  home  mission  society.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Historical  Vindications "  (Boston,
"Struggles  and  Triumphs  of  Religious
(New  York,  1876);  and  "Ancient  Bap-
(published  posthumously).  Several  of  his
well  as  many  occasional  discourses,  were
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the
y  of  Vermont.

S,  Maria,  sister  superior,  b.  in  Lough-
gh,  Leicester,  England,  in  1811 ;  d.  at  Grand
."oteaujn  1853.  She  entered  the  novitiate  of  the
JuiiWlfof  the  Sacred  Heart  in  Paris  at  the  age  of
seventeen,  and  on  becoming  a  professed  nun,  in
1836,  asked  to  be  sent  on  the  American  mission.
She  was  named  superior  of  the  Grand  Coteau  con-
vent after  her  arrival,  and  afterward  was  made
superior  of  all  the  convents  of  her  order  in  the
west  of  the  United  States.

CUYLER,  Sir  Cornel  ins,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  about  1740;  d.  at  St.  John's  Lodge,  Hert-
fordshire, England,  8  March,  1819.  In  May,  1759,
he  joined  the  55th  regiment  of  foot  (British)  as  an
ensign,  and  was  present  at  the  reduction  of  Ticon-
deroga  in  that  year,  and  of  Montreal  in  1760.
Serving  through  the  old  French  war,  he  became
captain  in  the  46th  foot,  9  May,  1764,  and  was
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Sir  William  Howe  from
July,  1775,  till  15  Jan.,  1776,  when  he  was  pro-
moted major  of  the  55th  regiment.  He  continued
on  Gen.  Howe's  staff,  and  was  at  the  battles  of
Long  Island,  Brandywine,  and  Germantown.  He
was  promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel,  16  Nov.,  1777,
and  commanded  his  regiment  at  the  battle  of  Mon-
mouth. After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  was
transferred  to  the  West  Indies,  where  he  was
quartermaster-general  of  the  British  forces,  and
was  afterward  in  chief  command.  He  attained  the
full  rank  of  general  in  1799.

CUYLER,  Cornelius  C,  clergyman,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1783 ;  d.  31  Aug.,  1850.  His
ancestors  were  among  the  early  Dutch  settlers  of
the  neighborhood,  and  so  common  was  the  name
Cornelius  among  them  that  those  who  bore  it  were
obliged  to  adopt  distinguishing  initials  to  prevent
mistakes.  This  accounted  for  the  middle  "  C."  of
Dr.  Cuyler's  name.  In  1806  he  was  graduated  at
Union,  and  began  to  study  theology  under  Drs.
Livingstone  and  Bassett. In  1809  he  was  ordained

Eastor  of  the  Reformed  Dutch,  church  in  Pough-
eepsie,  N.  Y..  where  he  remained  for  twenty-five
years,  strengthening  and  uniting  a  congregation
which  he  found  in  a  weak  and  almost  divided  con-
dition. As  a  preacher  he  was  exceptionally  suc-
cessful, and  several  revivals  occurred  under  his
ministry.  An  invitation  from  the  2d  Presby-
terian church  of  Philadelphia  was  accepted  in
1834,  and  the  pastoral  relation  then  assumed  con-
tinued during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  For  many
J  ears  he  was  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  ox
efferson  medical  college. In  1838  he  received  the


degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Union.  Besides  a  large
number  of  sermons,  published  separately,  he  was
the  author  of  "  A  Narrative  of  a  Revival  of  Relte-
ion  in  the  Reformed  Dutch  Church,  l'oiighkeepsie,
1815,"  and  three  tracts  issued  by  the  Presbyterian
board  of  publication.  Their  titles  are  "  The  Paxil  y
of  the  Ministry."  "  Evidences  of  a  Gracious  State,
and  *  Who  shall  dwell  in  Heaven  f  "  He  also  wrote
for  the  religious  press,  notably  a  series  of  essays
on  the  Atonement,  published  in  the  "Journal  and
Telegraph,"  of  Albany,

CUYLER,  John  M.,  surgeon,  U.  S.  army,  b.  in
Georgia,  about  1810;  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  N
April,  1884  He  entered  the  army  as  assistant
surgeon  in  1834,  being  among  the  first  to  paM  I  he
rigid  examination  instituted  in  1833.  He  was  act-
ively engaged  in  the  Creek  war  of  1838,  and  the
Seminole  war  of  1840,  and  served  with  distinction
through  the  Mexican  war,  receiving  promotion  as
major  and  surgeon  on  16  Feb.,  1847.  From  1848
till  1855  he  served  at  West  Point.  As  senior  medi-
cal officer  at  Fort  Monroe,  during  the  first  years
of  the  civil  war,  his  services  were  invaluable  in  or-
ganizing the  medical  department  of  the  armies  con-
gregated there.  He  served  afterward  as  medical
inspector  and  acting  medical  inspector-general.
He  served  on  examining  boards,  and  sought  to
uphold  a  high  professional  standard  among  army
surgeons.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel
and  medical  inspector  on  11  June,  1862,  brevetted
brigadier-general  on  13  March,  1865,  and  promoted
to  the  rank  of  colonel  on  26  June,  1876.  After
the  war  he  was  medical  director  of  important  de-
partments until  his  retirement,  30  June,  1882.

CUYLER,  Theodore  Ledvard,  clergyman,  b.
in  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1822,  of  which  town  his
great-grandfather,  Gen.  Benjamin  Ledyard,  was
the  founder.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1841,  and  at  the  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1846.  Two  years  afterward  he  was  ordained  into
the  Presbyterian  ministry,  and  for  a  short  time
was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Burlington,  N.  J.
Shortly  afterward  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the
3d  Presbyterian  church  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  and
remained  there  until  1853,  when  he  accepted  an  in-
vitation from  the  Market  street  Reformed  Dutch
church  in  the  city  of  New  York.  During  the  seven
years  of  his  ministry  to  this  congregation  occurred
the  remarkable  and  wide-spread  religious  revival
of  1858.  In  the  impressive  services  connected
with  this  awakening  Dr.  Cuyler  took  a  prominent
part.  In  April,  1860,  he  was  invited  by  the  Lafav-
ette  avenue  Presbyterian  church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
to  become  its  first  pastor,  and  under  his  charge  the
church  rapidly  grew  to  be  one  of  the  largest  and
most  prosperous  in  the  denomination,  and  it  has
twice  outgrown  its  spacious  buildings  and  sent  out
"  colonies."  As  a  preacher  he  has  been  remarkably
influential,  and  nearly  3,500  members  have  been
borne  on  the  rolls  of  his  church.  He  is  a  regular
writer  for  the  religious  press,  to  which  he  has  con-
tributed nearly  3,000  articles,  many  of  which  have
been  republished  and  translated  into  foreign  lan-
guages. He  has  also  written  a  large  number  of
tracts  on  temperance.  The  titles  of  his  books  are
"Stray  Arrows"  (New  York,  1851);  "The  Cedar
Christian"  (1863);  "The  Emptv  Crib"  (1868);
"Heart  Life"  (1871);  "Thought  Hives"  (1872) j
"Pointed  Papers"  (1876);  "From  the  Nile  to
Norway  '  (1881);  "God's  Light  on  Dark  Clouds"
(1882) ;  "  Wayside  Springs  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Right  to
the  Point "  (spare-minute  series,  Boston,  1884).  A
large  volume  of  miscellaneous  articles  on  religion!
topes  has  been  published  in  Dutch^  and  still  an-
other in  Swedish.


DABLON


DA BULL


n


D

imti.ov  (  i.i. id.',  olsrgymaa,  i>.  la  Dieppe,

1  il. in  Canada  in  1700. 1 1  •■  nrri\ «<1

in New  I-' ram  c  in 1656,  ami  was  at  OWM  sent t<>

ill.-  Onondagaa.  In  1661  be  accompanied  Drui-
n  his  ex|MMlit ion  t<>  Hudson  Lay.  He  was
m-xt  *  nil  Marquette  on  Lake  Superior  in  I688L  after
the  latter  had  founded  the  mwffrrm  of  Sault  St.
Marv,  and  was  appointed  superior  of  all  I  he  mis-
sions in  1670.  He  edited  the  "Relation"  of  t<">;i j.

and  compiled  other  narratives,  which  are  still  in
manuscript.  He  is  also  the  author  of  a  deserii>-
tion  of  Manpiettc's  journey,  published  in  the
'*  Discovery  and  Exploration  of  the  Mississippi  Val-
l.\."  I.v  John  (Jilinarv  Shea  (New  York.  1888).

'DABNKY,  Charles  William,  consul,  b.  m  Al-
exandria, Ya.,  ID  March,  1?!U  ;  d.  in  Faval.  A/...,.-.
12  March.  1*71.  In  1N2<>  he  became  U.S.  eon-.nl  at
Fayal.  and  won  the  affections  of  the  islanders  in  a
remarkable  degree  by  his  efforts  for  their  welfare.
In  the  famines  that  visited  the  island  from  time  t<»
time  daring  Ids  residence,  some  of  which  were  very

•>•,  he  furnished  the  inhabitants  with  food,  as-  j
■leted  them  to  replant  their  fields, advised  and  sug-
gested the  culture  of  new  and  more  varied  crops,
encouraged  the  despondent,  and  restrained  theover-
sanguine.  During  the  whole  of  his  residence  in  the
island  he  acted  the  part  of  a  wise  and  judicious
father  to  the  people,  and,  wherever  he  went,  their
blearing*  and  gratitude  were  manifested.

DABNKY.  Richard,  author,  b.  in  Louisa  coun-
ty, Ya.,  in  1787;  d.  there  in  November,  1825.  Hi-
name  was  originally  the  same  as  that  of  the  his-
torian D'Aubigne\  He  applied  himself  to  the  ac-
quisition of  Latin,  Greek,  and  Italian,  acquiring  a
remarkable  proficiency  in  those  languages,  and  was
employed  as  a  teacher  in  a  school  in  Richmond.
At  the  burning  of  the  theatre  in  Decendtcr.  1811,
he  sustained  severe  injuries.  In  1812  he  published
a  volume  of  "  Poems,  Original  and  Translated."  of
which  an  improved  edition  was  printed  in  Phila-
delphia in  1815.  The  collection  contained  spirited
ana  elegant  translations  from  Euripides,  Alcaus,
Sappho,  Martial,  Seneca,  and  Petrarch.  The  sec-
ond edition  was  published  by  Matthew  ( 'any,  who
employed  Dabney  for  a  few  years.  Carey's  political
tract,  called  the  "Olive  Branch,  or  Faults  on  Both
Sides,"  is  supposed  to  have  been  in  great  part
written  by  Dabney.  In  a  few  years  he  returned  to
Virginia  and  taught  a  class  of  boys.  The  painful
injuries  received  at  a  fire,  together  with  the  use  of
opium,  taken  to  allay  his  sufferings,  and  Indulgence
in  intoxicating  drinks,  caused  his  early  death. —
His  n.phew,  Robert  Lewis,  clergyman,  o.  in
Louisa  count v,  Ya.,  ">  March,  1880.  He  studied  at
Hampden  Sidney  college,  and  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1842.  After  teaching  for
two  years,  he  studied  at  the  Union  theological
seminary  in  Virginia,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1848,  ordained  by  the  Lexington  presbytery  in
July,  1847,  and  became  pastor  of  Tinkling  Spring
church  in  Augusta  county,  Ya.,  where  be  remained
for  six  years.  In  185:}  he  accepted  the  professor-
ship of  church  history  in  Union, seminary,  Virginia,
and  remained  until  lHs:{,  except  daring  the  civil
war,  when  he  was  actively  engaged  in  the  Confed-
erate service  as  chaplain  of  the  [8th  Virginia  regi-
ment, and  afterward  as  chief  of  staff  to  (Jen.  '!'.


J.  Jackson. In  iw<5  he  wa«  elect. ,1  to  th*  chair
moral  philosophy  in  the  Univei  ta. The

'b'gn f  l>.  I>.  wax  conferred  on  him  by  Hamiiden

Sidney  college  in  1H.W,  a,„i  ,|m,  ,,f  |.|.  |,  u  t\w
Southwestern Presbyterian in  mi.,  in

1877,  and  simultaneous]}  by  Hampden  Sidney  <-ol-
lege, Besides  being  a  roluminous  i
periodical literature, Dr. Dabney I

"  Life of Rev. l>r. I\  S.  Sump^n  rid.

1864);  "Life  of  Cm.  T.  J.  (Stonewall)  .Ul-.i,"
(London,  1864): •>...  r.d Rhetoric"  (Richmond,
1866);  ••  Defence  of  Virginia  and  the  Soutl
York.  \Ht]X):  "Sensualistie  Philosophy  of  the  Nine-
teentfa  Caatnry  Considersd ]*(1876  .  ••  \  I

Systematic and Polemic ThaolofTJ  lia,

1878);  and  "The  Christian  SabUth  '<  Philadelphia,
lHHlj.-Charles  William,  son  of  I
chemist,  b,  in  Hampden-8idney,  Va..  ISJai
He  was  mduated  at  Hampden  BMnsj  eofiage  la

1878,  and.  after  leaching  fora  year,  ipenl  somejj  inu-

at  the  University  of  Yire;inia.  following special  »tu|f- •*

ies.  principally  scientific.  In  1*77  he  became  |fff  •'
feesor  of  chemistry  and  miaenJagy  in  Kmut*  and
Henry  college,  but  relinquished  this  chair  at  the
end  of  a  year  and  visited  Germany,  when-  in  1880
he  received  the  degree  <>f  Ph.  I),  from  the  Univ.  r-
sityof  GOttingen.  In  October,  1880,  he  became
state  chemist  of  North  Carolina  and  director  of
the  North  Carolina  agricultural  experiment  station,
and  to  these  offices  was  added,  in  November,  181
that  of  director  of  the  North  Carolina  weather
service.  He  has  edited  numerous  technical  circu-
lars giving  valuable  scientific  information  to  farm-
ers, and  prepared  the  annual  rc|K>rts  from  \>n*l
till  1880.  Dr.  Dabney  is  a  member  of  several  sci-
entific societies,  and  has  been  secretary  <>f  the
American  association  of  official  agricultural  cbsSJH
isK  editing  in  that  capacity  the  reports  <>f  their
proceedings.  He  has  discovered  Dumsruua  miner-
als in  North  Carolina,  not  preTioasly  known  m
that  state,  such  a-  tin  and  arsenic  ores,  and  h<-  has
published  scientific  investigations  in  the  "Ameri-
can Chemical  Journal."

DABNEY,  VlrgtaJaa, author, b. at  Bmlngtoa,
Gloucester  co..  Vs.,  15  Feb,  1885,  He  **•>  j:radu-
ated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1865,  and
practised  law.  But  be  had  almndoned  this  profes-
sion for  literature  when  the  ciul  war  began  in
1861.  He  became  a  staff  officer  in  the  Confederate
army,  and  served  through  the  war.  Hs  has  pub-
lished "The  Story  of  Don  Miff,  as  told  b]  hla
Friend.  John  Bouchs  Whacker,  a  Symphony  "f
Life  "(Philadelphia,  1886).  This  book'  reached  its
fourth  edition  in  six  months,

I>  VBOI.I..  Nathan,  edncator,  b.  aU.ut  1 7M» :  d.
in  Oroton,  Conn..  !»  March.  1*1*. He  was  fam
as  a  teacher,  and  Instructed  as  many  as  LOOO  |- r-
soos  in  navigation. He  published  a  treatise  an
arithmetic,  entitled  ths"flohoolmssteraAsrii

(New  London,  1  ?!«•),  which  wai  for  a  long  tune  a
standard  text-book;  aU.  the  "Practical  Na\iga-
t.>r."  Ill  1  TT.'t  he  l*-gan  the  annual  publication  of
the  "  Connect i« m Almanac."— Hi-  son,  Nathan,

b.  in  Oroton,  Conn,  m  1781;  d,  there  in  1868,  was
a  member  of  the  nsiaoulnil  boassoi  rvpresrnta-
tives  in  1889  ^of  the  senate  la  1885-'6, and  judge
of  probata  la  Bs  *«  joint  ami.,  i


•  In  a  work  like  thin  there  Is  iilvvnv*  difflrultv  in  deridinp  where  to  place  m»ny  <>f  I
general  rule  In.  that  If  the  asm  riirinal  form,  it  •boa Id  he  placed  and.  r  the  initial  letter


if  the  panicle  ha*  ronlenred  with  the  main  word,  it  ohould  be  found  under  I>
here,  he  should  look  for  it  under  another  Utter.


If  the


thai  begin  with  I*. The
!.<•  main  word  :  bat

ant  MMBSWS  i^nw


52


DABOUR


DADD


Daboll's  "New  Arithmetic,"  and  compiled  the
"New  England  Almanac"  from  his  father's  de.it h
in  1818  until  his  own  death. — David  Austin,  son
of  the  second  Nathan,  1).  in  (i  rot  on,  Conn.,  in  1813,
sat  continuously  in  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives from  1846  till  1871,  and  then  served  a  term
in  the  senate.  He  assisted  his  father  in  the  prepa-
ration  of  the  "New  Arithmetic,"  and  since  his
father's  death  has  continued  the  publication  of  the
"  New  England  Almanac." — Another  son,  Celadon
Leeds,  inventor,  b.  in  Centre  Groton,  Conn.,  18
July,  1818 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  13  Oct.,
1866,  was  a  merchant  in  New  London,  and  from
1854  till  1861  was  employed  in  the  interior  de-
partment at  Washington.  He  conceived  the  idea
of  applying  the  principle  of  the  clarionet  to  a  large
trumpet,  to  serve  as  a  fog  signal  for  mariners. —
Another  grandson  of  Nathan,  Charles  Miner,  in-
ventor, b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,  14  Oct.,  1823,  was
trained  as  a  practical  mechanic  in  the  works  of  the
Wilson  manufacturing  company,  New  London,  of
which  he  rose  to  be  superintendent.  He  is  the  in-
ventor of  the  cast-iron  bell-bottom  jack-screw  bar-
rel, now  in  general  use  throughout  the  world,  for
raising  buildings  and  other  massive  objects,  and  of
a  lathe  for  cutting  the  thread  of  jack-screws,  which
has  been  in  successful  operation  for  twenty-five
years,  as  has  also  his  oval  slide  parallel  bench-vise.
He  has  invented  also  a  breast-drill,  a  self-centring
brace  for  bits,  a  mowing-machine,  and  the  Dabofi
bushing.  He  developed  his  cousin's  suggestion  of
a  steam  fog-trumpet,  consisting  of  a  steel  reed  vi-
brating within  a  horn,  using  a  hot-air  engine  to
force  cold  air  by  means  of  an  air-pump  into  a
boiler,  from  which  it  escapes  into  the  horn  through
a  valve,  causing  the  vibrations  of  the  reed,  which
are  regulated  by  an  automatic  cam.  He  has  held
various  local  offices,  and  in  recent  years  that  of
U.  S.  government  inspector,  for  Connecticut  and
Rhode  Island,  of  boilers  on  steam  vessels.

DABOUR,  John,  artist,  b.  in  Smyrna,  Asia,  in
1837.  He  was  a  pupil  at  the  Academy  of  fine
arts  irf  Paris,  and  studied  also  at  the  Art  museum
of  France.  Fifteen  years  of  his  professional  life
were  spent  in  the  United  States,  painting  portraits,
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  principal  cities  of  the
country,  but  chiefly  in  Baltimore.  Among  the
more  prominent  of  those  that  have  been  sitters  in
his  studio  are  Archbishop  Spaulding,  of  Baltimore ;
Archbishop  Purcell,  of  Cincinnati ;  Senator  Cam-
eron, of  Pennsylvania,  and  his  son;  Senator  Davis,
of  Virginia ;  and  Gov.  Groome,  of  Maryland.

DACIAN,  Jakob  (dah-see-an),  Danish  monk,  b.
in  Copenhagen  in  1496 ;  d.  in  Tarecuato,  Mexico,
in  1562.  He  belonged  to  the  Danish  royal  family,
became  a  Franciscan  at  the  age  of  twenty-four,  and
was  appointed  provincial  of  his  order  in  1529.  A
few  years  afterward  he  had  to  leave  his  country  to
escape  persecution  by  the  Lutherans,  and  went  to
Spain,  where  the  emperor,  Charles  V.,  recommend-
ed him  to  the  civil  and  church  authorities  of  New
Spain.  Dacian  at  once  left  for  Mexico,  and  there
filled  important  offices  in  his  order,  and  for  many
years  worked  most  successfully  as  a  missionary
among  the  Indians,  especially  in  the  provinces  of
Santo  Evangelio,  Michoacan,  and  Guadalajara.
He  preached  to  the  natives  in  their  Tarasc  lan-

?;uage,  which  he  mastered,'  as  well  as  Spanish,
jatin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  and  Arabic.  While  he  was
guardian  of  the  Tarecuato  coi.f  ent  he  founded  the
town  of  Arancara.  Dacian  left  many  works  in
various  languages,  most  of  which  have  been  lost.
The  best  known  is  his  "Declamacion  del  pueblo
barbaro  de  los  Indios,  que  habiendo  recibido  el
bautismo,  desean  recibir  los  demas  sacramentos."


DA  COSTA,  Jacob  M.,  physician,  b.  in  the  inl-
and of  St,  Thomas,  West  In. In-  7  K.I,..  1888.  His
literary  and  classical  education  was  received  in
Germany,  his  medical  in  Jefferson  college,  Phila-
delphia, where  he  was  graduated  in  1852,  and  in
the  hospitals  and  schools  of  Paris  and  Vienna,
where  he  passed  two  years.  In  1854  he  returned
to  Philadelphia,  established  himself  there  in  pno*
tice,  and  made  a  special  study  of  diseases  of  the
heart  and  lungs.  In  1864  he  was  appointed  lec-
turer on  clinical  medicine  in  Jefferson  medical  col-
lege, and  in  the  spring  of  1872  was  chosen  profes-
sor of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the
same  institution.  His  contributions  to  medical
literature  include  "  Epithelial  Tumors  and  Cancers
of  the  Skin  "  (1852) ;  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Patho-
logical Anatomy  of  Acute  Pneumonia"  (1855);
"  The  Physicians  of  the  Last  Century  "  (1&57) ;  "  On
Serous  Apoplexy"  (1859);  "Medical  Diagnosis,
with  Special  Reference  to  Practical  Medicine"
(1864) ;  and  "  Inhalation  in  the  Treatment  of  Dis-
eases of  the  Respiratory  Passages"  (1867).  He  has
also  contributed  many  articles  to  the  "Pennsyl-
vania Hospital  Reports,"  in  the  "  American  Journal
of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  and  his  clinical  lectures
have  appeared  in  the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Re-
porter and  the  "  Philadelphia  Medical  Times."

DACRES,  James  Richard,  British  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Lowestoft,  Suffolk,  England,  22  Aug.,
1788;  d.  at  his  country-seat  in  Hampshire,  3  Dec,
1853.  His  father  was  Vice-Admiral  Dacres,  who
in  the  Revolutionary  war  commanded  the  "  Carle-
ton,"  which  engaged  Gen.  Arnold's  flotilla  on  Lake
Champlain  in  1776.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1796
as  a  first-class  volunteer  on  board  the  "  Serapis,"
commanded  by  his  father,  with  whom  he  also
served  on  the  "  Barfleur  "  in  1797.  He  afterward
accompanied  the  expedition  against  Ferrol,  in  Au-
gust, 1800,  and  was  present,  in  the  "  Boadicea,"  in
the  action  with  the  French  ship  "  Duguay  Trouin,"
in  August,  1803.  He  received  his  first  commission
15  Nov.,  1804,  and  on  5  July,  1805,  was  given  com-
mand of  the  sloop  "Elk,"  from  which  he  was
transferred,  14  Jan.,  1806,  to  the  "  Bacchante."  On
14  Feb.,  1807,  he  captured  the  French  schooner
"  Dauphin,"  and  after  other  distinguished  services
returned  to  England  in  December,  1807.  On  16
March,  1811.  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  "  Guerriere,"  and  participated  in  the  pursuit  of
the  "  Constitution,"  having  previously  had  his  ves-
sel's name  vauntingly  printed  in  large  letters  on
her  foretopsail,  and  inquired  of  every  ship  he  met
for  the  "President,"  intimating  that  he  would
chastise  her  for  the  punishment  she  had  given  the
"  Little  Belt."  After  the  loss  of  the  "  Guerriere  "
he  was  transferred  to  the  "  Constitution,"  and  was
put  on  shore,  on  parole,  at  Boston,  on  31  Aug.,
1812.  By  the  court-martial  that,  on  6  October  fol-
lowing, assembled  on  board  the  "  Africa,"  at  Hali-
fax, to  try  Capt.  Dacres  for  surrendering  his  ship
to  the  enemy,  he  was  honorably  acquitted  of  all
blame  for  her  loss.  While  in  command  of  the
"Tiber"  he  took,  on  8  March,  1815,  the  American
privateer  "Leo."  He  was  on  duty  on  the  New-
foundland and  Channel  stations  from  1833  till
1837.  He  attained  flag  rank  28  June,  1838,  and  in
1845  was  appointed  commander-in-chief  at  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  See  Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson's
address  on  "Commodore  Isaac  Hull  and  the  Frig-
ate Constitution"  (New  York,  1880).

DADD,  George  H.,  veterinary  surgeon,  b.
about  1813.  He  was  a  native  of  England,  but  re-
moved to  the  United  States  in  1839.  He  turned
his  attention  to  the  diseases  of  the  brute  creation,
and  became  a  successful  practitioner. He  pub-


DADF


MAUI/


m


Hohcd  "The  Modern  Bom  Doctor  "(Nui v-.rk.
,  ;  ••  The  Manual  of  Vcterinarj  Scieni
a. iiny  tod  Physiology  of  the  llor>c"  fBoston,
;  ana  "  The  A  r."

DADE.  Francis  Langhorn.  soldier,  l>.  in  Vir-
i\  killed  by  indiana  near  Pari  King,  Fl.i
Dec,  1H35.  He  was  appointed  third  lieutenant  in
the  19th  infantry  on  18  March,  1813,  became  lir>t
lieutenant  in  1816,  OSPtoJn  in  1*1*.  ami  brevet  major
in  L8S8L  Whan  killed  ho  was  on  the  march  to  Kort
g  with  a  detachment,  which  was  nearly  destroyed
by  a  treacherous  attack  of  the  S«»miin»lf  Indians.  A
beautiful  monument  was  erected  at  Wool  Point  to
Ml  memory  and  that  of  his  command.

I>\<.(«,  John  L.,  eduoator,  b,  in  Middleburg,
Loudon  co.,  Va.,  18  Pub.,  171)4;  d.  in  Hayncsvillc,
Ala.,  11  June,  1884.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Bap-
tist ministry  In  1  Si 7,  preached  for  some  vears  m
Virginia,  and  in  1  s*J.">  removed  to  Philadelphia,  l'a.,
where  he  became  pastor  of  the  r>th  Baptist  church.
Retiring  from  the  j>astorate  in  1833  on  account  of
a  diseased  throat,  he  thenceforth  devoted  himCtU
to  teaching  and  authorship.  In  1836  he  took  charge
of  the  Alabama  female  athenivum  in  Tuscaloosa,
and  in  1844  was  made  president  of  Mercer  univer-
sity at  Penfield,  (ia.,  where  he  remained  for  twelve
years,  giving  instruction  in  theology  in  addition  to
his  duties  as  president.  In  1856  he  resigned  the
presidency  of  Mercer  university.  His  published
works  are  "  Manual  of  Theology  " ;  "  Treatise  on
Church  Order";  "Elements  of  Moral  Science";
'•  Evidences  of  Christianity";  and  several  pamph-
lets, including  "The  More  Excellent  Way  ;  M  An
Interpretation  of  John  III.:  5" J  "An  Essay  in
Defence  of  Strict  Communion  " ;  and  "  A  Decisive
Argument  against  Infant  Baptism,  furnished  by
One  of  its  Own  Proof-Texts."

DACHGrETT,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  Attleborough,
Mass.,  31  Dec,  1764;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  12
April,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783,
studied  and  practised  law  in  New  Haven,  became
state's  attorney  in  1811,  mayor  of  the  city  in  1828,
and  held  other  local  offices.  From  1791  till  1813
he  was  a  member  of  the  Connecticut  legislature,
serving  in  17U4  as  speaker,  and  from  1797  till  1804
and  lsoii  till  1813  as  a  member  of  the  council  or
upper  house.  He  voted  as  a  presidential  elector
for  Charles  C.  Pinckney  in  1804  and  1808,  and  for
DeWitt  Clinton  in  1812.  He  was  elected  a  V.  S.
senator  in  the  place  of  Chauncev  Goodrich,  who
resigned,  and  served  from  24  May,  1813,  till  3
March,  1819,  when  he  returned  to  his  extensive
practice  at  the  bar  in  Connecticut.  From  18M
till  1832  he  was  a  judge  of  the  Connecticut  supreme
court,  and  then  chief  judge  till  1834,  when  hi
reached  the  age  of  seventy  years,  and  was  retired
under  the  statute.  He  became  an  instructor  in  the
New  Haven  law-school  in  1824,  and  was  professor
of  jurisprudence  from  1826  until  he  was  compelled
by  the  infirmities  of  age  to  resign  the  chair.  A
■Ketch  of  his  life  by  the  Bar.  Samuel  w.  s.  Dot-
ton,  1).  I).,  appeared  in  1851.— His  son,  Oliver
Ellsworth,  clergvman,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn..
14  Jan.,  1810;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn..  1  Sept..  1880.
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1828.  studied  in  the  law-
school  at  New  Haven,  and,  after  being  admitted
to  the  l»ar  in  1881,  spent  two  "years  in  thedivinity-
■ehooL  From  1837  till  1848  he  was  pastor  of  the
South  Ohuroh  in  Hartford.  Conn.,  and  of  the
Congregational  church  in  Caiiandaigua,  N.  Y..
from  1845  till  1867.  In  September  of  the  letter
year  he  was  chosen  professor  of  divinitv  at  Vale,
where  he  remained  till  l*To.  officiating  during  the

hum  period  as  pastor  of the college ohuroh.

From  1*71  till  1877  he  was  minister  of  the  Congre-


gational  ehunh in New Lond  . after

which he  resided  in Hartf.

■one  end  magazine  article*,  assisted  in  compiling

a  booh  of  peihns  end  Iran  (1M&  and  left  •

small  volume  of  i  inted  posthumously

DAGtiE  IT,  Naphtail,  •■!.  rgvman,  b.  in
iHinuigh.  Mass.,  8  Sept..  17*7;  d.  in  N
OMUL, 80  HOT-  1780.  Hi*  grandfather  was  the  great-
grandfather of  David  Daggett.  He  ru graduated
at  Vale  in  1748,  '  i  lied  theology,  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Smith  town,
L.  I.,  in  1751,  and' in  1756  became  profa—or  of
divinity  at  Vale,  which  post  he  retained  until  hi*
death.'  When  President  Clapp  resigned  in  1788,
he  was  ehosen  praaklantare  trmporr,  m  which  oa-

pae'tv  he  otlieiated  until  1777,  when  he  was  auo-
eeeded  by  Dr.  Ezra  stil.->. w

attacked  New  Haven  in  July.  ]',','.!,  Dr.  Itaggett
took  |»art  in  the  defence  with  a  shot-gun,  but  was
taken  prisoner,  and  compelled  hv  the  enemy  to  act
as  a  guide,  and  rejicatedly  pricked  with  bayonet*  un-
til his  strength  failed,  and  he  never  fully  recovered.
He  published  several  sermons  and  an  account  of
the  famous  dark  dav  in  New  Kngland  <17*U>.

DAHLOHKN.  John  Adolph.  naval  officer,  b.
in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  ||  Nov.,  QOv;  d.  in  Washing-
ton,  I).  C.,  12  July,  1N70.  His  father,  Bernard
Ulric  Dahlgren,  was  Swedish  OOnesJ  at  Philadel-
phia till  his  death  in  1824.  The  great  ofcjeel  sf
the  son's  early  ambition  was  to  enter  the  narv  of
the  United  States,  and  he  reooirad  his  Bddahh>
man's  warrant  on  1  Feb.,  1826,  making  his  first
cruise  in  the  "  Macedonian."  of  the  Brazil  squadron,
in  1827-'9.  He
was  attached  to
the  sloop  "Onta-
rio," of  the  Medi-
terranean squad-
ron, in  I8o0--J.
and  made  passed
midshipman  in
the  latter  year,
and  in  1834,  ow-
ing to  his  mathe-
matical proficien-
cy, detailed  for
duty  on  the  coast
survey. In  this

year  he wrote  a

series  of  letters
on  naval  tonios
to  the  Philadel-
phia "  National
Gazette,"  signed
"  Blue  -  Jacket."
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant  in  1837.  and
in  the  same  year  his  hitherto  exceptionally  fine
sight  became  "so  impaired  by  incessant  lalx-r  a«
to  threaten  entire  l<-s  of  vision,  and  an  absosntS
tied.  During  this  period  ol  anlsreal
inaction  Lieut.  Dahlgren  resided  on  a  farm.  In
1842 he resumed  duty,  and in 1*4^  went t«>  the

Meditermneen  in  the  frigate  "Oesiherinwd"  re-
turning late  in  1*45  to  the  United  Mate*,  the
oruies  ha\ing  been  shortened  by  the  prospa

war  with  Mexico. In  January,  1H47.  Lieu1

gren  was  assigned  t<>  ordnance  duty  at  Washing-
ton, although  he  desired,  and  made  an  effort  to
obtain.  active  duty  at  sea.  Then  began  those
lalx>rs  as  an  ordnance  08*001  which  for  sixteen
vears  demanded  the  most  extraordinary  energT*
and  which  finallv  made  Dahlgr
name,  and  gese  hint  the  world's  recognition  as  a
man  of  tcienoe  and  mrentivs  genius,  nenwrar
most  at  once  the  defects  in  gunnery  then  existing,


yr*~* — .


54


DA  II LG  REX


DAIILGREN


and  soon  offered  the  remedy  in  the  style  of  can-
non known  by  his  name,  which  for  so  many  years
constituted  the  naval  armament  of  the  United
States.  It  was  proposed  by  him  in  1850,  and  the
first  gun  according  to  his  design  was  cast  in  May
of  that  year.  These  guns  are  of  iron,  cast  solid,
and  cooled  from  the  exterior.  They  are  distin-
guished by  great  thickness  at  the  breech,  rapidly
diminishing  from  the  trunnions  to  the  muzzle,  and
were  the  first  practical  application  of  results  ob-
tained by  experimental  determination  of  pressures
at  different  points  along  the  lx>re.  They  are  chiefly
smooth-bores  of  nine-  and  eleven-inch  calibre ;  but
Dahlgren  also  invented  a  rifled  cannon,  and  intro-
duced boat-howitzers  with  iron  carriages,  which
were  unsurpassed  for  combined  lightness  and  ac-
curacy. Under  the  sole  direction  of  Lieut.  Dahl-
gren, the  ordnance  department  at  Washington
acquired  the  most  extensive  additions,  including
the  foundry  for  cannon,  gun-carriage  shops,  the
experimental  battery,  and  equipment  of  all  kinds.
He  was  made  commander  in  1855,  and,  in  order  to
introduce  innovations  that  completely  revolution-
ized the  armament  of  the  navy,  and  to  remove  ob-
jections particularly  to  his  eleven-inch  gun,  which
was  then  considered  too  heavy  for  use  at  sea,  he
was  permitted  to  equip  the  sloop-of-war  "  Plym-
outh entirely  as  he  wished.  The  experimental
cruise  of  this  vessel  lasted  from  1857  till  1859.  He
was  on  ordnance  dutv  at  the  Washington  navy-
yard  in  1860-1,  and  on  22  April,  1861,  after  the
resignation  of  Franklin  Buchanan,  who  entered
the  Confederate  service,  was  given  command  of  the
yard,  which  was  not  only  of  great  importance  on
account  of  naval  resources,  but  also  as  the  key  of
the  defences  of  Washington  on  the  left.  Com-
mander Dahlgren  hastened  to  secure  the  only  route
left  to  the  capital  by  the  Potomac  river,  and,  when
Alexandria  was  seized,  he  moved  down  the  left
wing  of  the  column  under  Col.  Ellsworth.  He  was
appointed  chief  of  the  ordnance  bureau  on  18  July,
1862,  and  shortly  afterward  promoted  to  be  cap-
tain, his  commission  being  antedated  to  16  July.
On  7  Feb.,  1863,  he  was  made  a  rear-admiral,  re-
ceiving at  the  same  time  the  thanks  of  congress,
and  ten  years  additional  on  the  active  list,  which,
however,  he  did  not  live  to  enjoy.  In  July,  1863,
he  was  ordered  to  relieve  Admiral  Dupont  in  the
command  of  the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron. In  July,  August,  and  September  of  that  year
he  co-operated  with  the  land  forces  under  Gen.
Gillmore  in  various  attacks  on  the  defences  of
Charleston,  and  succeeded,  by  silencing  Fort  Sum-
ter and  the  batteries  on  Morris  island,  in  obtaining
for  the  monitors  a  safe  anchorage  inside  the  bar,
thus  putting  a  stop  to  blockade-running.  His  fail-
ure to  take  Charleston  provoked  some  hostile  criti-
cism, but  his  operations  had  the  continuous  ap-
proval of  the  navy  department.  He  led  a  successful
expedition  up  St.  Jonn's  river  in  February,  1864,
to  aid  in  throwing  a  military  force  into  Florida,
co-operated  with  Sherman  in  the  capture  of  Savan-
nah, on  23  Dec,  and  entered  Charleston  with
Gen.  Schimmelpfennig  on  its  evacuation  in  Febru-
ary, 1865.  In  1866  he  was  given  command  of  the
South  Pacific  squadron.  lie  was  again  chief  of
the  ordnance  bureau  in  1868-'70,  and  1l  few  months
before  his  death  was  relieved  at  his  own  request
and  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Washington
navy-yard.  His  death  was  the  result  of  heart-dis-
ease. Admiral  Dahlgren  was  a  man  of  great  per-
sonal bravery,  dignified  in  manner,  and  of  exem-
plary character.  He  published  many  scientific
works  on  ordnance,  which  have  been  used  as  text-
books in  the  navy. They  include  "Thirty-two-


B Minder  Practice  for  Rangers  "  (1850) :  "  System  of
oat-Armament  in  the  U. S.  Navy n (1888 ;  French
translation,  1855);  "Naval  Percussion  Locks  and
Primers"  (1852);  "Ordnance  Memoranda"  (1853)  j
"  Shells  and  Shell-Guns."  explaining  his  own  sys-
tem (1856);  and  various  reports  on  ordnance,  arm-
ored vessels,  and  coast  defences.  After  his  death
appeared  "  Notes  on  Maritime  and  International
Law,"  with  a  preface  by  his  widow,  indicating  the
plan  of  an  uncompleted  work  (Boston,  1877).  See
"  Memoir  of  John  A.  Dahlgren,"  by  his  widow
(Boston,  1882). — His  son,  UlrFc,  b.  in  Bucks  county,
Pa.,  in  1842 ;  d.  near  King  and  Queen's  Court-House,
Va.,  4  March,  1864,  removed  to  Washington  with
his  father  in  1848.  In  the  intervals  of  study  he
spent  his  time  in  the  navy-yard,  where  he  became
familiar  with  the  construction  and  use  of  artillery,
and  was  taught  by  the  sailors  to  swim  and  row.
He  began  the  study  of  civil  engineering  in  1858,
and  in  1860  began  also  to  study  law  in  Philadel-
phia ;  but,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  he  re-
turned to  Washington,  and  just  after  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run  was  sent  by  his  father  to  place
and  take  charge  of  a  naval  battery  on  Maryland
heights.  He  then  became  aide  to  Gen.  Sigel,  and
served  through  Fremont's  mountain  campaign
and  through  Pope's  campaign,  acting  as  Sigel's
chief  of  artillery  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.
In  November,  1862,  he  attacked  Fredericksburg  at
the  head  of  Sigel's  body-guard  of  57  men,  and
held  the  town  for  three  hours,  returning  with  81
prisoners,  and  for  his  gallantry  was  detailed  as
special  aide  on  Gen.  Burnside's  staff.  He  was  after-
ward on  Gen.  Hooker's  staff,  distinguished  himself
at  Chancellorsville,  and  as  aide  to  Gen.  Meade  per-
formed much  dangerous  and  important  service  in
the  Gettysburg  campaign  at  the  head  of  a  hundred
picked  men.  On  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  from
Gettysburg  he  led  the  charge  into  Hagerstown,
and  was  severely  wounded  in  the  foot.  His  leg
was  amputated,  and  for  a  time  his  life  was  in  dan-
ger ;  but  he  recovered,  was  promoted  to  colonel  for
his  gallantry,  and,  though  obliged  to  walk  on
crutches,  returned  at  once  to  active  service.  He
lost  his  life  in  a  raid  planned  by  him,  in  concert
with  Gen.  Kilpatrick,  to  release  the  Union  prison-
ers at  Libby  prison  and  Belle  Isle.  A  memoir  of
him,  written  by  his  father,  was  revised  and  pub-
lished by  his  stepmother  (Philadelphia,  1872). —
Admiral  Dahlgren's  second  wife,  Madeleine  Vin-
ton, b.  in  Gallipolis,  Ohio,  about  1835,  is  a  daughter
of  Samuel  F.  Vinton,  for  over  twenty  years  a  lead-
er of  the  whig  party.  At  an  early  age  she  married
Daniel  Convers  Goddard,  of  Zanesvdle,  who  died,
leaving  two  children.  She  married  Admiral  Dahl-
gren on  2  Aug.,  1865,  and  has  three  children  of
this  marriage.  As  early  as  1859  she  published
sketches  and  poems  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Co-
rinne."  In  1870-'3  she  actively  opposed  the  move-
ment for  female  suffrage,  and  drew  up  a  petition
to  congress,  which  was  extensively  signed,  asking
that  the  right  to  vote  should  not  be  extended  to
women.  The  literary  society  of  Washington,  of
which  she  was  one  of  the  founders,  held  its  in. .  t-
ings  in  her  house  for  six  years,  and  she  was  elected
its  vice-president.  She  was  for  some  time  presi-
dent of  "  The  Ladies'  Catholic  Missionary  Society
of  Washington,"  and  has  built  the  chapel  of  "  St.
Joseph's  of  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus,  in  South
Mountain,  Md.  Mrs.  Dahlgren's  works  include
"Idealities"  (Philadelphia,  1859);  "Thoughts  on
Female  Suffrage"  (Washington,  1871);  "South
Sea  Sketches  "  (Boston.  1881) ;  "  Etiquette  of  Social
Life  in  Washington  "  (Philadelphia,  1861) ;  "  South
Mountain  Magic"  (1882);  "A  Washington  Win-


daii.i.i:


DAI.K


n


BOinof  John  A.  DuUgffM  " IH82);

ati-l  •• 'I'lir  I... -i  N'.uii.  "  and  "  Lights  and  Shad
of  a  Life  "  (Boston,  1hk«). She  has  translated  from
the  l-'nii.  li,  Montaiembert'e  •I'm-.  i\"  and  De
Chambrune  "Executive  Power"  (Lancaster,
1874),  tin'  prefaoa  i<>  tin-  latter  being  written  by

.lain.-  A.  Garfield,  and  from  the  Spanish,  D

Oortes'i  ■•  ('atl)iilicisin.  Liberalism,  and  Socialism,"

for  wiii.li  -\u-  reoeiTed  the  thanks  ..f  Pim  i\.

HUII  i:.  Pi.  lie.  •  Icrgvnian.  b,  in  France  in
1649;  '1.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  si  May.  1715.  He  bad
Uvn  a  professor  at  Snumur.  one  of  tin-  four  great
Protestant  schools  of  France. The  school  WSJ  <\<  -

atrored  by  order  of  LooJs  XIV.  in  1686,  ami  about

H\Hi\  Daille  was  Iwnishcd  on  account  ol  his  Huguc-
not  faith,  and  was  called  brthe  consistory  ofthe
Reformed  ohoroh  in  New  S'ork  to  lain.r  for  the
French  then-.  The  scattered  Huguenot  famflioi
in  Staten  Island.  Bushwick,  Hackcnsack,  and  Har-
lem were  also  under  his  can-.  In  1680  Bar,  Lan-
rentius  Vandenboaoh  drew  away  two  thirds  of  hi*
country  oongiagjaUilMI.  and  established  a  new
church  on  Staten  Island,  hut  he  was  ansponded  a
few  years  later,  and  in  L6M  the  chur«  lies  were  re-
united. Daille  received  a  ooUeejrae,  Pastor  Paint,
in  1687,  and  from  that  time  till  1092  he  was  an
itinerant.  l*p  to  1688  the  French  congregation
worshipped  in  the  Dutch  church  in  the  fort,  but  in
that  year  they  put  up  a  church  of  their  own  in
Marketficld  street,  or  Petticoat  lane,  half  way  l>e-
tween  Broad  and  Whitehall  streets.  In  1698  Daille
fell  under  Jacob  Leisler's  displeasure  for  exhorting
the  commander  to  meekness,  and  disapproving  of
his  violent  measures,  and  both  he  and  Peiret  were
threatened  with  imprisonment.  Notwithstanding
this,  the  pastor  showed  his  Christian  spirit  by  sub-
sequently endeavoring  to  prevent  Leisler's  execu-
tion. Pot  his  efforts  in  this  matter  he  was  cited
before  the  assembly  and  narrowly  escaped  impris-
onment as  a  "promoter  of  sedition."  lie  went  to
Boston  in  1696,  took  charge  of  the  School  street
church,  and  remained  there  till  his  death.  The
Boston  "  News- Letter  "  spoke  of  him  as  "  a  Person
of  great  Piety,  Charity,  affable  and  courteous  Beha-
viour, and  of  an  exemplary  Life  and  Conversation."
VAIN,  Charles,  French  magistrate,  b.  in  (iua-
deloti|M\  West  Indies,  20  Sept.,  |818;  d.  there  in
1873.  He  was  graduated  in  law  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Paris.  Having  made  the  acquaintance
of  the  economist  Consiuerant,  he  neglected  his
profession  for  communistic  disputes,  and  Uramc  a
follower  of  the  phalansterian  doctrines,  then  pro-
fessed by  Fourier,  Knfantin,  and  Marquis  de  Saint
Simon.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  Euro-
pean congress  that  was  opened  in  Paris  in  1888  by
the  French  royal  historical  institute,  and  opjiosed
the  Christian  philosophers  Buchez  and  Roux-La-
vergne.  He  was  a  contributor  to  "La  democratic
pacifique,"  in  which  he  denounced  slavery  and
urged  its  abolition  in  the  French  ootonias.  After
the  revolution  of  1848  the  slaves  emancipated  in
Guadeloupe  elected  Dain  their  representative  in
the  French  chamber  of  deputies,  ami  soon  his  radi-
cal colleagues  recognized  him  as  their  leader.  As
such  he  denounced  the  conduct  of  President  Ca-
vaignac,  and  went  so  far  as  to  a.sk.  on  the  Moor  of
the  legislative  assembly,  for  the  immediate  arn-t
of  the  i. resident  and  all  the  members  of  his  cabi-
net. When  LovJi  Napoleon  was  elected  president

of  the  republic,  Dain  tendered  his  resignation,  but

tin- assembly  refused  to  accept  it. He  return

delonpe  in  1888  ss  judge  of  titer  f  ill!  (hf  court,
which  office  he  held  until  hi

l>  V  K  I  N . Thoina> SpciioM^icn-haltUrjL
Orange  county.  N.  Y.,  in ls/c.^«UifWD4*X&V  1:


1 1- was  the  eldest  of  four  children.

and.  until  he  wan  seventeen  vear*  of  m&>,  worked

-•li  his  father'*  farm. He  then  walked

enty-flve  miles,  t.«  Sew  Y.-rk.  and  beg
office-boy.  In  1858  he  established  the  firm  of
ThMMS  S.  Dakin  \  Co.,  eommiaaioo  agents,  con*
tinning  it  until  1881,  when  he  i-opigrd  iii  the  oil
trade,  and  became  the  head  of  the  flrm  of  Dak  III  A
Oulick.  In  1870  In-  retired  from  biuineaa.  He
was  elected  captain  in  the  i:tth  regiment  Brook-
lyn, in  1868,  and  served  in  the  \  <»paigB
as  a  member  of  the  staff  of  i  k.  who  then
commanded  the  5th  bi  ■  he  be-
came major-general  of  militia,  and
known  as  a  member  of  tie

He  es|MH'iallv practised shooting at hag  ran^r.
and  took  part  in  the  first  international  conti
Oeedaoor  in  September,  1874.  when  th-

team, under Maj. Leash, wan defeated I
American  team. In  the  following  year  the
cans  again  defeated  the  Irish  team  at  Doll)  V

Ireland,  when  tien.  Dakin  made  the  remarkable
vore  of  l(k")  in  a  pissihle  1N».  He  was  afterward
elected  a  member  of  the  legion  of  honor  of  France.
In  the  international  match  in  l*?ii.  wksn  the
Americans  defeated  teams  from  Inland.  Scotland,
Australia,  and  Canada,  their  success  was  mainly
due  to  the  instructions  of  (Jen.  Dakin.  In  tkefrsl
day's  shooting  he  made  the  highest  score,  20tf.  He
also  took  part  m  the  Irish-American  n  turn  match
of  the  same  year,  when  his  soote  was  again  the
highest,  row  lung  ->,,s.  lb-  was  the  "lily  rifleman
that  sle.t  in  every  international. contest  held  either

in  this  country  or  in  Europe. He  »ns  a  director
in  the  National  and  several  other  rifle  association*.
In  1876  he  was  the  democratic  DOmls
gives  man  in the  third  congressional  district,  but
was  defeated  bv  a  small  majority.

DAM  HO,  Frederick,  phvsii  ian.  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1??<»;  d.  ill  Charleston.  S.  C.,  84  N-v  .
1886, His father,  a distinguished officer under

Frederick  the  Great,  had  retired  to  Finland  for
his  health,  and  at  his  death  Frederick  came  to  Bal-
timore. Md..  at  the  invitation  of  his  uncle,  vko
had  remoTed  t<>  that  place  a  few  yean*  before.
Here  he  received  a  classical  education, and  then
studied  medicine,  giving  sjxvial  attention  to  bot-
any. He  then  entered  the  medical  depart moM  of
the  army,  and  was  stationed  at  Fort  Johnson,
Charleston  barter,  but,  in  eonseqnence  of  some
difficulty  with  his  brother  officers,  resigned  fan
1799,  and  practised  in  Charleston,  when-  he  was
active  in  establishing  the  botanioal  garden. About

iso:  he  left  his  praotioa  and  became  one  of  the
editors  ..f  the  Charleston  '-Courier."  adaflj  Fed-
eral  newspaper.  Be  began  to  be  interested  In  theo-
logical stuibes  in  1811,  was  ordained  deaeoa  in  Iks
Proteatanl  Episcopal  church  in  ihu,  and  priest  in

1«1H.  On  88  Feb..  1X19,  he  became  assistant  min-
ister of  St.  Michael's  church.  Charleston,  where  be
remained  until  his  death,  A  monument,  erected
t..  his  niemorv  bv  the  vestrv,  stands  near  the  s..uth
.l.w.r  of  the  Church.  Dr.  Daldio  published  'The
Kvidenceof  the  Divinity  of  Our  Saviour"  (Charles-
ton. 1880);  ••  Historical" Account  of  the  Protestant
gpisoopei  Chnrck  in  S.uth  Carolina"  (1880);  and
••  Vhiman  Hezon,"  for  the  in-  of  fn-<Mnasons(lMBL,

DALB,  James  Wilkinson,  author,  b.  m  Caiit-
well's  Bridge  tnow  Odessa!  Bat,  II  Oot,  1818;  d
,„  Media.  1'...  I'-'  April,  I88t  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  Of  Pennsylvania,  in  lHttl.  at  the
head  of  his  cla-ss",  and  began  the  study  of  law.  but
abandoned  it  for  that  of  theology,  which  kt  pur-
sued at  Andoverand  Pi  lie  wished  i»k»
missionary,  and  wasappointed  by  the  Ameri-


56


DALE


DALE


can  board  to  a  station  in  India;  but  financial  em-
barrassment prevented  his  depart  tin-,  and  to  fit
himself  more  thoroughly  for  mission  work  he  en-
tered the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  where  ne  received  his  degree  in  1838.
He  had  been  ordained  at  Andover  in  1837,  and,
after  supplying  pulpits  in  Philadelphia,  was  agent
of  the  American  Bible  society  in  1838-'45.  He
then  held  pastorates  at  Ridley,  Middletown,  Media,
and  Wayne,  Pa.,  till  1876,  when  he  retired  and
devoted  himself  to  literature.  Dr.  Dale  was  at  one
time  a  leader  in  the  temperance  movement  in
Media.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1868.  His  principal  work
is  an  exhaustive  "Inquiry  into  the  Meaning  of
Bmmfa  as  determined  by  Usage,"  including
"Classic  Baptism"  (Philadelphia,  1867) :  "Judaic
Baptism  "  (1869) ;  "  Johannic  Baptism  "  (1871) ;  and
"Christie  and  Patristic  Baptism"  (1874).  Dr.
Dale's  conclusions  are  adverse  to  the  views  of  the
Baptists  on  the  subject ;  but  the  work  is  consid-
ered an  authority  by  scholars  of  all  other  denomi-
nations, and  has  received  from  them  the  highest
praise.  A  memorial  of  Dr.  Dale  was  written  by
the  Rev.  James  Roberts,  D.  D.  (Philadelphia,  print-
ed privately,  1886).

DALE,  Richard,  naval  officer,  b.  near  Norfolk,
Va.,  6  Nov.,  1 75(> ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Feb.,
1826.  He  entered  the  merchant  service  at  the  age
of  twelve,  and  at  nineteen  commanded  a  ship.  In
1776  he  became  a  lieutenant  in  the  Virginia  navy,

and  was  soon
afterward  cap-
tured and  con-
fined in  a  pri-
son -  ship  at
Norfolk,where
some  royalist
school  -  mates
persuaded  him
to  embark  on
an  English
cruiser  against
the  vessels  of
his  state.  He
was  wounded
in  an  engage-
ment with  an
American  flo-
tilla,and,  while
confined  to  his
bed  in  Norfolk,
resolved  "  nev-
er again  to  put
himself  in  the
way  of  the  bullets  of  his  own  countrymen."  After
the  Declaration  of  Independence  he  became  a  mid-
shipman on  the  American  brig  "  Lexington,"  which
was  captured  on  the  coast  of  France  by  the  English
cutter  "Alert"  in  1777.  Dale  was  thrown  into
Mill  prison,  at  Plymouth,  with  the  rest  of  the  offi-
cers and  crew  of  the  "  Lexington,"  on  a  charge  of
high  treason,  but  escaped,  with  many  of  his  fellow-
prisoners,  in  February,  1778,  was  recaptured,  es-
caped again,  disguised  as  a  British  naval  officer,  and
reached  France,  where  he  joined  John  Paid  Jones's
squadron  as  master's  mate.  Jones  soon  made  him
first  lieutenant  of  the  "  Bon  Homme  Richard,"
and  in  that  capacity  he  fought  with  distinction  in
the  famous  battle  with  the  "  Serapis,"  on  23  Sept.,
1779,  and  received  a  severe  splinter  wound.  After
the  sinking  of  the  "Bon  Ilomme  Richard"  in
that  engagement,  Dale  served  with  Jones  in  the
"  Alliance. '  and  afterward  in  the  "  Ariel."  He  re-
turned to  Philadelphia  on  28  Feb.,  1781,  was  placed


on  the  list  of  lieutenants  in  the  navy,  and  joined
the  "  Trumbull,"  which  was  captured  in  Angus!  <>f
that  year  by  the  "Iris"  and  the  -.Monk."  Dait
received  his  third  wound  in  the  engagement.  He
was  exchanged  in  November,  obtained  leave  of  abi
sence,  and  served  on  letters  of  marque  and  in  the
merchant  service  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was
appointed  captain  in  1794,  but,  with  the  exception
of  a  short  cruise  in  the  "Ganges,"  during  the
troubles  with  France,  was  not  in  active  service  till
1801,  when  he  was  given  command  of  a  squadron
and  ordered  to  the  Mediterranean  during  the  hos-
tilities with  Tripoli  Although  he  was  greatly
hampered  by  his  instructions,  so  that  no  serious
enterprise  could  be  attempted,  he  prevented  the
Tripoli  tans  from  making  any  captures  during  his
command.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
April,  1802,  and  was  again  ordered  to  the  Medi-
terranean, but,  becoming  dissatisfied,  he  resigned
his  commission  on  17  Dec,  and,  having  gained  a
competency,  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  retirement.
Dale  enjoved  the  distinction  of  having  been  praised
by  Lord  Nelson,  who,  after  critically  watching  the
seamanship  of  the  commodore's  squadron,  said  that
there  was  in  the  handling  of  those  trans-Atlantic
ships  a  nucleus  of  trouble  for  the  navy  of  Great
Britain.  The  prediction  was  soon  verified.  Two
of  Com.  Dale's  sons  held  commissions  in  the  navy.
DALE,  Samuel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Rockbridge
county,  Va.,  in  1772;  d.  in  Lauderdale  county,
Miss.,  24  May,  1841.  His  parents  were  Pennsyl-
vanians  of  Scotch-Irish  extraction.  Samuel  went
with  them  in  1775  to  the  forks  of  Clinch  river,  Va.,
and  in  1783  to  the  vicinity  of  the  present  town  of
Greensborough,  Ga.  In  both  these  places  the.  fam-
ily lived  with  others  in  a  stockade,  being  exposed
to  frequent  attacks  from  Indians,  and  young  Dale
thus  became  familiar  with  savage  warfare.  After
the  death  of  his  parents  in  1791  he  enlisted  in  1793
as  a  scout  in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  and
soon  became  a  famous  Indian  fighter,  being  known
as  "Big  Sam."  His  most  noted  exploit  was  his
"canoe  fight,"  a  struggle  in  a  canoe  with  seven
Indians,  all  of  whom  he  killed.  This  remarkable
contest  took  place  on  13  Nov.,  1813.  at  Randon's
landing,  on  the  Alabama  river,  and  all  its  circum-
stances were  afterward  verified  before  the  Alabama
legislature.  The  death  of  the  last  of  the  Indians,
Tar-cha-chee,  a  noted  wrestler  and  the  most  famous
ball-player  of  his  clan,  is  thus  described  by  Dale :
"  He  paused  a  moment  in  expectation  of  my  attack,
but,  finding  me  motionless,  he  stepped  backward
to  the  bow  of  the  canoe,  shook  himself,  gave  the
war-whoop  of  his  tribe,  and  cried  out,  'Sam
tholocco,  Iana  dahmaska,  ia-lanestha-lipso-lipso-
lanestha ! '  '  Big  Sam.  I  am  a  man ;  I  am  coming,
come  on  ! '  As  Tie  said  this,  with  a  terrific  yell  he
bounded  over  the  dead  body  of  his  comrade,  and
directed  a  blow  at  my  head  with  his  rifle,  which
dislocated  my  left  shoulder.  I  dashed  the  bayonet
into  him.  It  glanced  around  his  ribs,  and,  the
point  hitching  to  his  backbone,  I  pressed  him  down.
As  I  pulled  the  weapon  out,  he  put  his  hands  upon
the  sides  of  the  canoe  and  endeavored  to  rise,  cry-
ing out,  '  Tar-cha-chee  is  a  man ;  he  is  not  afraid
to  die ! '  I  drove  my  bayonet  through  his  heart,"
Dale  commanded  a  battalion  of  Kentucky  volun-
teers against  the  Creeks  in  February,  1814,  and  in
December  carried  despatches  for  Gen,  Jackson  from
Georgia  to  New  Orleans  in  eight  days  with  only
one  horse.  After  the  war  he  became  a  trader  at
Dale's  Ferry,  Ala.,  was  appointed  colonel  of  militia,
held  various  local  offices,  and  was  a  delegate  in
1816  to  the  convention  that  divided  the  territory
ol  Mississippi. He  was  a  member  of  tiie  first  gen-


DALE


DALL


m


eral  assembly  <>f  Alaltama  territory  in  1*17.  ,,f  the
state  legislature  in 1819 -'»  ind  1  d  of

that  of  Mississippi  in  1886.  In  1881  hi  WH  one  of
nini-^i'in  to  locate  a  public  road  from  Tusca-
loosa through  IVnsiM-ola  to  Blak.lv  ami  Fort  Clai-
borne, and.  OB  tin-  i-< Miiplft i«>n  OX  hit  duty,  was
made  brigSdiflMMMnl  by  the  Alabama  legislature
and given a life-pension. In lH^Jl lie  was  ap-

B  fated  by  the  secretary  "f  war.  together;  with  Col.
eorge  S.  Gaines,  t<>  remove  tin-  Choctaw  Indians
to  thrir  new  bomfl  00  the  Arkansas  and  Bed  rivets,
See  "Life  and  Times  of  (Jen.  Sum.  Dale."  from
notes  of  his  own  OMIIWMlkHli,  bv  .John  F.  II.
Claiborne  (New  York.  1860).

DALE,  Sir  Thomas,  colonial  governor  of  Vir-
ginia: d.  near  Bantam.  East  Indies,  early  in  1620.
He  bad  been  a  soldier  of  distinction  in  the  Low
Countries,  and  had  been  knighted  by  Kin_'  James
in  June,  HMMi.  The  I^ondon  company,  before  the
retirement  of  Lord  Delaware,  had  sent  him  to  Vir-
ginia with  supplies,  and  on  his  arrival  in  the  Chesa-
peake he  assumed  the  government.  He  found  the
colony,  then  consisting  of  al>out  200  men.  in  gnat
des|H»ndencv  over  the  departure  of  Delaware,  and
gave  them  new  cause  for  sorrow  by  his  administra-
tion of  the  government,  which  he  carried  on  under
a  code  (chiefly  compiled  from  the  rules  of  war  of
the  United  Provinces)  sent  to  Virginia,  without
the  company's  authority,  by  its  treasurer,  Thomas
Smvthe.  Notwithstanding  this  introduction  of
martial  law,  Dale  has  received  praise  for  his  vigor
ami  industry.  Seeing  the  feeble  state  of  the  colony,
be  wrote  at  once  to  England  for  aid;  and  in  Au-
gust, 1611,  a  new  fleet  reached  Jamestown  under  Sir
Thomas  Gates,  who  relieved  Dale  in  the  govern-
ment. The  latter  continued,  however,  to  be  active
in  colonial  affairs,  founding  the  new  settlement  of
Henrico,  and  conquering  the  Appomattox  Indians.
On  Gates's  return  to  England  in  March,  1014,  the
government  was  again  left  with  Dale,  and  he  ad-
ministered it  till  1016,  when  he  sailed  for  home  in
the  same  vessel  with  Pocohontas  and  John  Rolfe,
who  had  been  married  during  his  term  of  office.
Dale  was  in  Holland  in  February,  1617,  and  in
January,  1619.  made  commander  of  the  East  In-
dian fleet,  participating  in  an  engagement  with  the
Dutch  near  Bantam.  The  climate  at  his  post
proved  fatal  to  him.  Dale  deserves  special  praise
lor  the  important  changes  that  he  introduced  in
the  colonial  land-laws,  under  which,  as  established
by  him,  the  cultivator  was  given  a  chance  of  be-
coming proprietor  of  the  soil,  which  was  an  lmpos-
sibilitv  under  the  old  system.

DALE,  William  Johnson,  physician,  b.  in
Gloucester,  Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1815.  His  grandfather,
William  Johnson,  fought  at  Bunker  Bill;  his  pa-
ternal grandfather.  Elienezer,  at  Lexington;  and
his  father.  K!>enezer.  was  a  surgeon  in  the  war  of
1812.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  lKo7.  at  its
medical  school  in  1*40.  and  began  practice  in  Bos-
ton. In  June,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  surgeon-
genera!  of  Massachusetts,  holding  the  rank  <>f  colo-
nel, and  in  Decemlterof  that  year  was  appointed
acting  assistant  surgeon  of  the  l\  S.  army,  which
place  he  retained  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was
on  duty  in  Bo-ton.  Mass..  during  the  civil  war.  and
had  general  SUperflsion  of  all.  matters  connected
with  the  medical  staff  and  the  care  and  treatment
of  the  sick  ami  wounded  that  were  sent  bona. In

October,  ikw.  be  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  saiga-
dier-general.  in  connection  with  his  appointment

as  surgon-general of Massachusetts. In M
nltion  of  bil  services,  tl„.  I'.  S.  authoriti-
name  to  a  general  hospital  established  at  Worces-
ter. Mass..  opened  in  September,  ik<>.». Be  is  a


mcml.-rof  the  Mssssrhosetts  medical  society,  and
was  ha  anniversary  chairman.

KM  IK. I  s||.  ...onri-  Kamnai.  Earl  of,  Scot-
tish  general,  b.  in  177M;  ,|.  „i  Kn;
Edinburgh,  Scotland. 21  March.  lv>  h,  ,.otem|
the  British  army  tut  a  cornet  in  the  guard*,  raianl  a
company,  and  Mas  m.idc captain.  II.  wu  wounded
at  Martini. pie,  and  aerved  in  Ireland,
reliellion  of  1 71*4,  in  the  .  \i-dn  Hclder,

at  Bellcialcaml  Minorca,  ana  Miner  Oil  Rsliili
cromby m Egypt,  attaining the  rank  of  major-
general in lm£. H,.  ■ofasaqsjontri fought  at the

Scheldt  ami  at  Freshing, and  through  the  Penmen-

lar war,  distinguishing  himself  «t the  U'
Vittoria  and  the  Pyrenees. In 1811  he  waa  raised
to  the  peerage  as  Itaron  Kauisay. In 1818  he  was
sent to  Nova  Scotia  as  couiinander-in-chief  «.f  the
forces,  and after  the  death of  the  Duke  ol
BOOd.  in  1*1W,  was  ap|»ointed  gQTOrnoi  SBIIi
British North America. During  his  admiuistra-
tion  efforts  to  effect  a  union  of  the  proi  ukt*  ware
continued,  provoking  the  Intense,  botflltj  <.f  the
French pormlation. and ceaseless disputes  took
place  I K-t ween  the  executive  and  the  asM-mhly  re-

s|M'ctingthe  civil li»t  and tl rown  lauds, lb-

left  Canada  in  September.  1888,  and  served  in  India

as  commander-in-chief,  but  returned  t<>  Bsotland

with  broken  health  in  1888,

DALL,  Charles  Henry  Appleton  (dalulergT-
man,  b.  in  Baltimore.  M'i..  12  l-vi...  1818:  «1.  in

Calcutta.  British  India.  in  July.  1W6.  He  was
educated  in  the  Boston  public  and  Latin  wh'«.K,
and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1897,  and  at
Harvard  divinity-school  in  lK-fo.  In  November,
1841,  he  was  ordained  an  evangelist  «.f  the  I'nita-
rian  church  in  St.  I>>uis.  after  which  he  was  settled
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  Portsmouth.  N.  II..  N.i-dham.
Mass.,  and  Toronto,  Canada.  Failing  health.  fn»m
excosive  pastoral  duties,  with  a  preferei
missionary  work,  induced  him  to  take  up  that  OB*
cupation  as  his  life  labor.  He  became  the  first  for-
eign missionary  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  America,
and  in  February.  1856,  Bailed  for  Calcutta.  Then-
lie  instituted  the  first  girls'  school  for  natives,  the
tirst  school  for  homeless  and  triundhae  ehfldron.  sad

the  first  children's  teiiiiHTance«MHiei\.  Mr.  Dal  1  waa
elected  a  member  of  the  American  oriental  -
and  the  Asiatic  society  of  Bengal,  and  a  foreign
associate  of  the  Hungarian  Unitarian  consistory.
He  was  the  author  of  many  tracts,  educational  and
moral,  for  circulation  m  British  India,  a  small  »ork
on the Su./.  canal, many  hymns  and  devotional

poems,  and  Dotasof  travel  contributed  to  periodkali
m  the  tJnited  States  and  India.  Thenamoerofpnsa-

pbietS written  by  Mr.  Dall  in  India  exceeded  one

hundred,  and  many  of  them  w.re  several  tu
printed  in  response  to  a  demand  from  the  natives

for  whose  instruction  thev  wen-  intended.— His
wife.  Caroline  Wells,  daughter  of  Mark  I!
b.  in  Boston,  Mass..  22  June,  1822,  was  educated
bv  private  tutors  and  governesses,  after  which  she
became  ■  teacher,  and  in  1*4<»  was  made  Tiee-
primipal  of  the  celebrated  "Miss  English'-
for  voung  ladies."  in  Georgetown.  D.  C.  In  Sep-
tember, 1*44.  she  married  Mr.  Kail.  and.  although
occupied  thenceforth  with  duties  incidental  to
the  life  of  a  clergyman's  wife,  she  continued  her
Studies  and  literary  activity,  lbr  early  »..rk  waa
SSpSOfcUf  devoted  to  reform  topi.  ..ly  the

opening  of  new  Held*  of  labor  to  women.  Mrs.
Kail's  later  laln.rs  have  »>een  chiefly  litcran  and
critical.  In  1*77  she  received  the  degr>  ■  I  LL  l>.
from  Alfred  university.  She  has  published  roanjr
SJBJOng  which an-  "F.ssav.  and  J***1***

(Boston,  1848);  "Historical Pictures  Retouched.


58


DALLAS


DALLAS


a  Volume  of  Miscellanies"  (1859);  ''Woman's
Right  to  Labor"  (18(H));  "Life  of  Dr.  Marie  Zfr
krewska,  being  a  Practical  Illustration  of  ■  \N rom«
au's  Right  to  Labor"'  (1860);  "  Woman's  Rights
under  the  Law  "  (1861);  "Sunshine;  A  Name  for
a  Popular  Lecture  on  Health"  (1864) ;  "The  Col-
lege, the  Market,  and  the  .Court,  or  Woman's  L'<  -
lation  to  Education,  Employment,  and  Citizen-
ship" (1867);  "Egypt's  Place  in  History"  (1868);
"Patty  Gray's  Journey  to  the  Cotton  Islands  "
(3  vols.,  1 869-70);  "Romance  of  the  Association,
or  One  Last  Glimpse  of  Charlotte  Temple  and
Eliza  Wharton"  (1875);  "My  First  Holiday,  or
Letters  Home  from  Colorado,  Utah,  and  Califor-
nia" (1881);  and  "What  we  Really  Know  about
Shakespeare  "(1885).— Their  son,  William  Ilea  lev,
naturalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  21  Aug.,  1845,  was
educated  at  the  Boston  public  schools,  and  then
became  a  special  pupil  in  natural  sciences  under
Louis  Agassiz,  ana  in  anatomy  and  medicine  under
Jeffries  Wyraan  and  Daniel  Brainerd.  In  1865  he
was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the  International  tele-
graph expedition,  and  in  this  capacity  visited
Alaska  in  1865-'8.  From  1871  till  1880  he  was
assistant  to  the  U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  under  its
direction  spent  the  years  1871  till  1874,  and  1884  in
that  district.  His  work,  beside  the  exploration  and
description  of  the  geography,  included  the  anthro-
pology, natural  history,  and  geology  of  the  Alaskan
and  adjacent  regions.  From  the  field-work  and
collections  have  resulted  maps,  memoirs,  coast  pilot,
and  papers  on  these  subjects  or  branches  of  tnem.
From  1884  till  1886  he  was  paleontologist  to  the
U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  since  1869  he  has  been
honorary  curator  of  the  department  of  mollusks  in
the  U.  S.  national  museum.  In  this  office  he  has
made  studies  of  recent  and  fossil  mollusks  of  the
world,  and  especially  of  North  America,  from  which
new  information  has  been  derived  concerning  the
brachiopoda,  patellidae,  chitonidae,  and  the  mollusk-
fauna  of  the  deep  sea.  These  studies  have  grown
out  of  those  devoted  to  the  fauna  of  northwestern
America  and  eastern  Siberia.  Mr.  Dall  has  been
honored  with  elections  to  nearly  all  of  the  scientific
societies  in  this  country,  and  to  many  abroad.  In
1882  and  in  1885  he  was  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  presided  over  the  sections  of  biology  and
anthropology.  His  scientific  papers  include  about
two  hundred  titles.  Among  the  separate  books  are
"  Alaska  and  its  Resources  "  (Boston,  1870) ;  "  Tribes
of  the  Extreme  Northwest"  (Washington,  1877);
"Coast  Pilot  of  Alaska,  Appendix  I.,  Meteorology
and  Bibliography"  (1879);  "The  Currents  and
Temperatures  of  Bering  Sea  and  the  Adjacent
Waters"  (1882);  "  Pacific  Coast  Pilot,  and  Islands
of  Alaska,  Dixon  Entrance  to  Yakutat  Bay,  with
the  Inland  Passage  "  (1883) ;  "  Prehistoric  Ameri-
ca," by  the  Marquis  de  Nadaillac,  edited  (New
York,  1885) ;  and  "  Report  on  the  Mollusca  Bra-
chipoda  and  Pelecypoda"  of  the  Blake  dredging
expedition  in  the  West  Indies  (Cambridge,  1886).

DALLAS,  Alexander  James,  statesman,  b.  in
the  island  of  Jamaica,  21  June,  1759 ;  d.  in  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  14  Jan.,  1817.  He  was  the  son  of  a
Scottish  physician  who  emigrated  to  Jamaica  about
1750.  The  son  was  educated  in  Edinburgh  and  at
Westminster  under  James  Elphinston,  the  friend
of  Dr.  Johnson,  whose  acquaintance  and  that  of
Dr.  Franklin  he  made  whnVa  student.  He  then
studied  law  in  London,  returned  to  Jamaica  in
1780,  and,  upon  the  remarriage  of  his  mother  and
his  exclusion  from  the  inheritance  of  his  father's
estate,  removed  in  April,  1783,  to  Philadelphia.
He  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  common-


wealth of  Pennsylvania  in  June,  1783,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  July.  ITS."),  and  a  few  years  later
was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  United  States
eourts,  and  became  eminently  rocoCMful  as  a  law-
yer in  Philadelphia.  He  wrote  for  periodicals. and,
was  for  a  time  editor  of  the  "Columbian  Maga-
zine." In  January,  1791,  he  was  appointed  seen  -
tary  of  the  commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania,  and
in  December,  1793,  his  commission  was  renewed.
While  in  this  office  he  prepared  an  edition  of  the
laws  of  Pennsylvania,  with  notes.  He  also  com-
piled four  volumes  of  "Reports  of  Cases  ruled
and  adjudged  by  the  Courts  of  the  United  States
and  of  Pennsylvania,  before  and  since  the  Revolu-
tion "  (Philadelphia,  1790-1807).  He  accompanied
an  armed  force  to  Pittsburg,  in  the  capacity  of
paymaster-general,  in  1794.  He  was  again  ap-
jxilnted  secretary  of  state  in  December,  1796,  and
neldthe  office  until  Thomas  Jefferson  became  presi-
dent in  1801  and  appointed  him,  as  an  ardent  sup-
porter of  the  republican  party,  U.  S.  district  at-
torney for  the  eastern  district  of  Pennsylvania,
which  office  he  held  till  1814,  when  he  was  called
into  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  the  treasury  by
President  Madison.  When  he  entered  upon  this
office,  6  Oct.,  1814,  the  government  was  seriously
embarrassed  in  its  finances  through  the  war  with
Great  Britain,  and  the  committee  of  ways  and
means  in  congress  applied  to  Mr.  Dallas  for  sug-
gestions as  to  the  best  mode  of  raising  money  for
the  requirements  of  the  government,  and  of  sus-
taining the  public  credit.  In  a  masterly  report  he
showed  that  the  money  required  could  not  be
raised  by  taxation  alone,  but  must  be  obtained  in
part  by  loans.  He  proposed  for  the  purpose  of
raising  a  loan  the  establishment  of  a  government
bank.  The  house,  in  committee  of  the  whole,  re-
ported in  favor  of  the  bank  on  24  Oct.,  1814,  and
a  bill  was  passed  on  20  Jan.,  1815,  but  was  vetoed
by  President  Madison.  Having  been  interrogated
as  to  the  probable  effect  of  a  large  issue  of  treas-
ury-notes, Secretary  Dallas  made  a  reply  that  had
much  influence  in  restoring  public  confidence  and
arousing  the  spirit  of  patriotism.  On  3  April,
1816,  an  act  to  incorporate  a  national  bank  was
passed  by  congress  and  received  the  signature  of
the  president.  Mr.  Dallas's  administration  of  the
treasury  department  was  able  and  energetic.  Treas-
ury-notes, which  were  scarcely  current  when  he
assumed  office,  were  sold  at  par,  with  interest  added,
a  few  months  later.  The  bank  had  the  effect  of
greatly  improving  the  credit  of  the  government.
After  March,  1815,  he  discharged  the  duties  of  sec-
retary of  war  in  addition  to  the  direction  of  the
treasury  department,  and  superintended  the  re-
duction of  the  array  consequent  upon  the  restora-
tion of  peace.  Having  contributed,  to  the  extent
of  his  ability,  to  extricate  the  government  from
its  financial  difficulties,  and  having  seen  the  United
States  bank  firmly  established,  he  retired  from
office  in  November,  1816,  and  returned  to  the  prac-
tice of  law  in  Philadelphia,  but  died  a  few  weeks
afterward.  Besides  the  works  mentioned  above
and  his  treasury  reports,  he  published  "  Features
of  Jay's  Treaty "  (Philadelphia,  1795);  "Speeches
on  the  Trial  of  Blount " ;  "  Address  to  the  Society
of  Constitutional  Republicans  "  (1805) ;  and  "  Ex-
position of  the  Causes  and  Character  of  the  War
of  1812-'15."  He  left  unfinished  a  "  History  of
Pennsylvania."  The  third  edition  of  his  "  Reports
of  Cases,"  with  notes  by  Thomas  J.  Wharton,  ap-
peared in  Philadelphia  in  1830. — His  son,  Alex-
ander James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  1791 ;  d.  in  Cal-
lao  bay,  Peru,  3  June,  1844,  was  appointed  a  mid-
shipman on  22  Nov.,  1805,  became  fc  lieutenant


DALLAS


DAI.I.  Vs


00


..n 18  Jui  'mnmiiiltT  ..n  a  March,  1H7.

ami  captain  CO  M  April.  1888.  He  MTWd  under
rers  "ii  board  I  In*  "  Pre-idetit  "  in  1818,  ami
ward  under  Chauncev  on  Lake  Ontario,  and
was  with  Porter  in  his  cruise  for  the  extermina-
t i<>ii  <>f  pirates  in  the  West  Indies. — Another  eon,
I,  >i  i  ill  in. -tiit. '-man,  l>.  In Philadelphia,

id  .Inly.  1798;  <1.  there  81  Deo,  1884,
graduated  with  first -class  honors  at  Princeton  in
[810,  and  then  studied  law  in  his  father's  office,
U-ing  admitted  to  the  Imr  in  1813.  The  same  year
•  I  the  appointment  of  private  secretary  to
Albert  Gel latin,  ami  accompanied  thai  gentleman
on  his  mission  to  Russia,  to  negotiate  a  treaty  of
peace  with  England.  <>n  his  return  to  this  coun-
try, in  the  following  year,  he  assisted  his  father  for
some months in his  duties  as  secretary  of the

treasury,  ami  then Ijegan  the  practii f  law in

New  York  city,  and  was  solicitor  of  the  I'.S.  bank.
In  1817  he  was  appointed  deputy  attorney-general
for  Philadelphia  county.  Taking  an  active  part
in  politics,  and  supporting  the  oandidaoyof  Gen.
Jackson  for  the  presidency  in  1824  and  1828,  Mr.
Dallas  was  in  1820  elected  mayor,  and.  on  the
elevation  of  Gen.  Jackson  to  the  presidency,  in
1888  was  appointed  U.  S.  attorney  forthat  district
He  retained  this  ofHce  till  18&1,  when  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  the  place  of  Isaac

D.  Barnard,  who
had  resigned.  He
took  a  prominent
part  in  tne  debates
of  that  body  until
the  expiration  of
his  term,  in  1888,
when  he  declined
a  re-election,  re-
turned to  the  prac-
tice of  the  law,  and
filled  the  office  of
attornev-gcncral  <  >f
Pennsylvania  from
lxw  till  iK-tr>. in

1837 President  Van
Bnren  appointed
him  minister  to
Russia,  which  post
he  retained  till  Oc-
tober, 1HM,  when
he  was  recalled,  at
his  own  request,  and  again  resumed  legal  prac-
tice. George  M.  Dallas  and  James  Buchanan  were
for  many  years  rival  leaders  of  the  democratic
party  in  'Pennsylvania,  and  aspirants  for  the  presi-
dency of  the  United  States.  In  May.  1H44.  the
democratic  convention  at  Baltimore  nominated
him  for  vice-president  of  the  United  States  on  the
ticket  with  James  K.  Polk  for  president  The
democratic  candidates  were  elected  by  an  electoral
vote  of  170  out  of  275.  The  questions  of  the  time
were  the  tariff  and  the  annexation  of  Texas.  Mr.
Polk's  election  caused  the  admission  of  Texas  to
the  Union  just  l>efore  the  close  of  Mr.  Tyler's
term  of  office,  but  the  subject  of  the  tariff  was  left
for  the  new  administration.  The  appointment  of
his  rival.  Buchanan,  as  secretary  of  state,  left  Mr.
Dallas  without  influence  on  the  poUoy  oi  the  ad-
ministration; hut  the  tie  in  the  senate  on  the  free-
trade  tariff  of  1846,  and  its  adoption  by  his  pasting
vote,  gave  hJm  prominence.  A  hill  that  levied
duties  on  imports  f,,r  the  purpose  of  revenue  only,
abandoning  the  protective  policy,  was  |>as-cd  by

the  boose  of  lepissantatlvei  in  1848,  bnl  when  it

reached  the  senate  that hodf  was  evenly  divided,
so  that  the  decision  rested  with  the  liuu  ptusidsmt


In  giving  Ml  vote  Mr.  Ifcilla*  said  that,  though  the

bill  mi«  defective,  he  believed  th.,

tarnished  that  a  majoritj  of  th«

change,  to  ■  great  extent,  in  prim  iplo,

fundamentally  ;  hut  In  giving  the  cast  11

a  low  tariff  he  violated pled:

lectioiiists  of  Pennsylvania  that had  secured the

rote  of  t In-  Mate  for  his  |>ar1y  in the :

election. His  term  expired  -4  Mr.

DaUsl Mn-ciidcd Mr. Buchanan an mirii«t«r  to

Great  Britain, and continued  in  that  post  fmmt

Feb.,  1868,  until  the  ap|N>intment  hv  I'n-nident
Lincoln  of  Charles  F.  Adam-,  who  rrlicv.s-1  him
on  Hi  May,  1861.  At  the  \.-rv  l«-gmii
his  diplomatic  SMlfusfal  Fnglaml  he  vm-  called
t<>  act  upon  the  Cent  nil  American  question,  and
the  reqin-t made  hv  the  (Totted  States  to  the

British  government  that  Sir  John  Crnmpton.  the
British  minister  t<>  tin-  Cnited  Stat.--.  shoOM  l»-  n-
called.  Both  the-,-  delicate  question*  were  man-
aged hv  Mr.  Dallas  in  a  conciliatory  spirit,  fait
without  any  sacrifice  of  national  dignity,  ami  h.th
tiled  amiciihly.  At  thsdoss  Of  hi- diplo-
matic career  Mr.  Dallas  returned  to  private  life
and  took  no  further  |>art  in  public  affair,  excel  it  to
express  condemnation  of  secession.  Many  of  his
speeches  were  published,  among  them  "An  Beeay

on  the  Expediency  of  erecting  any  Monument  to
Washington  except  that  involved  in  the  Preserve*
tion  of  the  Union "  (1811);  "A  vTndiwetWi  of
Presiilcnt  Monroe  for  authorising  Gen.  Jackson  to

pursue  the Hostile Indians  into  Florida"  (1*19):

"Speech  in  the  Senate  on  Nullification  and  the
Tariff"  (1881); "  Eulogy  on  Andrew  Jackson"

(1846);  "Speech  <>n  giving  his  Ca-ting  Vole  OO  the
Tariff  of  lK4ti  "  (1H4<»):  "  Vindication  of  th.
President'-  Ca-ting Vote  in  a  S-rii  -  of Letters"

1848  :  "Speech  to  the  Citi/en-  of  Pittsburg  on

the  War.  Slaverv.  and  the  Tariff  "(1847);  "Sjwech
to  the  Citizens  of  Philadelphia  on  the  Necessity  of
maintaining  the  Union,  the  Constitution,  ami  the
Compromise  "(18681  a  "Seriee  of  betters  from
London."  written  while  he  wa-  minister  then-,  m
IMotJ-'tkt,  was  edited  and  published  bv  hi-  daugh-
ter Julia  (Philadelphia,  1869).— The  third  son  of
Alexander  .lames  was  a  lawyer  and  judge  in  Pitts-
bur-.  Paw— The  son  of  George  M..  Philip  Nirklln,
h.  in  18S5;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  h  Man  I
was  a  lawyer  practising  hi  Philadelphia,  and.  while
hi-  father' held  the  English  misskin, was  secretary
of  legation  in  London.  Booert  Charles  author,
a  brother  of  Alexander  James,  h.  in  Ku  -
Jamaica,  in  17-">4:  d.  in  Normandy.  Frm
is-24.  was  edooated  under  Mr.  Bphinston,  studied

law  in  the  Temple,  returned  to  Jamaica  at  the
age  of  twenty-one,  married  in  Kngland  three  yean
later,  and  returned  to  Jamaica  to  fill  a  hnVBttVO
DOSl  but  gave  it  up  onaCOOUnt  Of  hi-  fife  >  health,
and  resided  in  Frame  until  the  French  n-volutmn.
lb-  then  came  to  the  United  Stat.-,  but  was  not
pleased  with  the  count rv.  and  consequently  re-
turned to  Fngland.  where  he  followed  a  literary
career.  He  was  a  friend  and  counsellor  of  I>>nJ
Byron,  the  poet,  whose  uncle,  Copt  Byn.n,  mar-
ried hi-  Skier.  Among  his  publications  wOTO
-Poems,"  "Lucreoie,  a  Tragedy,  and  Moral  ha-
am"  (London,  1787);  -Auhn-y.'  a  novel

-  Memoir-  of  Mane  Antoinette.''  fn-m  the  French
of  Joseph  Weber  11888);  and  many  more  transla-
ttMM  and  original  trad-  in  defence  of  royalty  in
France  and  in  condemnation  of  the  Revolution;
•The  MorlamK  Tales  illustrative  of  the  Simple
and  the  Surnrisit  • In  the >  year  of  bis

death  he  published  "Rejections  of  the)
l>.rd  Bvn.n  fnun  h*W  to  the  hml  of  1H14.  -!1»


60


DALLING


DALTON


son,  Alexander  Robert  Charles,  after  serving
with  distinction  as  a  British  officer  through  the
Peninsular  war  and  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo
(when  his  cousin  Charles  was  wounded),  entered
the  Anglican  priesthood,  following  his  cousin's  ex-
ample, and  became  eminent  as  the  organizer  of
missions  in  the  west  of  Ireland.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  many  popular  devotional  books. — Another
distinguished  member  of  the  family  in  Great
Britain  was  Sir  George,  a  political  author,  b.  in
London  in  1758;  d.  in  1833.  His  principal  publi-
cation was  a  work  entitled  "  Thoughts  on  our  Pres-
ent Situation,  with  Remarks  on  the  Policy  of  a
War  with  France  "  (1793).

DALLING,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  d.  in  1798.
He  served  under  Loudoun  as  major  of  infantry  in
1757,  was  engaged  at  Louisburg  in  1758,  and  com-
manded a  body  of  light  infantry  under  Gen.  Wolfe
at  Quebec  in  1759.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  43d  foot  in  1760,  and  commanded  the
regiment  at  the  siege  of  Havana  in  August,  1762.
In  1767  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor,  and
a  few  years  later  governor,  of  Jamaica.  He  was
promoted  major-general  in  1777,  conducted  an  ex-
pedition against  the  Spanish  colonies  in  1780,  be-
came lieutenant-general  in  1782,  and  was  made  a
baronet  in  1783.

DALSHEIMER,  Alice,  poet,  b.  in  New  Or-
leans. La.,  1  Dec,  1845;  d.  there,  15  Jan.,  1880.
Her  maiden  name  was  Solomon.  She  received  her
education  in  the  city  schools,  and  in  1865  became
a  teacher,  in  her  examination  as  to  qualifications
standing  at  the  head  of  250  applicants.  She  mar-
ried, in  1867,  Mr.  Dalsheimer,  a  lawyer,  and  gave
up  teaching,  but  resumed  it  in  1873,  when  she  be-
came principal  of  the  girls'  department  of  a  school
under  the  management  of  the  Hebrew  educational
society,  where  she  remained  until  1878.  Her  writ-
ings consist  of  numerous  sketches,  short  stories,
and  poems,  principally  the  latter,  all  of  which  ap-
peared in  the  daily  papers  of  New  Orleans  under
the  pseudonym  of  "  Salvia  Dale,"  but  have  never
been  collected  and  published  in  book-form. Of  her

I)oems,  those  entitled  "  Motherhood  "  and  "  Twi-
ight  Shadows  "  are  among  the  best.

DALTON,  John,  R.  C.  bishop  in  Newfoundland,
d.  in  Harbor  Grace,  Newfoundland,  in  April,  1869.
He  was  nominated  bishop  on  the  creation  of  the
see  in  1856,  and  was  consecrated  the  same  year.

DALTON,  John  Call,  physiologist,  b.  in  Chelms-
ford, Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York,  11  Feb.,
1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1844.  and
at  the  medical  department  in  1847.  His  attention
was  directed  to  physiology,  and  in  1851  he  ob-
tained the  annual  prize  offered  by  the  American
medical  association  by  his  essay  on  "  Corpus  Lu-
teum."  Subsequently  his  researches  on  the  anato-
my of  the  placenta,  the  physiology  of  the  cere-
bellum, intestinal  digestion,  and  other  experiment-
al observations,  embodied  in  his  treatise  on  physi-
ology, gained  for  him  a  reputation  as  one  of  the
first  of  modern  physiologists.  He  became  profes-
sor of  physiology  in  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Buffalo,  and  was  the  first  in  the
United  States  to  teach  that  subject  with  illustra-
tions by  experiments  on  animals.  This  chair  he
resigned  in  1854,  and  accepted  a  similar  professor-
ship in  the  Vermont  medical  college  in  Woodstock,
where  he  remained  until  1856.  From  1859  till
1861  he  filled  the  chair  of  physiology  in  the  Long
Island  college  hospital  in  Brooklyn.  During  the
winter  of  1854-'5  he  lectured  on  physiology  at  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York,
temporarily  filling  the  place  of  Dr.  Alonzo  Clark.
In  1855  he  was  elected  to  that  professorship,  which


he  continued  to  fill  until  his  resignation  in  1883.
In  ls*t  he  again  succeeded  Dr.  Clark  as  president
of  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  Dor*
ing  the  civil  war  he  was  a  surgeon  in  the  national
•en  ice,  going  to  Washington  in  1861  in  that  ca-
pacity with  the  7th  New  York  regiment.  Subse-
quently he  was  appointed  surgeon  of  volunteers,
and  held  important  offices  in  the  medical  corps
until  his  resignation  in  March,  1864.  Dr.  Dalton
had  been  an  active  member  of  many  medical  soci-
eties, and  held  prominent  offices  in  them.  In
1864  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  His  contributions  to  the
literature  of  physiology  had  been  numerous  since
1851.  He  had  published  articles  in  the  ••  American
Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  the  "  Transac-
tions of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,"  the
"  American  Medical  Monthly,"  and  other  medical
journals  in  New  York ;  and  also  many  valuable
articles  in  his  specialties  in  the  American  and
other  cyclopaedias.  He  hadpublished  in  book-form
"  A  Treatise  on  Human  Physiology  "  (New  York,
1859 ;  6th  ed.,  1882) ;  "  A  Treatise  on  Physiology
and  Hygiene  for  Schools,  Families,  and  Colleges
(1868);  "The  Experimental  Method  of  Medicine"
(1882) ;  "  Doctrines  of  the  Circulation  "  (1884) ;  and
"  Topographical  Anatomy  of  the  Brain  "  (1885). —
His  brother,  Edward  Barry,  physician,  b.  in
Lowell,  Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1834 ;  d.  in  Santa  Barbara,
Cal.,  13  May,  1872,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1855,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons, New  York,  in  1858.  Dr.  Dalton  then  set-
tled in  New  York,  and  was  resident  physician  of
St.  Luke's  hospital  when  the  civil  war  began.  He
at  once  volunteered  as  a  surgeon,  and  served  from
April,  1861,  till  May,  1865.  At  first  he  was  a
medical  officer  in  the  navy,  after  which  he  was
commissioned  surgeon  of  the  36th  New  York  vol-
unteers, and  subsequently  surgeon  of  U.  S.  volun-
teers, serving  as  medical  inspector  of  the  6th
army  corps,  and  as  medical  director  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Virginia.  In  March,  1864,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  where  he  re-
mained throughout  the  campaign  of  that  year,
from  the  Wilderness  to  City  Point,  having  charge
of  all  the  wounded,  and  establishing  and  moving
the  hospitals.  At  City  Point  he  was  made  chief
medical  officer  of  the  depot  field-hospitals,  Army
of  the  Potomac,  till  the  final  campaign  in  March
and  April,  1865,  when  he  accompanied  the  troops
as  medical  director  of  the  9th  army  corps.  After
his  discharge  he  was  successively  appointed  brevet
lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  of  volunteers.  In
March,  1866,  he  was  appointed  sanitary  superin-
tendent of  the  New  York  metropolitan  board  of
health,  in  which  office  he  remained  until  his  resig-
nation in  January,  1869.  In  1869  he  originated
the  present  city  ambulance  system  for  the  trans-
portation of  the  sick  and  injured.  His  health  had
then  begun  to  fail,  and,  after  trying  various  resorts,
he  finally  visited  California,  where  he  died  from
consumption.  He  published  papers  on  "  The  Dis-
order known  as  Bronzed  Skin,  or  Disease  of  the
Supra-renal  Capsules  "  (1860) ;  "  The  Metropolitan
Board  of  Health "  (1868) ;  and  "  Reports  of  the
Sanitary  Superintendent  of  the  Metropolitan  Board
of  Health  "  from  1866  till  1869.

DALTON,  Tristram,  senator,  b.  in  the  part  of
the  town  of  Newbury  that  afterward  became  New-
burvnort,  Mass.,  2K  May,  1738;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
30  May,  1817.  He  was  prepared  for  college  in
I  )u n uner  academy,  Bvfield,  under  Samuel  Moody,
and  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1755.  He  then
studied  law,  but  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits
with  his  father-in-law,  Robert  Hooper.^nd  attend-


DALY

bit  lorn  estate,  call.. I  Spring  Hill,  in  West
bury. He  was  an  ardent  patriot, and •  i«

Of  ttSSWttigl  unty.  iiiiinii^  whom

many  notanle  mi»n. He  was  distinguished  for  his

elegance uf manners and scholarly aceomplish-

Hunts,  an. I  entertained VTashlTlgton.  Adams,  Tal-

i iid.  and  other  famous  persons  at  Spring  Hill.

lie \V(i.s  II  iVIfltl  from Massachusetts to  the -

rention  of  committees  of  the  New  England  prov-
ince-that  met  in  Prorldsnos,  R,  I..  M  !»••..  l?7n,
speaker  of  the  house  of  1 1  prMBntltlff,  and  a
MOlber  Of  the  senate  of  Massachusetts,  and  \\a-
chosen  a  senator  in  the  1st  congress,  ami  drew  tin-
lot  for  the  short  term,  serving  from  14  April.  17v!».
till  :i  Maroh.  LltL  Following  tin*  advice  of  hi-
friend.  President  Washington,  he  pold  his  projN-rty
in  Ifassaohusattl  to  invest  in  real  estate  in  Wash-
ington :  but  through  the  mismanagement  of  hi>
it  he  lost  a  {Treat  part  of  the  sum  thus  invent-
ed, and  commercial  losses  that  occurred  at  the
same  time  raduosd  him  to  Utivwlf.  In  1810  In-
obtained  the  post  of  surveyor  of  the  port  of  Bos-
ton, which  he  held  until  his  death.

DALY,  Augustin,  dramatist,  b.  in  Plymouth,
N.  ('.,  '2(»  .Inly.  IKK  His  education  was  "received
partly  in  Norfolk,  Va..  and  in  the  public  schools  of
New  York  city.  He  began  his  literary  career
as  dramatic  editor  of  the  "Sunday  Courier,"  in
New  York  city,  in  1859,  and  continued  as  such  on
the  "Sunday  Courier,"  the  New  York  '•Times,"
the  "Sun,"  the  '•  Express,"  and  the" Citizen,"  until
18(59,  when  he  opened  the  Fifth  Avenue  theatre  on
Twenty-fourth  street.  This  building  was  destroyed
by  fire  in  1873,  and  three  weeks  later  he  opened
another  theatre,  formerly  the  "Globe,"  in  Broad-
way, under  the  former  name.  In  1879  he  estab-
lisln-d  Daly's  theatre  in  Broadway,  near  Thirtieth
street. He  has  three  times  taken  his  entire  com-

Siny  to  California,  twice  to  England,  and  once  to
ermany  and  France,  where  the  merits  of  his
management  and  training  were  warmly  acknowl-
edged. His  career  a*  a  dramatic  author  began  in
1862  with  an  adaptation  from  the  German  of  Mo-
seni  hal's  "  Deborah,"  and  since  then  he  has  pro-
duced original  plays — among  them  "Divorce."
"Pi<pn\"  "Horizon,  "Under  the  Gaslight,'1  and
many  adaptations  from  French  and  German  au-
thors. Most  of  his  productions  have  won  popu-
lar  success.  Mr.  Daly  has  also,  for  several  seasons,
managed  the  "Grand  Opera  House  "  in  New  York.
His  noted  achievement  is  the  organization  of  com-
binations of  players,  complete  scenic  presentations,
and  elevation  of  dramatic  purposes.  He  is  an  en-
thusiast and  a  hard  worker  in  his  profession,  de-
voting all  his  time  to  the  success  of  his  theatre,  a
great  reader,  and  a  well-informed  student  of  the
dramatic  literature  of  many  nations.

DALY,  Charles  Patrick,  jurist.  1>.  in  New  York
city.  II  Oct.,  1816.  He  received  a  little  school-
ing; early  went  to  sea  before  the  mast.  SMiillg
three  years,  and  later  became  a  mechanic's  appren-
tice. Afterward  he  studied  law  in  his  native  city.
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,  elected  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1843,  became  justice  of  tin-
court  of  common  pleas  in  1844.  first  judge  in  1857,
and  chief  justice  from  1H71  to  1886,  his  term  ex-
piring l>y  limitation  of  agUj  when  be  returned  to
the  practice  of  hi>  profession.  In  1800  be  received
from  Columbia  the  degree  of  LL.  I).  Justice
Daly  has  for  many  years  been  president  of  tin-
American  gcoajraphioal  society,  lectured  at  clum-
bia  law-school,  delivered  discourses  before  learned
societies,  and  made  public  addresses.  He  has
visited  Europe  on  five  occasions.  It  has  l»cen  said
of  Justice  Daly  that,  as  a  lawyer,  no  large  fee  has


ZKLL


n


[•I"*.


nosed  him  mcattel  his  asrviosson  behalf

of  an  uinb-wn  mg  cause, He  is  the  air
men.us  biographical,  seieotttV,  and  legal
most of them

issued in |.HIli-

phlet-form. His

Implications  cm-
irace  "  Historic-
al Sketch  of  t  In-
judicial Tribu-
nals of  New  Yoik
from  1628  to
lM'i"i  New  Y..rk,
"  History
of  Naturaliza-
tion and  its
Laws  in  Differ-
ent ( 'ountries  "

(1800); -  Are  the

Southern Pri-

Miteersiinn  Pi-
rates J"  (U
"Origin  and  His-
tory of  Institu-
tion? for  the  Pro-
mot  ion  of  Useful
Arts  bv  Indus-
trial Exhibit  ions  "(Albany.  1864):  "  When  was  the
Drama  introduced  in  America t"  (1NM»;  1.1  Tola.
of  "Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Court  of  (<-mrnon
Pleas,  Citv  and  County  of  New  York  "  (New  Y..rk.
1H6S-V7):'  "First  S-tt  lenient  of  Jews  in  North
America"  (1875};  "What  we  know  of  Map*  and
Man-making  In-fore  the  Time  of  Mereator

DALY,  Sir  Dominlrk,  governor  of  Prises  Ed-
ward island,  b.  in  1  Tu*  :  d.  in  Adelaide.  s,,nth
Australia,  lit  Fell.,  1888.  \\v  was  acting  chief
secretary  in  Canada  for  nearly  twenty-six  year*,
and  in  1851  was  ap|»ointcd  governor  of  the  island
of  Tobago.  In  1H.Y1  be  was  knighted,  and  trans-
ferred to  Prince Edward  island,  of  which  he  was

governor  till 1008. In  l^u  be  was  appointed
governor  of  Booth  Australia
DALZELL,  James,  soldier,  d.  mar Detroit,

Mich..  00  July.  1768.  Of  his  early  life  nothing  i*
known.  He  was  a  companion  of  Israel  Put  rutin  in
some  of  the  most  adventurous  passages  of  that
rough  veteran's  life,  and  afterward  an  aide-de-<-ainp
to  Sen.  Jeffrey  Amlnrst.  He  led  a  dctachnn  nt  of
900  men  to  the  relief  of  the  garrison  of  iH-tn-it,
reaching  that  place  at  davhreak.  '.»»  July.  176S.
After  one  day'-  Net,  Gent  Dalzell  led  a  BJgM  sallr
againsl  the  Indians,  in  which  his  command  of  '.M7
men  was  surprisi-d  00  the  banks  of  a  rivulet,  called
Parent's  creek,  defeated  and  dispersed.  Ihdiell
fell  ami  was  amlned  while  attempting  to  l.r
the  wounded.  His  heart  was  toni  out,  and  with
it  the  Indians  wiped  the  faces  of  their  pri--in-r».
The  stream  received  the  name  of  MBeeowj  Kun."

bv  which  it  is  known  to  t ti i—  dav.

DALZKLL,  Robert  M..  inventor,  b.  near  1M-
fa-t.  Ireland,  in  1793;  d.in  Kochester.  X.  Y..20JaiL.
1H7:{.  His  ancestor*  were  S<-t<  h.  and  his  father.
John  DalaalL  .»  leader  in  the  Irish  rebeUioo  •
in  oonasqaeoot  Of  which  the  old  family  mansion
was  bulled,  and  In-  foread  to  put  to  sea  in  an  open

boat Ha  was  tenoned  by  a  eamal. bound  for  n.»

York,  when-  he  settled  ainl  where  his  family  soon
followed  him. Winn KoUrt was  shoot thirtr-

f  age  he  removed  to  Boahashsa Be

millwright,  untisuallv  skilful  ami  ingenious,

and  ninnv  of  the  flour-mills  in  the  city  of  Koehsa*

ter  were  Iniilt  under  his  supervision. He  invented

ami  Introduced  the  -elevator  system  "in  handling

|  and  stowing  grain,  which  is  now  in  general  use.


62


DA.MKN


DAMPIER


DAMEN,  Arnold,  clergyman,  \>.  in  Holland
about  1800.  After  entering  the  Society  of  .Jesus.
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  the  development
of  the  Roman  Catholic  cliunli  in  the  west  is  con-
sidered to  be  largely  his  work.  In  1857  he  erected
a  Jesuit  establishment  in  Chicago ;  he  also  built
the  great  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  founded
the  College  of  St.  Ignatius  in  the  same  city.  His
success  as  a  missionary  has  been  very  great.  As  a
pulpit  orator  he  ranks  very  high  in  the  religious
body  to  which  he  belongs.

D'AMICO,  Carlos  A.  (da-am-e'-ko),  Argentine
statesman,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayrus  in  1844.  At  the  age
of  twenty-one  he  was  graduated  in  law  at  the  uni-
versity of  his  native  city,  and  opened  an  office  in
Buenos  Ayres.  At  the  same  time  he  took  an  act  i  re
part  in  politics,  affiliating  himself  in  the  national
autonomist  party,  of  which  he  is  still  one  of  the
chief  supporters.  In  1868,  when  the  allied  armies,
having  repelled  the  forces  of  Lopez,  were  about  to
invade  Paraguay,  D'Amico  accepted  a  commission
in  a  regiment  of  national  guards,  was  present  at
all  the  battles  of  the  allied  armies  on  Paraguayan
territory,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major.  lie  then
returned  to  his  law  practice,  but  soon  was  elected
secretary  of  the  federal  senate,  and  in  1877  to  con-
gress as  member  for  Buenos  Ayres.  In  October,
1880,  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  of  the
government  of  the  state  of  Buenos  Ayres,  which
office  he  held  until,  in  1883,  he  was  called  to  the
federal  senate  as  senator  for  Buenos  Ayres.  At
the  expiration  of  the  term  of  Gov.  Rocha,  in  1884,
D'Amico  was  chosen  governor  of  the  state  of  Buenos
Ayres.  He  is,  perhaps,  the  most  popular  orator  of
the  Argentine  republic,  and  in  the  chamber  of
deputies,  as  well  as  in  the  senate,  uses  his  gifts  to
defend  the  interests  of  his  native  state  and  the
federation  in  general.  As  minister  of  the  state
government,  he  initiated  measures  granting  in-
creased facilities  for  communications  with  Europe
and  the  countries  of  both  Americas,  and  fostering
emigration  and  the  public-school  system.  He  was
one  of  the  originators  of  the  railroad  to  Mendoza,
destined  to  cross  the  Andes  after  traversing  the
immense  pampas,  and  to  put  Chili  in  communica-
tion with  the  Atlantic  seaboard.  During  his  term
as  minister  he  worked  incessantly  for  the  execution
of  the  project  to  found  a  new  capital,  and,  when  his
idea  was  accepted  by  Gov.  Rocha,  the  foundations
of  the  new  city,  La  Plata,  were  laid  in  1882.  When
he  became  governor  he  pushed  the  progress  of  this
favorite  city  still  more  energetically,  and  its  growth
and  embellishment  made  rapid  strides.  Under  his
administration  were  either  begun  or  completed  the
palace  of  the  government,  the  ministerial  buildings,
the  house  of  congress,  the  progreso  bank,  and  a
great  number  of  public-school  buildings.  His  term
as  governor  will  expire  in  the  latter  part  of  1887.

DAMON,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  East  Sudbury
(now  Wayland),  Mass.,  12Sept.,  1788;  d.  in  Read-
ing, Mass.,  in  1843.  His  father  was  a  farmer,
barely  able  to  support  his  family,  so  that  the  son
was  dependent  for  his  education  entirely  upon  his
own  exertions.  He  prepared  himself  for  college  at
Phillips  Andover  academy,  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1811.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Harvard  Lyceum,  at  Cambridge,  in  1810— '11,
and  was  the  third  scholar  in  a  class  of  which  Ed-
ward Everett  and  N.  L.  Frothingham  were  the
first  and  second.  Ho  studied  theology  at  Andover,
but  was  not  graduated,  was  licensed  to  preach  22
Nov.,  1813,  ordained  1  Feb.,  1815,  ikid  installed  as
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  rn  Lunenburg,
Mass.  He  occupied  various  parishes  in  New  Eng-
land until  1835,  when  he  settled  in  East  Cambridge,


Mass.  In  January,  1841,  he  delivered  the  annual
sermon  before  the  legislature  of  Massachut
and  in  May  of  the  same  year  the  Dudleian  lecture
at  Harvard.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  his  alma  mater  in  1843.  His  death  was
caused  by  apoplexy,  wliieh  attacked  him  while  he'
was  officiating  at  the  funeral  of  his  friend,  Edmund
Parker.  His  publications  consisted  principally  of
sermons  and  addresses.

DAMON,  Howard  Franklin,  physician,  b.  in
Scituate,  Mass.,  in  1833;  d.  in  Boston,  17  Sept.,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1858,  and
at  the  medical  department  of  that  institution  in
1801.  He  was  physician  and  superintendent  of  the
Boston  dispensary  in  1862-'4,  and  was  afterward
admitting  physician  to  the  city  hospital,  and  physi-
cian to  the  department  of  skin  diseases  among  out-
door patients.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
medical  association,  of  the  Boston  society  for  medi-
cal improvement,  the  Boston  microscopical  society,
and  was  corresponding  member  of  the  New  York
dermatological  society.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Leucocythffimia,"  a  Bovlston  prize  essay  (Boston,
1864) ;  "  Photographs  of  Skin  Diseases1*'  (Boston,
1870) ;  "  Neuroses  of  the  Skin  "  (Philadelphia,  1868) ;
"Structural  Lesions  of  the  Skin"  (Philadelphia,
1869) ;  and  "  Some  General  Remarks  on  the  Fre-
quency of  Skin  Diseases  "  (1870).

DAMPIER,  William,  navigator,  b.  in  East
Coker,  Somersetshire,  about  1652;  the  place  and
date  of  his  death  are  unknown.  Early  in  life  he
was  left  an  orphan,  when  he  was  taken  from  school
and  placed  on  board  of  a  vessel  bound  for  New-
foundland, and  on  his  return  he  engaged  as  a  com-
mon sailor  on  a  vessel  sailing  for  the  East  Indies.
He  served  in  the  Dutch  war  during  1673  under  Sir
Edward  Sprague,  but  failing  health  led  him  to
settle  in  the  country.  In  1674  he  became  under-
manager  of  an  estate  in  Jamaica,  but  soon  engaged
in  the  coasting  trade,  and  made  two  voyages  to  the
bay  of  Campeachy,  where  he  also  remained  for
some  time  with  the  logwood-cutters  as  a  common
workman,  and  subsequently  published  an  account
of  his  experiences.  In  1678  he  returned  to  Ja-
maica, and  then  sailed  to  England,  but  again  re-
turned to  the  West  Indies  during  the  following
year,  when  he  was  persuaded  to  join  a  party  of
buccaneers,  with  whom  he  crossed  the  isthmus  of
Panama,  and  spent  1680  on  the  Peruvian  coast,
successfully  plundering  several  towns.  After
another  privateering  voyage  on  the  Spanish  main,
he  set  out  on  an  expedition,  under  Capt.  John
Cook,  against  the  Spaniards  in  the  South  sea.
They  sailed  from  Virginia  in  August,  1684,  cruised
along  the  coasts  of  Guinea,  and  then,  doubling
Cape  Horn,  entered  the  Pacific.  Here  the  expe-
dition was  joined  by  another  ship  from  London,
bent  on  a  similar  errand,  and,  after  stopping  at  the
island  of  Juan  Fernandez,  they  cruised  together
up  the  coast  of  South  America,  capturing  several
prizes.  While  near  Cape  Blanco,  off  the  coast  of
Mexico,  Capt.  Cook  died,  and  was  succeeded  by
Capt.  Davis.  Here  a  vessel  commanded  by  Capt.
Swan  joined  the  expedition.  Unsuccessful  attacks
were  made  on  Guayaquil,  and  also  on  a  Spanish
fleet  laden  with  treasures  from  Peru,  but  they  suc-
ceeded in  capturing  several  prizes.  After  a  time
Dampier  left  Davis  and,  joining  Swan,  set  out  for
the  East  Indies  across  the  Pacific  ocean.  On  reach-
ing Mindanao,  the  crew  mutinied,  and  Swan,  with
others,  was  left  on  the  island.  Dampier  continued
cruising  in  East  Indian  waters  for  several  years,
until  he  landed  at  Bencoolen,  where  he  acted  as  a
gunner  in  the  English  fort.  In  1691  he  sailed  for
England,  reaching  home  in  September. Subse-


DAMKnSCll

qucntly  hi  entered  the  British  navy,  ami  com-
manded the  "  Roebuck." lie  WW  Milt  on  a

\  and  illicit  t<>  Brazil,  ami  llienoeto
Australia.  WMfl  In-  s|>cnt  MWM  time  in  explora-
tion ami  circumnavigated  the  bland,  to  which  he
gOVOthe  BUM  of  New  Britain.  Tin-  small  urvhi-
pelago  ami  tlic  strait  between  I'apua  ami  New
Britain  wen-  named  f«»r  him  at  this  time.  After
other  discoveries,  be  returned  bj  a  new  route  t..
('cram,  in  the  Moluccas,  and  in  February,  1?<U,
arrived  off  the  island  of  Ascension,  where  his  ves-
sel sprung  a  leak  and  foundered.  He  reached
England,  however,  during  the  latter  part  of  the
year.  He  had  command  of  a  ship  in  the  Booth
seas  al*>ut  1  TO.-),  ami  sailed  with  ('apt.  Btiadling,
whose  vessel  foundered  at  sea.  Later  hampier  ac-
companied Woodes  HoLCefs  in  his  voyage  around
the  world  during  1 708—'  1 1  in  the  cajwity  of  pilot.
On  this  expedition  Guayaquil  was  taken.  He  pub-
lished "A Yovage around the World," and a

supplement  to  it, describing  the  oountries of  Ton*

quiii,  Malacca,  etc.;  "Two  Voyages  to  Cam-
peachy";  "A  Discourse  of  Trade  Winds,  etc.,  in
the  Torrid  Zone"  (1707);  ami  M  A  Voyage  to  New
Holland"  (1709).  The  best  edition"  of  his  col-
lected voyages  is  in  four  volumes  (London.  1729),

DAMBObCH,  Leopold,  musician,  l>.  in  Posen,
Prussia,  n  Oct..  1832;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16
Feb.,  1885.  At  the  age  of  nine  years  he  began  to
study  the  violin,  but  was  obliged  to  practise  at  the
house  of  friends,  on  account  of  the  opposition  of
his  parents.  Acceding  to  their  wishes,  lie  entered
the  University  of  Berlin,  was  graduated  with  high
honors,  and  received  a  diploma  as  doctor  of  medi-
cine. But  every
leisure  moment
was  given  to  mu-
sic. He  studied
the  violin  under
Hies,  and  thor-
ough Itass  with
Dehn  and  Bohm-
er.  After  his  grad-
uation. Dr.  Dam-
rosch  devoted  his
time  and  energies
to  the  study  of
music,  and  his
tame  ai  a  violin-
ist soon  reached
the  large  cities  of
Germany,  where
he  appeared  with
success.  Shortly
afterward  he  went
to  Weimar,  and  was  cordially  received  by  Liszt,
who  appointed  him  solo-violinist  in  the  Ducal  or-
chestra, of  which  he  was  the  director.  Liszt  dedi-
cated one  of  his  symphonic  poems,  "  I*?  Triomphe
Funelire  de  Tasse,*'  to  Dr.  Damrosch,  an  honor  ex-
tended to  two  others  only — Wagner  and  Berlioz.
Dr.  Datnroseh'sfirst  appearance  as  a  conductor  was
at  the  Philharmonic  concerts  in  Brcslau  in  1808,
where  he  was  highly  successful,  ami  conducted
them  for  three  years.  In  these  concerts  he  gave  a
judicious  mixture  of  popular  and  classic  as  well  as
modern  pieces,  and  in  1862  founded  a  symphonic
society  in  that  city,  with  an  orchestra  of  eighty
performers,  modelled  after  the  (iewandhaus  con-
certs of  Leipsie.  The  fame  of  this  society  soon
extended  throughout  Germany,  ami  several  of  the

performances  were  directed  by  Liszt.  Wagner
also  accepted  the  invitation  to  conduct  his  own
manuscriiit  compositions  in  the  winter  of  lsc.T.
In 1H71 Or. Damrosch  came  to New York  upon


DA  MKOSL'II


m


^'^^v^^i^aZ^


the mutation of  the  Arion  society,  ant.  ,
his  first  appearance,  on  0  May.  I  „,»»,

hall,  as  conductor.  c<>m|»o«rr. and  v t. ,-t ||.

bonded  the  Oratorio  -■  i,m  J,,
ties  that  had previous!}  ■  xtiued  had  fallal.
various  cause.,  and the  onlv  organization.,  of  tht.
character  were  the  old HarmonI
Church-Mu-ic  association. The  work  was  begun
with  enthusiasm,  and  in  the  rant  of  iu  orjcanTse-
lion  the  tirst  oOMOrl  »»■  gtrssj.  v» itli  a  programme
consisting  of  selection*  fron  •ndd,  Pales*

trina.  etc. The  growth  ..f  the  loeletj »a»  audi
that  in  the  following  year  the  first  orator,
dels  "Sjiuisi.il."  was  |»rformitl  with  full  orchestra,
and  on  Christmas  evening  of  that  fear  tht

siah"was  given  with  great  afloat, it  pari
Ha.iis,  Beethoven's,  BrahariL  Handola,  Haydn's,
Ifendelsaohn'a  Mooartla,  Palsetrins's,  »mi

great  works,  many  of  which  had  never  been  given
in  the  United  States.  In  1H77  Dr.  Damr<~  h.  in
connection  with  a  number  <>f  [iirinm  interested
in  the  cultivation  <»f  orchestral  music,  established
the  Symphony  society.  Although  a  M-paratr  or-
ganization, it 'has  become  Identmed  with  the  ora-
torio society  by  the  joint  performance  of  -
notable  works.  The  co-o|>cration  of  |
ties  reached  its  climax  in  the  gnat  ••musical  fes-
tival" which  was  held  in  the  armory  of  the  7th

regiment  in  New  York,  from  ;j  till  ;
The  chorus  numbered  1,200,  the  main  body  being
the  Oratorio  society,  which  was  augmented  by  va-
rious choral  societies  fp.m  neighboring  towi
additional  chorus  of  l.OtMl  young  laUMI  from  the
Normal  college  and  'V+\  boys  from  the  church
choirs  t<Kik  part  in  the  afternoon  OOOOOrtS.  The
orchestra  was  composed  <>f  860  pieces,  and  a  laryr
number  of  artists  were  selected  for  soloists  \>\  Dr.
Damrosch.  Among  the  choral  works  performed
were  Handel's  "Dettingen  Te  Deum"and  "Mes-
siah"; Uubinsteiii's  •*  Tower  of  Babel  "(first  time);
Berlioz's  "Grande  Hesse  des  Hortee"  (first  time);
and  Beethoven's  "Ninth  Symphony."  The  audi-
ence numbered  from  n.ooo  to  10,000  at  each  oon«
cert,  ami  the  enthusiasm  for  the  projector  of  this
enterprise  resulted  in  an  ovation  on  the  last  night.
The  degree  of  Doctor  of  Music  was  conferred  npon
him  by  Columbia  in  l**<>.  In  1881  Dr.  Damrosch
travelled  extensively  through  the  sreat  with  his
orchestra,  meeting  everywhere  with  great  succes*.
Italian  opera,  which,  through  its  -star"  system  and
small  repertory,  had  been  losing  its  hold  open
American  audiences,  received  its  death-blow
when  Dr.  Damrosch  proposed  German  opera  to  the
directors  <>f  the  mw  Metropolitan  opera-house. In

one  i it h.  September,  18ns,  he  engaged  h  -

pan  v.  and  began  the  most  remarkable  »-ries  of
operatic  performances  ever  held  in  this  country.
I  he  company  comprised  some  of  thegraateal  artists
of  the  German  o|>cra-houses.  ami.  in  contrast  with
the  hitherto  prevailing  mode, every  P*rL oven  the
smallest,  was  carefully  presented.  Twelve ol  the
operas  performed  were  comparative  novelties,  the
most important of  which  WOTS  Wagner's  "Tann-

bluser,"  M Lohengrin,"  and  "Die  walkflre,"  and
Beethoven's  -  Fidelia" This  proved  so  fa
Damrosch's  last  effort. He  conduct. si  ■van  par*
formance  except  during  the  last  weak  of  his  Ufa,
when  he  took  eseveweoei,frts»whiohheai

covered.  His  musical  OOaanoaJtioai  include  ssveral
violin  (oncert.-,  "Siilninith."  a  biblical  id)  I.  and  a
-  Festival  Overture."  Be  had  Ihorongh  command
over  the  modern  resources  of  instrumentation,  and
his  musical  ideas  are  characterized  by  giant  no-
bility and  refinement.  Hi*  violin  «-om|-««tions
are  'prized bj woliuist*  as  valuable  additions  to


64


DANA


DAN.v


the  literature  of  that  instrument.  It  was  as  a  con-
ductor, however,  that  he  gained  Ids  neatest  celeb-
rity. He  possessed  strong  personal  magnetism,
united  with  power  to  impart  his  ideas,  which  made
him  an  ideal  conductor.  His  aim  was  always  to
produce  the  inner  meaning  and  spirit  of  a  compo-
sition. Through  his  gentle  bearing  and  high  cul-
ture he  gained  many  warm  friends.  Never  seek-
ing for  immediate  fame  or  personal  success,  he
found  that  high  truth  which  he  extended  in  his
art. — His  son,  Walter  Johannes,  b.  in  Bres-
lau,  Prussia,  80  Jan.,  1862,  received  his  musical
education  chiefly  from  his  father,  but  also  had
instruction  from  other  noted  musicians.  During
the  great  music  festival  given  by  Dr.  Damrosch  in
May,  1881,  he  first  acted  as  conductor  in  drilling
several  sections  of  the  large  chorus,  one  in  New
York,  and  another  in  Newark,  N.  J.  The  latter,
consisting  chiefly  of  members  of  the  Harmonic
society,  elected  him  to  be  their  conductor.  Un-
der his  leadership  this  society  regained  its  former
reputation,  and  during  this  time  a  series  of  con-
certs was  given,  in  which  such  works  as  Rubin-
stein's "  Tower  of  Babel,"  Berlioz's  "  Damnation
de  Faust,"  and  Verdi's  "  Requiem  "  were  performed.
He  was  then  only  nineteen  years  or  age,  but
showed  marked  ability  in  drilling  large  masses.
During  Dr.  Damrosch  s  last  illness  his  son  was
suddenly  called  upon  to  conduct  the  German
opera,  which' he  did  with  success,  and  after  his
father's  death  was  appointed  to  be  assistant  di-
rector and  conductor  at  the  Metropolitan  opera-
house,  and  also  to  succeed  him  as  conductor  of
the  Symphony  and  Oratorio  societies.  One  of  his
principal  achievements  was  the  successful  per-
formance of  "  Parsifal,"  perhaps  the  most  difficult
of  Wagner's  operas,  for  the  first  time  in  the
United  States,  in  March,  1886,  by  the  Oratorio  and
Symphony  societies.  During  his  visit  to  Europe
in  the  summer  of  1886  he  was  invited  by  the
Deutsche  Tonkilnstler-Verein,  of  which  Dr.  Franz
Liszt  was  president,  to  conduct  some  of  his  father's
compositions  at  Sondershausen,  Thuringia.  Carl
Golumark's  opera  "  Merlin  "  was  produced  for  the
first  time  in  tne  United  States  under  his  direction,
at  the  Metropolitan  opera-house.  3  Jan.,  1887.

DANA,  Charles  Anderson,  editor,  b.  in  Hins-
dale, N.  H.,  8  Aug.,  1819.  He  is  a  descendant  of  Ja-
cob, eldest  son  of  Richard  Dana,  progenitor  of  most
of  those  who  bear  the  name  in  the  United  States.
His  boyhood  was  spent  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  where  he
worked  in  a  store  until  he  was  eighteen  years  old.
At  that  age  he  first  studied  the  Latin  grammar,
and  prepared  himself  for  college,  entering  Harvard
in  1839,  but  after  two  years  a  serious  trouble  with
his  eyesight  compelled  him  to  leave.  He  received
an  honorable  dismissal,  and  was  afterward  given
his  bachelor's  and  master's  degrees.  In  1842  he
became  a  member  of  the  Brook  Farm  association
for  agriculture  and  education,  being  associated
with  George  and  Sophia  Ripley,  George  William
Curtis,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  Theodore  Parker,
William  Henry  Channing,  John  Sullivan  Dwight,
Margaret  Fuller,  and  other  philosophers  more  or
less  directly  concerned  in  the  remarkable  attempt
to  realize  at  Roxbury  a  high  ideal  of  social  and
intellectual  life.  One  of  the  survivors  of  Brook
Farm  speaks  of  Mr.  Dana  as  the  only  man  of
affairs  connected  with  that  unitarian,  humanitarian,
and  socialistic  experiment.  His  earliest  news-
paper experience  was  gained  in  tSe  management
of  the  "  Harbinger,"  which  was  devoted  to  social
reform  and  general  literature.  After  about  two
years  of  editorial  work  on  Elizur  Wright's  Boston
"  Chronotype,"  a  daily  newspaper,  Mr.  Dana  joined


rJA


o<*


the  staff  of  the  New  York  "Tribune"  in  1847.
The  next  year  he  spent  eight  months  in  Europe,
and  after  Ins  return  ne  l>ecaine  one  of  the  proprie-
tors and  the  managing  editor  of  the  **  Tribune."  a
port  which  he  held  until  1  April,  1862.  The  ex-
traordinary influence  and  circulation  attained  by
that  newspaper  during  the  ten  years  preceding  tin-
civil  war  was  in  a  degree  due  to  the  development
of  Mr.  Dana's  genius  for  journalism.  This  re-
mark applies  not  only  to  the  making  of  the  "  Trib-
une "  as  a  newspaper,  but  also  to  the  manage-
ment of  its  staff  of  writers,  and  to  the  steadiness
of  its  policy  as  the
leading  organ  of
anti-slavery  senti-
ment. The  great
struggle  of  the
"Tribune"  under
Greeley  and  Dana
was  not  so  much
for  the  overthrow
of  slavery  where
it  already  existed
as  against  the  fur-
ther spread  of  the
institution  over
unoccupied  terri-
tory, and  the  ac-
quisition of  slave-
holding  countries
outside  of  the
Union.  It  was  not
less  firm  in  its  re-
sistance of  the  designs  of  the  slave-holding  in-
terest than  wise  in  its  attitude  toward  the  ex-
tremists and  impracticables  at  the  north.  In
the  "  Tribune's "  opposition  to  the  attempt  to
break  down  the  Missouri  compromise  and  to  carry
slavery  into  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  and  in  the  de-
velopment and  organization  of  that  popular  senti-
ment which  gave  birth  to  the  Republican  party
and  led  to  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln  in
1860,  Mr.  Dana  bore  no  unimportant  part.  Writ-
ing of  the  political  situation  in  1854,  Henry  Wilson
says,  in  his  "Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Slave  Power":
"At  the  outset,  Mr.  Greeley  was  hopeless  and
seemed  disinclined  to  enter  the  contest.  He  told
his  associates  that  he  would  not  restrain  them,
but,  as  for  himself,  he  had  no  heart  for  the  strife.
They  were  more  hopeful ;  and  Richard  Hildreth,
the  historian,  Charles  A.  Dana,  the  veteran  jour-
nalist, James  S.  Pike,  and  other  able  writers,
opened  and  continued  a  powerful  opposition  in  its
columns,  and  did  very  much  to  rally  and  reassure
the  friends  of  freedom  and  to  nerve  them  for  the
fight."  In  1861  Mr.  Dana  went  to  Albany  to  ad-
vance the  cause  of  Mr.  Greeley  as  a  candidate  for
the  U.  S.  senate,  and  nearly  succeeded  in  nominat-
ing him.  The  caucus  was  about  equally  divided
between  Mr.  Greeley's  friends  and  those  of  Mr.
Evarts,  while  Ira  Harris  had  a  few  votes  which
held  the  balance  of  power,  and,  at  the  instigation
of  Thurlow  Weed,  the  supporters  of  Mr.  Evarts
went  over  to  Judge  Harris.  During  the  first  year
of  the  war  the  ideas  of  Mr.  Greeley  and  those  of
Mr.  Dana  in  regard  to  the  proper  conduct  of  mili-
tary operations  were  somewhat  at  variance;  and
this  disagreement  resulted  in  the  resignation  of
Mr.  Dana,  after  fifteen  years'  service  on  the  "  Trib-
une." He  was  at  once  employed  by  Secretary
Stanton  in  special  work  of  importance  for  the  war
department,  and  in  1863  was  appointed  assistant
secretary  of  war,  which  office  he  held  until  after
the  surrender  of  Lee.  His  duties  as  the  repre-
sentative of  the  civil  authority  at  t£e  scene  of


80


military  i  brought htm  Into  doss  per-

sonal relations  with  Mr.  Stunt- >n  and  Mr.  Line. In.
who  win-  iKcw-t'Minil  l.»  depend  BOOB  u|k>ii  hi*
accurate  perception  and  ju-t  estimates  of  men  ami
measures  f(.r  information  ,,f  the  iu-t ual  state  of
iifTair"«  at  the  front.  At  the  time  when  (ten.  (irant's
character  ami  prohibit-  usefulness  were  unknown
quantities.  Mr.  Dana's  confidence  in  (J rant's  mili-
tary ability  probably  •  1  i< I  mnoh  to  defenl  the
•  rful  effort  then  making  to  break  down  tin
firing  commander.  Of  this  critical  period  Gen.
Sherman  remarks  in  his  "Memoirs":  "One  clay
early  in  April,  lsW.  I  was  up  at  Grant's  bead-
marten  [at  viohaburgl  and  we  talked  over  all
these  things  with  absolute  freedom.  <  hurl.—  A.
Dana,  assistant  secretary  <>f  war,  was  there,  ami
Wilson,  Rawlins,  Frank Blair, MoPhenon,  ate.

\\  • all knew, what was notorious, that (i<n.

McCleruand  was  intriguing  egainri  Gen.  Grant,  in
hopes  to  regain  command  of  the  whole  expedi-

tion.  and  that  others  were  raising  clamor  apiinst
(Jrant  in  the  pewapaporsof  the  north.  Kv.n  Mr.
Lincoln  and  Gen.  Hallcck  seemed  to  be  shaken;
but  at  no  instant  did  we  (his  personal  friends)
slacken  in  our  loyalty  to  him."  Mr.  Dane  WM  in
the  saddle  at  the  front  much  of  the  time  during
t  he  campaigns  of  northern  Mississippi  and  Vick--
burg,  the  rescue  of  Chattanooga,  ana  the  marches
and  luittlesof  Virginia  in  1864  and  1865.  After
the  war  his  services  were  sought  by  the  proprietors
of  the  Chicago  "  Republican."  a  new  daily,  which
failed  through  causes  not  within  the  editor's  con-
trol. Returning  to  New  York,  he  organized  in
1867  the  stock  company  that  now  owns  the  '•  Sun  "
newspaper,  and  became  its  editor.  The  first  num-
ber of  the  "  Sun  "  issued  by  Mr.  Dana  ap[>eared  on
'21  Jan.,  186H,  and  for  nearly  twenty  years  he  has
been  actively  and  continuously  engaged  in  the
management  of  that  successful  journal,  and  solely
responsible  for  its  conduct.  He  made  the  "Sun"
a  democratic  newspaper,  independent  and  out-
spoken in  the  expression  of  its  opinions  respecting
the  affairs  of  either  party.  His  criticisms  of  civil
maladministration  during  Gen.  Grant's  terms  as
president  led  to  a  notable  attempt  on  the  part  of
that  administration,  in.lulv,  1873,  to  take  him  from
New  York  on  a  charge  of  libel,  to  be  tried  without
a  jury  in  a  Washington  police  court.  Applica-
tion was  made  to  the  U.  S.  district  court  in  New-
York  for  a  warrant  of  removal;  but  in  a  memo-
rable decision  Judge  Blatchford,  now  a  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States,  refused
the  warrant,  holding  the  proposed  form  of  trial  to
be  unconstitutional.  Perhaps  to  a  greater  extent
than  in  the  case  of  any  other  conspicuous  journal-
ist, Mr.  Dana's  personality  is  identified  in  the
public  mind  with  the  newspaper  that  he  edits.  He
has  recorded  no  theories  of  journalism  other  than
those  of  common  sense  and  human  interest,  lie  i-
impatient  of  prolixity,  cant,  and  the  conventional
standards  of  news  importance.  Mr.  Dana's  first
book  was  a  volume  of  stories  translated  from  the
German,  entitled  "The  Black  Ant"  (New  York
and  Leipsic,  1848).  In  1855  he  planned  and  edited,
with  George  Ripley,  the  u New  American  Cyclopa--
dia."  The  original  edition  was  completed  in  l***!.
It  has  since  been  thoroughly  revised  and  issued  in
a  BOW  edition  under  the  title  of  "The  American
( 'yelorwdia "  (16  role,  New  York,  ls;:{-'(}).  With
<  ifi».  Jamei  II.  Wilson  he  wrote  a  "  Life  of  Ulysses
s.  (Irani"  (Springfield.  186H).  His  -Household
Hook  of  Poetry,  a  collection  of  the  best  minor
poems  of  the  English  language,'1  was  first  pub!
B  1807,  and  has  na*sed  through  many  editions,
the  latest,  thoroughly  mind,  bring  that  of  1884.

VOL. IL 6


Ho  has  nl«,  edited,  with  Bosjtesj  Mhhl  "  Kiftr
Perfi  k.  1HW8).

DAN  V. Jam.-  «  •inbridia,

Mass.,  1 1 M

1811.  IL  wa>  a  neph.w  of  Ki.hi.rd.  »mi
descendant  through  Caleb,  second  son  of  Daniel.
who  was  the  voiiiigest  son  of  Richard  Dana.  He
was  -raduated  at  Harvard  in  1 758,  and  remained
in  the  college  as  a  resident  graduate  for  several

stodyinj  theology  and  general  literature.
In  October,  1758,  he  was  ordained  and  i
..f  the  Congregational  church  in  Wniiingford.
Conn.,  succeeding  the  Rev.  Samuel  .'•
After  he  had  accepted  this  ■  all.  1 1.. ■  consociation
prohibited  his  ordination ;  bal  the  .  hun-h  and  no-
ddy, together  with  Mr.  Dana.  penUted  in  their
action. SuhMHjuciitly  the . .  i,- ...  ml  ion  pronounced

a  rantanos  of  oomHsoaaannlon  against  them,  and
deolared  the  ministers  and  dsJegwi  of  the  evdrih>
tngooundl  to  be  "disorderly  nereone,  and  not  fit

t<>  sit  in  any  of  our  rorlfwiastiral  coundb)  until
they  shall  char  up  their  conduct  to  the  Satisfaction
Of  the  consociation  of  New  Haven  county."  The
controversy was essentially between the "Old*

Light  "and  the  "  Tf  <nr  T  light  **  partial  Mr.  Drum
was  regarded  as  a  partisan  of  the  liberal  sohod  of
Boston, and  the  mfnisteTs  forming  the.-iin-wiati-.il
of  New  Haven  were  little  dispose-.!  to  have
their  prominent  churches  committed  t<>  the  <«rv  of
a  pastor  whom  they  considered  as  baring  dej«arted

so  far  from  their  own  Standard  Of  Christian  d<«--

trine.  Mr.  Dana  ami  the  ordaining  olenn  than
formed  an  associstJOP  by  themselves,  which  cott*
tinued  until  alxuit  1772,  when  the  controversy  was
terminated  by  pacific  overtures  made  by  the  minis-
ters then  constituting  the  wmttwiation It

dent  that  tl rdination  was  a  departure  from  the

Saybrook  platform,  becansa  the  ordaining  wwmiHI
was  not  limited  to  the  consociation.  It  was  tanta-
mount to  an  assertion  of  independence  of  the
church,  in  disregard  of  the  platform.  The  mem-
bers of  the  council  wen-  regarded  as  inclining  to
Arminianism.  However,  the  prejudice  a^wi:
Dana  gradually  disappeared,  and  he  made  hfaneatf
very  popular  by  the  derided  stand  that  be  took  in
favor  of  the  American  cause  in  the  events  that  led
to  the  Revolution. His  patriotic  sermons,  delivered

in  New  Haven  while  the  legislators  was  in  session,
wen  effective  in  winning  many  t<>  his  rapport.  In
l?s<»  be  became  pastor  of  the  first  church  in  Nee
Haven,  and  was  installed  on  89  April.  Beta  »••
came  into  controversy  with  Jonathan  Kdwards  and
Samuel  Austin:  but.  for  the  most  part,  Mi  minis-
try was  peaceful  though  not  eminently  successful.

He  was  succeeded ill this  pastorals i>> tie
Stuart  in  l s< ir>.  bat  his  relation  was  -.
only  by  an  eonlesiaeticaJ  council. This  proosdura
deeply  wounded  Dr.  Dana,  and  thereafter  hewor-
ahipped  In  the  ooUega  chapel,  ■Hhongh  subeeojoent
to  Sir.  Stuart'e  departure  be  again  annealed  ■  hi*

old  church  and  Offloiotsd  M  moderator  at  the  in-
stallation of  Dr.  N.  v7.  Taylor  in  April.  1812.  The
University  of  Edinburgh  oooferred  on  him  thede-

Cr. f  D".  D.  in 1768. lb-  published,  bsridei  B0-

morial  and  other  sermons,  •■  Kxaminatioii  «'f  Kd-
wards OB  the  Will."  anonvinous  (BootOB,  177".
and  -An  Bxamination  of  the  Same  Continued
(N.w  Haven,  177M).— His  -on.  Samuel  Whittle
sej,  senator,  h.  in  Wallingfonl.  Conn..  II  reb..
lWOj  .1.  in  Middletown.  tl  -lulv.  1880,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  177*).  and  Iwcamea  distingin^iejl
lawyer.  He  was  elected  to  .  onirress  as  e  federal-
ist, and,  with  sultseoueni  re-elections,  serve«l  fn«m
.1  Jan..  IT'.*:,  till  1  May.  1X10.  when  he  waa  fleeted
,tor  to  succeed  James  Hillhouse. He


66


DANA


DANA


remained  in  the  senate  until  8  March,  1821,  and
afterward  made  his  home  in  Middletown,  where  for
many  years  lie  was  mayor.

DANA,  James  Dwight,  mineralogist,  b.  in  Uti-
<a.  N.  V..  IS  Fel>..  181&  He  was  attracted  to  New
Haven  by  the  reputation  of  Prof.  Benjamin  Silli-
man,  under  whose  guidance  many  of  the  subse-
quent leaders  in  American  science  received  their
earliest  training.  He  was  graduated  in  1833  and
appointed  instructor  of  mathematics  to  midship-
men in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  in  this  capacity  visited
the  seaports  of  France,  Italy,  Greece,  and  Turkey
while  on  the  "  Delaware  "  and  the  "  United  States. '
In  1836-'8  he  was  assistant  in  chemistry  to  Prof.
Silliman.  Meanwhile,  in  December,  1836,  he  was
appointed  mineralogist  and  geologist  to  the  U.  S.
exploring  expedition,  then  about  to  be  sent  by  the
government  of  the  United  States  to  the  Southern
and  Pacific  oceans  under  the  command  of  Capt.
Charles  Wilkes.  The  expedition  sailed  in  August,
1838,  and  Mr.  Dana  was  on  board  the  "  Peacock"
until  it  was  wrecked  on  a  sand-bar  at  the  mouth
of  Columbia  river.  In  June,  1842,  after  an  ab-
sence of  three  years  and  ten  months,  Mr.  Dana  re-
turned home.  Besides  the  mineralogy  and  ge-
ology, he  had  under  his  supervision  the  zoological

departments,  in-
cluding the  Crus-
tacea and  corals.
During  the  thir-
teen years  that
followed  he  was
occupied  princi-
pally in  study-
ing the  material
that  he  had  col-
lected, making
drawings,  and
preparing  the  re-
ports for  publica-
tion. From  1842
till  1844  he  re-
sided in  Wash-
ington, and  then
removed  to  New
Haven,  where  he
^\  / married  Henriet-

/\<\/wv**' W  .  &-cu4*o— ' ta  Frances,  third

daughter  of  Prof.
Silliman,  and  has
since  continued
to  reside.  The  results  of  his  labors  were  given  in
his  "  Reports  on  Zoophytes "  (4to,  with  an  atlas
of  61  folio  plates,  1846),  in  which  he  proposed  a
new  classification,  and  described  230  new  species  ;
the  "  Report  on  the  Geology  of  the  Pacific  "  (4to,
with  an  atlas  of  21  plates,  1849) ;  and  the  "  Report
on  Crustacea"  (4to,  with  an  atlas  of  96  folio  plates,
1852-'4).  These  were  published  by  the  government
in  Washington,  and  only  100  copies  of  each  were
issued.  With  few  exceptions,  the  drawings  in  the
atlases  were  made  by  Mr.  Dana  himself.  He  was
appointed  Silliman  professor  of  natural  history  and
geology  at  Yale  in  1850,  and  entered  on  the  ad-
ministrations of  the  chair  in  1855.  The  subse-
quent delivery  of  the  lectures  on  natural  history  by
others  led  to  a  change  in  the  title  of  the  professor-
ship, in  1864,  to  that  of  geology  and  mineralogy.
Prof.  Dana  became,  about  1850,  associate  editor  of
the  "American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,"
founded  by  the  elder  Silliman  in  1819.  Subsequent
to  the  death  of  Prof.  Silliman  he  became  its  senior
editor,  and  now,  in  conjunction  with  his  son,  Ed-
ward S.  Dana,  continues  its  publication.  In  1872  the
Geological  society  of  London  conferred  on  him  its


^~


Wollaston  medal,  and  in  1877  he  received  the  Cop-
lev  sold  medal  from  the  Royal  society  of  London.
He  is  a  member  of  scientific  socictio  in  the  United
States  and  abroad,  including  the  Royal  society  of
London,  the  Institute  of  France,  the  Royal  acade-
my of  the  Lincei  of  Boom,  the  Royal  academic-  c,f
Berlin,  Vienna,  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  mi  mm
of  the  original  members  of  the  National  academy
of  sciences  in  the  United  States.  Prof.  Dana
was  elected  president  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1854,  and  in
August  of  the  following  year  delivered  his  retir-
ing address  at  the  Providence  meeting.  In  1872,
on  the  celebration  of  the  fourth  centennial  of  the
University  of  Munich,  he  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.,  and  in  1886,  at  the  Harvard  celebration,  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him.  His
contributions  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science
and  Arts,"  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American
Academy."  to  the  "Transactions  of  the  Lyceum  of
Natural  History  of  New  York,"  and  to  the  "  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of
Philadelphia,"  include  hundreds  of  titles.  His
works  in  book-form  are  "  System  of  Mineralogy  "
(New  Haven,  1837;  5th  ed.,  revised,  New  York,
1868);  "Manual  of  Mineralogy"  (New  Haven,
1848;  4th  ed.,  revised,  New  York,  1886);  "Coral
Reefs  and  Islands  "  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  Manual  of
Geology  "  (Philadelphia,  1863 ;  3d  ed.,  revised,  New
York,  1880) ;  "  Text-Book  of  Geology  "  (1864 ;  4th
ed.,  revised,  1883);  "Corals  and  Coral  Islands"
(New  York,  1853);  "The  Geological  Story  briefly
told  "  (1875).— His  son,  Edward  Salisbury,  min-
eralogist, b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  16  Nov.,  1849,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1870,  where,  in  1876,  he
received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,  and  has  also  studied
in  Heidelberg  and  in  Vienna.  In  1874  he  became
tutor  in  mathematics  at  Yale,  and  also  curator  of
the  mineral  cabinet  in  the  Peabody  museum.  He
was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  natural  phi-
losophy and  astronomy  in  1879,  and  in  1875  be-
came one  of  the  editors  of  Silliman's  "  American
Journal  of  Science."  Dr.  Dana  is  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies,  and  in  1884  was  elected  a
member  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  In
1885  he  was  made  a  trustee  of  the  Peabody  mu-
seum of  Yale.  Besides  memoirs  on  mineralogical
and  kindred  subjects,  contributed  to  scientific  jour-
nals in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  he  has
published  "  Appendix  II."  (1875)  and  "  Appendix
III."  (1883)  of  Dana's  "System  of  Mineralogy";
"Text-Book  of  Mineralogy"  (New  York,  1877);
and  "  Text-Book  of  Mechanics  "  (1881).

DANA,  J  oseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,
2  Nov.,  1742;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1827.
He  was  a  grandson  of  Benjamin,  the  third  son  of
Richard,  the  progenitor  of  all  that  bear  the  name
in  the  United  States,  who,  according  to  the  family
tradition,  was  the  son  of  a  French  Huguenot  that
settled  in  England  in  1629.  Joseph  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1760,  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained
on  7  Nov.,  1765,  minister  of  the  South  society  of
Ipswich,  over  which  he  presided  for  sixty-two
years.  Many  of  his  occasional  discourses  were
published.  — His  grandson,  Israel  Thorndike,
physician,  b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,  6  June.  1  *■,'?.
studied  under  his  father,  Samuel,  who  was  minister
of  Marblehead,  and  in  the  academy  of  that  town,
attended  medical  lectures  at  Harvard,  was  gradu-
ated M.  D.  in  1850,  and  during  the  three  following
years  studied  medicine  in  New  York  city,  Dublin,
and  Paris.  In  1853  he  settled  in  Portland,  and
gave  special  attention  to  diseases  of  the  heart  and
lungs.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Port-
land school  of medical instruction*  and  of  the


DANA


07


Maine  general  hoonHnli  <>f  irhkh  In-  bti  hose,  at-
tending physician  since  its  opening  in  1875.  In
i  i  be  was  protenr  of  materia  mcdica.  and
in  1861-t  of  the  theory  and  pnwtii •«•  <>r  mtdferflf
in  the  Medical  school  of  .Maim-.  connected  with
Bowdoin  college.  This  chair  In-  resumed  in  l-
Bi  hai  contributed  t<>  professional  literatim'  pa-
iM-r>  <>n  the  use  of  tlif  stethosco|N>  in  detcrmin-
i n VT  'lie  position  of  the  foetus  in  ntero,  on  abor-
tion,  ami  <>n  defective  drainage  and
and  has  published  various  addresses.  He  tlso
prepared  the  articles  on  ••  Drop*]  ami  ••  Inflam-
mation of  the  Intestines'1  in  Wood's  "Reference

Band-Book of the Mt-dical Sciences." Si-ter- nf

Dr.  Dana  married  Seth  Ames,  Jacob  Abbott,  and

William  H.  Lawrence.  Israel  Thorndike  was  la-
unch.—Samuel, nephew of Joseph, clergyman.

l>.  in  Cambridge  (now  Brighton),  Mass.,  ii  Jan..

I7::i»;  d.  in Amherst, N.  11..  1  April,  17'.)*,  was

{graduated  at  Harvard  in  1756,  baring  among
ii-  (dam mates  John  Adams  and  Tristram  Dal-
tnn.  after  whieh  he  studied  theology.  In  17'il
the  town  of  (iroton  invited  him  to  become  their
minister  "with  a  settlement  of  £200,  a  salary  of
£'80,  and  firewood  not  to  exceed  thirty  cords  "per
annum."  He  accepted  this  call,  and  was  in-tailed
on  :»  June  as  rocoassor  toOalefa  Trowbridge.  Dur-
ing the  troubles  that  preceded  the  Revolutionary
war,  believing  that  resistance  would  lead  to  greater
evils  than  were  then  endured,  he  used  his  influence
on  the  side  of  non-resistance. This  course  gave

freat  offence  to  his  parishioners,  who  prevented
im  from  entering  the  meeting-house,  although
the  whig  committee  of  Groton  published  a  card
to  the  effect  that  .Mr.  Dana  had  fully  atoned  for
his  offences.  The  good  will  of  his  people  had  be-
come alienated,  and  hit  dismissal  soon  followed.  He
continued  to  reside  in  Groton.  where  he  cultivated
a  -mall  farm,  and  in  1780  preached  to  a  seiwrate
society.  On  the  death  of  John  Bnlkeley,  he  be-
came executor  of  his  will.  and.  removing  the  ex-
tensive law  library  to  hisown  residence,  be  studied
for  that  profession.  Subsequently  he  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  and  practised  in  Amherst.  X.  II..
where  in  1787  he  was  made  judge  of  probate  for
Hillsborough  county,  and  in  1798  was  state  sena-
tor,— His  son,  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Groton,  Ma-s..
M  June,  17<i7:  d.  in  (  harlestown,  20  tfoV,  1885.
He  studied  law,  and  became  prominent  in  that
profession  in  Chariest  own,  where  he  and  Timothy
Bigelow  were  professional  and  political  rivals,
Mr.  Dana  being  a  Jeffersonian  democrat,  and  Mr.
Bigelow  a  federalist.  In  his  s|>ceches  at  the  bur  be
was  smooth,  gentle,  and  insinuating,  as  Mr.  Bige-
low  was  bold,  rapid,  and  vehement.  He  filled  va-
rious local  offices,  was  a  member  of  the  Massachu-
sett-  senate,  and  its  president  for  eitrht  rears,  and
served  in  congress  from  89  Sept..  1814,  till  :{  March.
1*1.-).  Subsequently  he  received  the  appointment  of
chief  justice  of  the  circuit  court  of  common  pleas.
— James  Freeman,  nephew  of  Samuel  and  grand-
son of  Samuel,  chemist,  b.  in  Amherst,  N\  II..  88
Sept,  17JW;  d.  in  New  York  city.  11  April.  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1H1:{.  and  at  the
medical  department  in  1817.  Se  studied  with  Dr.
John  Gorham,  and  developed  such  ability  that  in
1815  he  was  selected  by  the  authorities  of  Harvard
to  procurator  the  chemical  laboratory  a  new  out-
fit  of  apparatus.  For  this  purpose  he  visited  Lon-
don, wliere  for  six  month-  he  worked  in  the  lal>-
orutory  of  Friediich  Christian  Aooum.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  settled  in  Cam-
bridge, where  he  practised  medicine  and  was  ap-
pointed  assistant  to  the  chair  in  chemistry.  In
1M7  he  was  invited  to  lecture  on  chemistry  at


Dartmouth,  ami  in  1*20  became  the  fimt  professor
of  chemi-trv  and  BuneiBlogj  m  that  m-nmtion.
He  watt  chosen  professor  of  cheun-tn  in  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  and  -ur.

ml  continm
a  student  m  Cambridge,  ho  rseeired  the  Boylston
prise  for  a  dissertation  on  the  "  Tests  for  Anwnie/*
end  again  in  1817  isjooived  the  for  an

essay  on  the  •*  Composition  of  Oxymui
lb>  contributed  numerous  stdeniifie
Silliman's  "  American  Journal  nl
the  ••  Annals  of  the  Nan  York  l,\e.-um  of  Natural

History."  Hi-  larger  works  ere,  with  bis  brother,
"Outlines  of  Mineralogy  and  G<  Hasten

and  it-  Vicinity"  (Boston.  1818).  and  "  I
Chemical  I'hilosophv  "  (Concord.  N.  II..  1888). —
His  brother.  Samuel  Luther.  -  InnnM.  b.  in  Am-
her-t.  N.  II..  ii  July,  1788;  d.  In  LowsU,  Ma**,  11
Manh,  1888.  He  studied  al  Phillips  Bieteraoade-
my,  and  was  graduated  at  Bemud  m  1811

-iron-  of  becoming  a  military  engineer,  he  applied

for  an  appointment  to  the  ('.  s.  military  eeedeajr,

but  in-tend  WM  OOmmlssioned  a  lieutenant in  the

1st  artillerv.  He  serred  during  the  war  b
York  and  Virginia,  and  at  it-  CMOS  lerigcnod  from
the  army.  Suboeouently  he  studied  nfflrfnt.  nn«l
was  graduated  at  Harvard  mtdioel  school  in  is*.
From  1818  till  1888  he  practised  in  Walt  ham.
Mass.,  where  he  WM  brought  into  intimate  rela-
tion- with the  early  cotton  manufacturer-  of  the

state,  and  hi-  fondness  for  physical  eeienoi

mined  him  to  devote  his  attention  tooheeeistn  M
applied  to  the  manufacture  ami  coloring  of  cotton
goods.  About  1886  be  established  alanoratorj  m
Walt  ham  f<>r  the  manufacture  of  sulphurii
and  bleaching-ealts,  which  afterward  was  i
in  the  Newton  chemical  company,  and  he  wa*  its
chemist  until  i*:u.  In  ist:{  be  visited  Europe,
and  spent  some  time  in  England  prosecuting  chemi-
cal investigations.  <»n  hi-  return  be  removed  to
Lowell,  where  be  became  resident  and  consulting
chemist  to  the  Merrimack  manufacturing  company,
and  continued  as  such  until  bis  death.  Hi-  inves-
ligation  in  the  bleaching  of  cotton  led  to  the  in-
vention of  the  so-called  -American  system"  of
bleaching,  which  attracted  much  attention  abroad
when  first  published  in  1888 in  the  "Bulletin  <le  la
soeicte  indu-trielle  de  Mulhouse."  Many  other  im-
portant  improvements  in  the  printing  <>1  cottons
and  the  chemical  processes  Involved  in  thai  *<ck
were  mad."  by  him,  and  gave  to  the  goods  pi
in  Lowell  a  high  reputation  in  the  United  State*.
His  researches  on  the  action  <>f  cow-manure  as  a
mordant,  showing  that  it-  fixing  pn-pcrt
.In  to  the  sodium  phosphate  that  it  contain-,  with
the  subsequent  Introduction  of  "substitutes,  was,
a  decided  advance  in  the  art  of  calico-printing.
Dr.  Dana  prepared  for  the  city  of  Lowell  a  valua-
ble re|M.rt  OU  the  injurious  influence  of  lead  pipes
for  water  used  for  drinking  and  culinary  put
His  interest  In  this  subject  l<-d  him  mbsequsotlv
to  translate  from  the  French  n  "Timlin  on  mm
Disease-."  He  oontribnted  many  pant
nioal  topko  to  the  "  North  amerl  ■  "end

Silliman's  "  American  Journal  of  Siciicc."  and.  in
conjunction  with  his  brother.  James  Fret-man  Dana,
he  published  "Outlines  of  Mineralogy  and  Geojo-
rj  of  Bostoo  and  it-  Yicinity m (Boston,  18M
oiher  works  include  -chemical  Changeo oaenntnf,

in  the  Manufacture  of  Sulphuric  A-id  "  (IKtti,  and
his  investigations  in  chemistry  applied  to  «.
ture  led  (■•  th. publication  of  "  Mttt  k  Manual  for
Manures" (Lowell,  1848). for  which  he  re-
prize from  the  Massaohusetteeocietv  for  pn
agriculiure.  and  also  an  "  Essay  on  Manures


68


DANA


DANA


York,  1843).  Prof.  Benjamin  Silliman.  Jr.,  wrote
of  him  :  "  In  point  of  time,  originality,  and  ability,
Dr.  Dana  stood  deservedly  first  among  scientific
writ ers  on  agriculture  in  the  United  States." — Na-

Eoleon  Jackson  Tcciimsch.  nephew  of  Samuel
uther  and  Jamei  Preeman, soldier, b. in  Fort  Sul-
livan, Fast  port.  Me..  18  April,  1888.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U,  S.  inilitarv  academy  in  1842,  and.
after  l>eing  appointed  in  the  ?th  infantry  as  second
lieutenant,  served  on  garrison  duty  in  the  south-
weet.  Dnrlng  tin-  Mexican  war  he  served  with
distinction,  and  was  present  at  many  of  the  im-
portant engagements,  being  severely  wounded  in
storming  the  intrenchments  at  the  battle  of  Cerro
Gordo.  He  became  captain  on  the  staff  and  assist-
ant quartermaster  in  March,  1848,  and  until  1855
served  in  garrison  duty,  principally  in  Minnesota.
Prom  1855  till  1861  he  was  a  banker  in  St.  Paul,
Minn.,  and  was  brigadier-general  of  the  militia
from  1857  till  1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  ac-
companied the  1st  Minnesota  infantry  as  colonel  to
the  front,  becoming  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers in  February,  1862,  and  attached  to  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  He  served  in  the  battles  before
Richmond,  and  at  Antietam  commanded  a  bri-
gade in  Gen.  John  Sedgwick's  division  of  Gen.
Edwin  V.  Sumner's  corps,  and  was  severely  wound-
ed. He  was  commissioned  maior-general  of  vol-
unteers in  November,  1862,  and  was  in  command
of  the  defences  of  Philadelphia  during  the  inva-
sion of  Pennsylvania  by  the  Confederate  army  in
1863.  Afterward  he  joined  the  Army  of  the  Gulf,
and  commanded  the  expedition  by  sea  to  the  Rio
Grande,  landing  at  Brazos  Santiago,  and  driving  the
Confederate  forces  as  far  as  Laredo,  Texas.  He
then  successively  commanded  the  13th  army  corps,
the  district  of  Vicksburg,  the  16th  army  corps,  the
districts  of  west  Tennessee  and  Vicksburg,  and
finally  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  in  May,
1865,  he  resigned  from  the  army  and  engaged  in
mining  operations  in  the  western  states.  From
1866  till  1871  he  was  general  agent  of  the  Ameri-
can-Russian commercial  company  of  San  Francisco,
in  Alaska  and  Washington,  after  which  he  became
superintendent  of  railroads  in  Illinois,  and  in  1878
of  the  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy  railroad.

DANA,  Judah,  senator,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  25
April,  1772 ;  d.  in  Fryeburg.  Me.,  27  Dec,  1845.  His
mother  was  the  eldest  daughter  of  Gen.  Israel  Put-
nam. His  father,  John  Winchester,  and  the  Rev.
Joseph,  of  Ipswich,  were  both  grandsons  of  Benja-
min, the  third  son  of  Richard.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1795,  studied  law,  and  began  practice,
in  1798,  in  Fryeburg,  then  in  Massachusetts.  He  was
government  attorney  for  Oxford  county  in  1805-'ll,
judge  of  probate  in  1811-'22,  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  from  1811  till  1823,  judge  of  the
circuit  court,  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
framed  the  state  constitution  of  Maine  in  1819,
and  in  1833  was  elected  a  member  of  the  executive
council.  He  was  an  adherent  of  the  democratic
party,  and,  on  the  resignation  of  Ether  Shepley,
was  appointed  U.  S.  senator,  serving  from  21  Dec,
1836,  till  3  March,  1837.— His  son,  John  Winches-
ter, governor  of  Maine,  b.  in  Fryeburg.  Me.,  21
Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  near  Rosario,  New  Grenada.  22  Dec,
1867.  He  was  for  many  years  an  active  democratic
politician  in  Maine,  snn  from  1847  till  1850  was
governor  of  the  state.  *  In  1853  he  went  to  Bolivia
as  charge  d'affaires,  was  commissioned  minister
resident  on  29  June,  1854,  and  held  that  post  till
10  March,  1859.  In  1861  he  was  again  a  candidate
for  governor  of  Maine,  but  was  defeated.  Soon
afterward  he  went  to  South  America,  where  he
resided  at  the  time  of  his  death.


DANA,  Stephen  Winchester,  clergyman,  b,  in
Canaan,  N.  V..  17  Nov.,  1840.  He  was  "the  son  of
a  Congregational  clergyman,  and  descended  in  the
eighth  generation  from "Kichard.  through  Benjamin,
the  third  son.  He  was  graduati  <\  at  William*  in
1861,  taught  in  Hinsdale.  Mass.,  for  two  years,  and
then  studied  theology  in  the  Union  theological
seminary.  New  York  city,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1866.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church
in  Belvidere,  N.  J.,  from  November,  1866,  till  July,
1868,  when  he  was  called  to  the  Walnut  stn.'t
church  in  West  Philadelphia,  which  has  steadily
grown  under  his  pastoral  care  and  earnest  preach-
ing. He  has  published  sermons  and  religious  tracts.
—  His  cousin,  William  Parsons,  artist,  b,  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1883,  was  attracted  to  a  sailor's
life,  and  made  several  voyages,  then  decided  to
study  art,  went  to  Paris  in  1852,  became  a  pupil  of
Picot  and  Le  Poitevin  and  a  student  in  the  School
of  arts,  and  spent  his  summers  sketching  in  Nor-
mandy and  Brittany.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1862,  was  chosen  a  national  academician
in  1863,  painted  in  New  York  city  and  Newport,
and  afterward  established  his  studio  in  Paris,
France.  His  first  pictures  were  marine  views,  but
subsequently  he  treated  genre  subjects  with  success,
and  has  been  happy  in  painting  children,  horses,  and
dogs.  Some  of  nis  principal  works  are  "  Chase  of
the  Frigate  Constitution  " ;  "  Waiting  for  the  Fish-
ing-Boat " ;  "  Low  Tide  at  Yport  " ;  "  French
Peasant-Girl " ;  "  Maternal  Care  ;  "  Heart's-Ease  " ;
"  Emby's  Admirals  " ;  "  Land  of  Nod  " ;  "  English
Greyhound  " ;  and  "  Gathering  Seaweed."

DANA,  Richard,  jurist,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
7  July,  1699;  d.  17  May,  1772.  He  was  the  thin!
son  of  Daniel,  who  was  the  son  of  Richard,  who
came  from  England,  settled  in  Cambridge  in  1640,
and  died  there  about  1695.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1718,  studied  law,  practised  in  Marble-
head  and  Charlestown,  and  then  removed  to  Boston
and  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  bar  of  Massa-
chusetts. During  the  critical  period  that  preceded
the  Revolution  he  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
protests  against  the  new  and  oppressive  taxes  im-
posed by  the  British  parliament  and  the  appoint-
ment of  highly  paid  crown  officials,  and  was  a  leader
in  the  popular  resistance  to  the  usurpations  of  the
British  government.  He  occasionally  presided  over
the  Boston  town-meetings  between  i763  and  1772,
was  chairman  of  the  committee  chosen  by  the  town
in  1765  to  give  instructions  to  the  representatives
in  the  general  court  with  reference  to  the  stamp-
act  and  other  new  taxes,  for  the  collection  of  which
revenue  officers  had  been  sent  over  from  England,
and  reported  the  instructions  to  the  representatives
of  Boston  on  20  Nov.,  1767,  and  8  May,  1770.  He
was  a  member  of  the  association  of  the  Sons  of
Liberty,  and  at  the  meeting  of  17  Dec,  1769,  ad-
ministered to  Andrew  Oliver,  secretary  of  the
province,  an  oath  binding  him  not  to  execute  the
stamp-act.  After  the  British  soldiery  fired  on  the
people  in  the  night  of  5  March,  1770,  he  was  ap-
pointed on  a  committee  to  investigate  the  incidents
of  the  massacre  and  the  order  in  which  they  occurred.
He  took  depositions  of  respectable  citizens  who  had
heard  threats  from  the  soldiers  some  davs  previous
to  the  tragedv,  and  who  swore  that  the  soldiers
under  Capt.  Preston  attacked  the  citizens  with
violence;  that  after  some  of  the  latter  had  been
struck,  young  men  and  boys  returned  abusive  lan-
guage, and  some  threw  snowballs  and  pieces  of  ice
at  the  soldiers;  that  these  fired  into  the  crowd,
killing  and  mortally  wounding  several  panon*.
when  there  was  no  danger  to  themselves :  and  that
therefore  the  firing  could  not  ha\e  been  in  self-


.


n


defence, and was unjustifiable. (See Am

Mr.  I>ana  watt  at  one  time  during  the
ilutionary  crisis  a  repreaontativo  from

Ion  in  the  assembly,  but  he  generally  declined  office,

ting  himself  exclusively  t<>  his  prof,
ciiii  fMB  the  cull  <>f  patriotism  Impelled  him  to
take  a  public  stainl  in  the  cause  of  liberty.  The
letters  of  leading  |«triots  contain  mention  of  him
as  a  man  of  great  value  in  the  movciucnt,  ami  of
his  d.-ath  M  a  serious  loss  to  the  cause. He  was  at

the  bead  of  the  Boston  bar, and  Is mon frequently

cited  in  Judge  Story's  work  on  American  precedent*
than  any  other  pleader  except  Judge  Trowbridge,
whose  *i*ter  lie  married  in  17:17. — His  son,  Francis,
jurist,  b.  in  Charlcstown,  Mass.,  IS  June,  1748;  d.
in  Cambridge,  Ma—..  88  April,  1811,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1768,  studied  law  with  Edmund  Trow-
bridge,  then  regarded  a*  the  ablest  lawyer  in  the
province,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1767,  and  prac-
tised in Boston. He  devoted  himself  early  to  the

assjssof  colonial  rights  and  popsdarUbertj,  joined

the  associated  Sons  of  Liberty',  in  whoss  discussions
he  took  a  leading  part,  and  l»ecame  an  active  whig.
In  1769  he  was  counsel  in  the  famous  Leehmere
slave  case.  In  1778  he  was  associated  with  John
Adams  in  the  prosecution  in  behalf  of  the  Rhode
Island  patriots  in  the  matter  of  the  Rome  and
MolTatt  letters.  When  Gov.  Hutchinson  sailed  on
1  June,  1774,  the  Boston  bar  sent  an  address  to  the
retiring  governor,  which  Dana,  though  one  of  the
youngest  of  them,  opposed  with  vigor.  In  Septem-
ber, 1774,  he  was  the  delegate  from  Cambridge  to
the  1st  provincial  congress  of  Massachusetts.  In
the  beginning  of  April,  177."),  he  sailed  for  England
(where  his  brother  Edmund  was  settled  as  a  minis-
ter at  Wroxeter),  bearing  confidential  letters  on
the  critical  state  of  colonial  feeling  from  Josiah
Quincy,  Joseph  Warren,  Dr.  Samuel  Cooper,  and
other  patriots.  Through  his  brother,  who  was
allied  by  marriage  with  the  Kinnaird  and  Pulteney
families,  he  came  in  contact  with  persons  of  |>oliti-
cal  influence  in  England,  and  in  April,  177<>.  after
his  return,  he  informed  Washington  that  there  was
no  reason  to  expect  peace  from  Britain.  While  in
England  he  became  acquainted  with  Dr.  Richard
Price,  and  furnished  him  with  information  which
he  embodied  in  his  work  in  defence  of  the  colonies
(London.  1776).  In  May,  1 776,  he  was  chosen  by  t  be
Massachusetts  assembly  a  member  of  the  executive
council,  which  united  executive  with  legislative
functions,  and  was  re-elected  annually  until  1780.
In  Norember,  1776,  he  was  chosen  a  delegate  from
Massachusetts  to  the  continental  congress,  and
took  part  in  framing  the  articles  of  confederation,
and  was  again  sent  to  the  congress  of  177N,  and
made  chairman  of  the  committee  (  barged  with  the
reorganization  of  the  arm  v.  He  remained  in  the
camp  at  Valley  Forge  with  Joseph  Reed,  Gouver-
neur  Morris,  and  other  members  of  the  committee
from  January  till  April.  177H,  and,  in  consultation
with  Gen.  Washington,  drew  up  the  plan  of  annual
drafts  that  was  submitted  to  congress,  and  re-
turned to  the  commander-in-chief  on  4  June,  with
directions  that  he  should  proceed  with  it,  with  the
advice  and  assistance  of  Messrs.  Reed  and  Dana,
or  either  of  them.  Re  served  with  Qowfernenr
Morris  ami  William  H.  Drayton  on  the  committee
to  which  Lord  North's  conefliatory  bills  were  re-
ferred  in  1778,  on  whose  rejxirt  these  OTertures
were  unanimously  rejected, and  the  intended  efisoi
of  the  peace  commission  frustrated.  Qovi  John-
stone, with  whom  he  had  lieeoine  acquainted  in
England,  was  one  of  the  commission,  and  wrote  to
him  in  the  hope  of  securing  bisoo-oparation.  This
letter,  with  others  received  by  Read  and Robert


Morris,  was  transmit  tad  to  congress  on  18  Julr

• Mr.  I >an<»  wuip|.
the  embassy  of  John  ida*m\  who  wm  ap-
pointed ci,uimiv.ioner  BO  BOB  !ie»of  ttrmcr
and  w»n th  (treat  Bi  wiled  with
Mr.  adamstoa  II •.  n  the  French  frigate
" Sensible." Thev  landed  nt Ferrol,  Spain and
nw-hwl  Paris  J>  Feb..  17*<i. Wh.
sequence  of  a  diplomatic  quarrel  with
left Paris for  Amsterdam  on 27  .lulv. Dntm  re-
mained in  Paris  until  tlw eOOUBission  Of  congress
(to  Mr.  Adam*,  and  eventually  to  himself,  to  raise

loans  in  Eurobe)  reached  Um  <.n  ||  s-pt. lie

then  lotned Adams  in  Am-l.-nlam.  and r.  rnained

with  him  till  Deessabsr.  Returning  to  Paris,  he
received,  on  ir>  Karen,  i7>*i.  i  oosnarisalon  from
eongiessas  minister  to  the  court  -burg,

having  bean  appointed  to  that  p"*t  on  1$

17K0.  He  remained  with  Mr.  Adam*  in  Holland
from  April  till  7  July,  when  he  left  for  St.  Peters-
burg, journeying  by  way  of  Frankfort  and  Berlin.

Re  resided  at  the  Ruselanoourt  two  vear*.  w  h<  re
he  ha<l  frequent  and  friendly  communications  with
Count  Ostermann,  the  foreign  minister,  but  was
unable  to  secure  the  recognition  of  the  ttMW*tnd-
ence  of  the  United  Btaioa.  Winn,  even  after  the
signature  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace,  the  govern-

meiit  of  the  Empress  Catherine  still  refused  to
receive  him  as  an  accredited  minister  of  an  inde-
pendent and  friendly  power,  he  asked  for  his  leave
from  congress,  and  depart. -d  from  St.  Petersburg
on  4  : Sept.,  1788,  sailing  direct  to  Boston,  w]
arrived  in  December.  In  February.  17*t.  he  was
elected  by  the  sssentbly  a  delegate  to  the  conti-
nental congress,  took  his  scat  <>n  '24  May.  and  wa<»
appointed  to  represent  Massachusetts  on  the  com-
mittee of  the  nates,  which  was  rested  with  some
of  the  powers  of  congress  during  the  recess,  and
continued  In  session  till  11  Aug.  On  18  Jan*  lTHo,
Gov,  Hancock  appointed  him  a  iustioeof  the  su-
preme court  of  Massachusetts.  <  »n  •>'.>  Aug
he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Annapolis  conven-
tion, which  fixed  the  time  and  place  for  tt
eral  convention  of  I7s7  that  adopted  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  State*.  He  was  al*o  sleeted  a
delegate to this body  on  i» April, 17*7.  but  wa*

prevented  from  attending  by  his  judicial  duties
and  the  state  of  his  health,  which  had  been  im-
paired by  his  residence  in  St.  Petersburg.  He  was
ohosen  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  stal
vention  that  met  in  January,  1788,  t<>  ratify  the
Federal  constitution.  In  that  body,  on  whose  de-
cision depended  the  fate  of  the  Psderal  constitution,
a  majority  of  the  member*  were  at  fir*t  opjNised  to
the  new  form  of  government  Judge  Dana  I

ire  the  ratification  of  the  constitution  with
.John  Hancock.  TheophilttS  PatBOns,  and  others,
and  aided  in  obtaining  a  majority  for  its  adoption
on  •'•  fab,  1788. "it  •*"•'  Nov.,  IT'.M.  after  th.

Of  Judge  Sargent,  he  was  appointed  chief  ju«tic<

of  Massachusetts,  and  held  that  offies  for  fifteen

years,  during  which  he  t'H.k  DO  |>nrt  in  |«.litic»l
affair*.  eXOSpj  SS  B  presidential  elector  in  17W  and
1800.  <>n  ."»  June.  17'.)?.  Prv*ident  Adams  aj»-
pointed  him  a  social  envoy  to  the  French  republic,

with  Outesworth  Pinckney  and  John  Marshall:
but  he  was  oompetled,  by  the  urooarWai  state  of
his  health.  to  dsclins  the  office,  which  wm
given  to  Dbridgs  Retry. Re  letfaed  bom  the

bench  in I^m;.  and  wa* 'succeeded  by  his  friend.

Theophilus  Parsona He  \

teteen's  smhafge  in  public  speeches  el  <  "'"bridge,

but BtldOSn  t.«-k  |>art  after  that in  public  discus-
lb •  wa*  one  of  the  founder*  of  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  interested


70


DANA


DANA


himself  in  enterprises  for  the  Wnefit  of  the  neigh-
borhood of  Boston.  After  his  retirement  he  was
frequently  visited  at his  bottSfl  by  the  old  IsadSfl

of  the  Federal  party  who  had  Itcen  ins  associates  in

political  life,  and  entertained  the  younger  literary
society  of  Cambridge.  Judge  Dana  possessed  a
large  fortune,  chiefly  in  lands.  He  was  a  typical
representative  of  the  Federal  gentry  of  New  Eng-
land, who  looked  upon  themselves  as  the  guardians
of  the  people,  ana  sought  to  preserve  distinc-
tions of  birth  and  station.  He  possessed  a  high
sense  of  honor  and  of  public  duty,  was  ardent
and  passionate  in  temperament,  intolerant  of
timid  or  temporizing  measures,  of  an  active  and
energetic  character,  remarkable  for  his  nervous
and  impressive  eloquence,  an  acute  and  learned
jurist,  and  an  austere  and  dignified  magistrate.
—  Richard  Henry,  son  of  Francis,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass..  16  Nov.,  1787;  d.  in  Boston,  2  Feb..
1879,  entered  Harvard  in  the  class  of  1808,  but
took  part  in  an  insurrection  of  his  class  against
the  faculty,  known  as  the  "Rotten  Cabbage  Re-
bellion," in  1807.  The  memory  of  this  disturbance
is  still  commemorated  in  the  name  of  the  "  Rebell-
ion tree,"  standing  on  the  college  grounds.  As  a
consequence  of  his  revolt,  he  failed  to  complete  his
college  course,  although  an  excellent  scholar;  but
fifty-eight  years  later  he  received  his  degree  as  of
1808.  Removing  to  Newport,  R.  L,  he  continued
his  studies  there  for  two  years,  then  entered  the
law-office  of  his  cousin,  Francis  Dana  Channing,  at
Boston,  and  afterward  went  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  to
familiarize  himself  with  Maryland  practice  in  the
office  of  Robert  Goodloe  Harper.  He  was  admitted
to  the  Massachusetts  bar  in  1811,  and  settled  in  Cam-
bridge, where  he  engaged  in  politics  on  the  Federal
side,  and  became  a  member  of  the  legislature.  In
1814  he  joined  the  Anthology  club,  an  association

of  gentlemen  in
Cambridge  and
Boston,  including
William  Tudor,
John  Quincy  Ad-
ams, and  others,
who  had  for  some
time  conducted
"TheMonthlyAn-
thology,"  an  un-
successful maga-
zine. They  now
projected  and  be-
gan to  issue  "  The
North  American
Review,"  the  first
number  of  which
appeared  in  May,
1815.  Mr.  Dana's
first  publications
appeared  in  that  periodical ;  among  them  were  an
"  Essay  on  Old  Times."  and  a  criticism  of  Hazlitt's
"Lectures  on  the  English  Poets,"  in  which  the
writer  boldly  ventured  to  dispute  the  English  crit-
ic's opinions.  He  also  gave  cordial  recognition  to
Wordsworth's  poems,  an  act  of  temerity  which,  in
the  then  reigning  taste  for  Pope,  brought  condem-
nation  upon  him.  His  association  with  Prof.  E.
T.  Channing  in  the  editorship  of  the  "Review"
was  brought  to  a  close  in  1821.  In  1821-'2  he  pub-
lished in  New  York,  in  six  numbers,  with  the  aid
of  contributions  from  Bryant  and  Allston,  "The
Idle  Man,"  a  miscellany  of  stories,  essays,  criti-
cisms, and  poems,  which  had  marked  literary  merit.
but  received  little  encouragement  from  the  public,
and  whs  discontinued. His  first  poem.  "  Tne  Dy-

tnirt  v-eii.


old,  appeared  in  the  "New  York  Review."  then
edited  l>y  Bryant.  He  brought  out  his  first  \..l-
ume  of  "  Poems."  in  Boston  in  1H27,  which  was
well  received  by  the  critics  and  found  a  limited
audience. Prof.  John Wilson,  in "  Blackwood's


6  u-6t£-  —  fy  C/)&s*USc


ing  Raven,"  written  when  he  was


-eight  years


Magazine,"  said  of  the  leading  poem :  "  We  pro-
nounce it  by  far  the  most  powerful  and  original  of
American  noepcal compositions."  In  1833 "Poems
and  Prose  Writings"  (Boston)  was  issued,  containing
additional  poems  and  Dana's  own  contributions  to
"The  Idle  Man."  A  portion  of  this  was  repub-
lished in  London  in  1844  as  "The  Buccaneer,  and
other  Poems."  Although  his  father  had  been  a
Unitarian,  the  son  joined  the  Congregationalists  in
1826,  and  wrote  vigorously  against  Dr.  Channing
in  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Pilgrims  "  during  the  Trini-
tarian agitation  in  New  England  from  1825  till
1835.  Subsequently  he  became  an  Episcopalian.
In  1850  he  brought  out  a  new  edition  of  "Poems
and  Prose  Writings  "  in  two  volumes,  including  his
essavs  and  literary  papers  from  the  "  North  Ameri-
can Jleview,"  forming  a  complete  collection  of  his
works.  His  further  literary  efforts  were  confined  to
a  course  of  lectures  on  Shakespeare,  which  he  deliv-
ered in  Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia,  in  1839-
'40.  The  larger  part  of  his  career  was  spent  in  retire-
ment from  literary  work,  at  his  country-seat  on  Cape
Ann  (see  illustration),  and  in  Boston.  For  the  iirst
fifty  years  of  his  life  he  was  an  invalid,  but  after
this  his  health  began  to  mend,  and  for  a  number  of
years  he  was  not  only  physically  well,  but  main-
tained an  intellectual  vigor  that  remained  unim-
paired until  within  a  few  days  of  his  death  at  the
age  of  ninety-two.  He  had  lived  through  the
whole  history  of  the  United  States  under  the  con-
stitution, and  distinctly  remembered  the  death  of
Washington.  He  was  the  last  of  his  generation  to
achieve  success  in  both  prose  and  verse,  and  won
high  rank  among  the  most  vigorous  American
authors  of  the  first  half  of  the  present  century.  He
never  became  a  popular  writer,  and  his  poetry  is
now  little  read ;  but  it  evinced  decided  qualities  of
imagination,  reflection,  and  independence,  without
any  noticeable  gift  of  melody.  His  prose  stories.
"Tom  Thornton"  and  "Paul'  Felton,  are  gloomy
in  tone,  but  show  vivid  imagination  and  contain
brief  passages  of  great  excellence.  His  essay  on
Kean's  acting,  in  "The  Idle  Man."  and  other  of
his  critical  essays,  prove  that  he  possessed  a  deli-
cate, firm  faculty  of  original  criticism  which,  at
the  time  when  he  wrote,  was  rare  in  the  United
States;  and  his  place  in  the  history  of  our  litera-
ture should  be  measured  by  the  important  service
that  a  mind  like  his  was  able  to  render  in  the  gen-
eral cultivation  of  public  taste  during  the  forma-
tive period. See  "  Homes  of  American  Authors  "


DAN  \


DANA


71


•  '».  ttii.l  "  Bnant an. I his l'ri. n.U"
!i.  Kii'hiinl ll»  n  i  » .  i..  in

bridge,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1815;  d.  in  Boom,  Italy.
-.'. In  early  life,  as  ho  assured  tin-  writ  or.
he  bad  a  strong  passion  f«»r  the  sea,  and,  had  he
ulted  his  inclination  only,  be  would  hereon-
1  tho  American  navy. But,  influenced  by  I » i —
father  ami  otber  members  of  the  family,  he  became
idenl  of  Harvard  university. Men-  he  was  ex-
posed to  one  of  those  difficulties  which  epilogs  facul-
ties put  in  tho  way  of  students  by  their  inismau-
inent,  and  Dana,  like  his  father,  was  rusticated,
irning to Harvard,  ho  was  compelled to  sus-
pend his  studies  by  an  affection  of  the  eyes,  finally
graduating  in  1887. In  the  mean  time,  bra  remedy,
recalling  nis  early  love  of  the  see,  he  resolved  to
:li  it  on  a  Pacific  voyage  as  a  sailor,  although
bj  bad,  of  course,  every  faculty  for  ordinary  travel.
iccordinglv  shipped  l>eforo  the  mast  as  a  sea-
man on  the  brig  "Klgrim,"  of  Boston,  for  a  voy-
age  round Cape Morn to the  western  coast  of
North  America. During  the  cruise  Dana  performed

with  cheerfulness
and  spirit  the  du-
ties of  a  common
sailor,  which  he
has  charmingly  de-
scribed in  his  well-
known  work.  "Two
Years  Before  the
Mast."  The  manu-
script was  sent,  in
1839,  by  the  elder
Dana  to  Bryant,
who  offered  it  to
various  New  York

fmblishers,  and  at
ast,  although  he
said  it  was  as  good
as  "  Robinson  Cru-
soe," sold  it  to  the
Harpers  for  $250.
The  work  was  is-
sued in  the  follow-
ing year.  It  was  immediately  successlul.  paeaing
through  numerous  editions,  being  reprinted  in  Eng-
land, where  t  he  Board  of  admiralty  adopted  it  for
distrilmtion  in  tin- navy,  and  translated  into  asr-
eral  continental  languages.  This  personal  narra-
tive of  a  sailor's  life  at  sea  is  probably  the  most
truthful  and  accurate  work  of  its  character  ever
published.  "  In  reading  it,"  says  Mr.  Whipple,
"anybody  can  see  it  is  more  than  an  ordinary  rec-
ord of  a  voyage,  for  there  runs  through  the  simple
and  lucid  narrative  an  element  of  beauty  and  power
which  gives  it  the  charm  of  romance."  The  work
was  republished  in  lfcMJO,  with  an  additional  chapter
giving  an  account  of  a  second  visit  to  California,
and  some  of  the  persons  and  vessels  mentioned  in
the  original  edition.  Mr.  Dana  studied  law  under
Judge  Story,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Massa-
chusetts in 1*40, speedily  attaining  eminence  as

an  edrooate.  In  1841  ha  puUished  a  work  on
sea-usages  and  laws,  under  the  title  of  "The  So-
man's Friend."  which  has  been  reprinted  in  Eng-
land as  the  "Seaman's  Manual."  and  in  1*.V.(  an
account  of  a  vacation  trip,  entitled  "To  Cuba  and
Back  "  (Boston).  He  occasionally  contributed  to
the  ••  North  American  Review," IbeM Law  Begfe-

ter,"  and the  "American Law Review. " and be

I  capered  biographical  sketches  of  his  kinsmen,
'rof.  Edward  Channing  and  Washington  Allston.
Daring  the  years  |s..v.i  '60  Mr.  Dana  made  a  tour
p.uiid the  world. Six  years  later,  by  reOjOesJ of

the familv of the late Henrv Wheatoii. he  an-


1


frolPfi  %a^J{


gaged  in  the  pmejilion  of  a  now  ad  W\m-

t. .n's ••  International |jiv»  " (Boston, 1866), I-
tag  up  that etandard work from 1

Wheat. .11  died.  tO  the  llllini f  the  pilbllej,!

revised  book  Tins  task,  which  in  many  reapecte
Mr. Dana  performed  nooejjAl&v,  entailed  upon

him  much  subsequent  trouble.  Ins  origi-

nal annotations  were regarded with particular
fa\or.  and bJSBOteCSJ the neutrality  In ■
United  States  hihI  (Jreat  Britain  fH  traii-dat..
order  of  our  government,  to  U  used  bj  lhessjta>
taton  in Wjk In 1*«MJ  Mr.  Dana  received
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  college,  and  he  lec-
tured on  international  law  in  the  Cambridge  law-
Bohool  in  1886-'?. lb ran  against (bn.  Butler  in
the  BeaeX dfctrict  in  IN«8,  and  was  defeated. This
act on  his  jwirt  also  h-d to  subsequent annoyance.
In  March,  l*7d.  (on.  Dnmt iiuminat.-d Mr.' Dana
minister  to  Kuglaud  as  successor  t<  ink.

At  first  tfaate  was  BO  thought  of  any  oppooitioa,
and  it  was  regarded  by  the  public  with  peculiar
favor,  but  personal  and  private  feelings  mmhi  began
toexercise  their  influence.  (Jreat  opposition  U
confirmation  arose  chiefly  through  the  exertions  of
(Jen.  Butler,  who  had  not  forgotten  Mr.  Dana's
canvass  against  him  as  a  candidate  f<>r  congress,
and  of  William  Beteh  [*wrcncet  who  charged  that
Mr.  Dana  had  pirated  the  notes  of  his  edition  <,f
"  Wheaton's  International  Ijaw."  It  is  unneces-
sary to  review  the  dreary  details  of  this  literary  con-
troversy. Mr.  Dana  complained  that  the  charges
against  him  were  made  ex  jxirte  U-fore  the  son-
ate  committee,  while  he  was  denied  any  oppor-
tunity of  defence.  The  nomination  (Jen.  (Jrant
utterly  refused  to  withdraw.  The  result  was  that
it  was  rejected  by  a  vote  of  thirty-one  to  seventeen.
The  controversy  continued  to  rage  even  after
the  rejection,  and  attracted  some  notice  abroad,
several  London  journals  characterizing  the  affair
as  "a  paltry  intrigue."  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that
if  Mr.  Dana  erred  in  the  matter,  be  did  s<»  unin-
tentionally. He  undoubtedly  felt  the  indignity  as
deeply  as  it  would  be  possible  for  any  man  t"  feel
it,  and  if  he  unwittingly  did  Mr.  Lawrence  any
wnmg.  be  paid  the  penalty.  In  1*7*  Mr.  Dana
went  abroad  for  the  purpose  of  pursuing  his  studies
of  international  law.  his  intention  being  to  publish
an  exhaustive  work  on  that  subject.  Hespenl  much
time  in  Paris,  and  near  the  does  of  1**1  visited
Koine.  He  joined  a  merry  Christmas  |«arty  of
American  friends,  was  taken  ill  the  following  day,
and  died  of  pneumonia,  7  Jan..  1888.  Two  days
later  the  beautiful  American  Episcopal  church  In
the  Via  Nationale  was  crowded  with  hi*  country-
men, assembled  to  attend  his  funeral  services.  His
remains  were  Interred  in  the  Protestant  ceineterv
at  Porte  Pia.  near  those  of  the  poeti  Keats  and
Shelley,  and  a  monument  has  since  In-cii  erected  to
his  memory.  Mr.  Dana  was  a  representative  of  the
Inst  culture  of  his  native  state,  and  had  acquired  a

permanent  reputation  on  ln.t h  sides  «.f  the  Atlantic

He  had  taken  |wrt  in  many  of  the  most  conspicu-
ous Litigations  of  the  last  half-century,  and  it  is
perhaps  not  too  much praise to  place  him  among

the  great  lawyers  of  the  land.  His  death,  following
closely  on  that  of  Mr.  I^awrenoo,  deprived  the  re-
stricted circle  of  American  writers  on  international
law  of  their  most  brilliant  leaders.  Asadiplomato
he  would  doubtless  have  acquitted  himsolf  with  as
much  success  as  those  other  nun  of  Massachusetts
-  Brerett,  Abbotl  I.awrcncc.  Adams.  Motley,  and
Lowell— who  represent. si  the  United  State* SJ  the
court  to  which  he  was  ap|>ointod.  Dfina  net  or  had
an  o|i|Mirtunitv  of  U-ing  known  in  the  national
councils  of  the  country. Had  he  obtained  a  seat


72


DANE


DAN  FORTH


in  the  senate,  he  would  have  met  there  few  men
who  were  his  superiors  in  knowledge  of  public
,i  (Tairs.  in  comprehension  of  the  principles  of  states-
manship, or  in  the  ability  to  engage  in  their  dis-
cussion.— Richard  Henry,  son  of  the  preceding,
b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1851,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1874,  being  chosen  class  ora-
tor, and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1877.  In  that
year  lie  received  from  President  Hayes  the  nom-
ination of  secretary  of  legation  at  London,  but
declined  the  office.  He  married  Miss  Edith  Long-
fellow, second  daughter  of  Henry  Wadsworth
Longfellow,  the  poet,  6  Jan.,  1878.  While  con-
tinuing the  practice  of  law,  he  has  been  a  regular
contributor  to  the  "  Civil  Service  Record,"  besides
writing  occasionally  for  the  press  on  questions  of

g'lit  ical  reform. — Another  son  of  Richard  Henry,
(1  in  n ml  Trowbridge,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  2*9
Aug.,  1818 ;  d.  there,  18  May,  1869,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1839,  and  at
Cambridge  law-school  in  1841.  Subsequently  he
practised  in  partnership  with  his  brother,  Richard,
in  Boston  for  several  years,  when  failing  health
compelled  him  to  reside  in  Europe,  where  he  con-
tinued his  studies,  devoting  special  attention  to
Roman  civil  law,  and  to  history  and  philosophy  in
their  bearings  upon  law.  In  1854  he  received  the
degree  of  J.  U.  D.  from  the  University  of  Heidel-
berg, and  returned  to  the  United  States  two  years
later.  He  wrote  occasionally  for  periodicals,  and
attempted  the  translation  of  the  works  of  Von
Mohl  and  other  eminent  German  jurists.

DANE,  Nathan,  jurist,  b.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  27
Dec.,  1752 ;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1835.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1778,  and,  after  study-
ing law,  was  admitted  to  its  practice  and  settled  in
Beverly.  His  acquirements  made  him  a  safe  and
able  counsellor,  and  with  his  large  and  diversified
experience  he  became  one  of  the  most  prominent
lawyers  of  New  England.  He  entered  at  once  into
political  life,  and  from  1782  till  1785  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  In  1785  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  continental  congress,  and
was  continued  as  such  by  re-election  until  1788.
During  his  career  in  the  national  legislature  he
rendered  much  efficient  service  by  his  work  on
committees,  and  was  the  framer  of  the  celebrated
ordinance  passed  by  congress  in  1787  for  the  gov-
ernment of  the  territory  northwest  of  the  Ohio.
It  was  adopted  without  a  single  alteration,  and
contains  the  emphatic  statement  "  that  there  shall
be  neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude  in  the
said  territory."  He  also  incorporated  in  this  ordi-
nance a  prohibition  against  all  laws  impairing  the
obligation  of  contracts,  which  the  convention  that
formed  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  a  few
months  afterward  extended  to  all  the  states  of  the
Union  by  making  it  a  part  of  that  constitution.
In  1790  he  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  senate,
and  again  elected  in  1794  and  1796. He  was  ap-

Eointed  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for
Issex  county  in  1794,  but,  after  taking  the  oath  of
office,  almost  immediately  resigned,  and  in  1795
was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  laws
of  the  state.  In  1811  he  was  delegated  to  revise
and  publish  the  charters  that  had  been  granted  in
Massachusetts,  and  in  1812  was  selected  to  make  a
new  publication  of  the  statutes.  During  the  same
year  he  was  chosen  a  presidential  elector.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the  Hartford  convention  in  1814,  and
also  to  the  Massachusetts  constitutional  convention
in  1820,  but  declined  serving  on  account  of  deaf-
ness. For  fifty  years  he  devoted  his  Sundays  to

tl logical  studies,  excepting  during  the  hours  of

public  worship,  reading  generally  the  Scriptures  in


their  original  languages.  In  1829  he  gave  $10,000,
which  he  increased  by  $5,000  in  1831,  for  the  foun-
dation of  the  Dane  professorship  of  law  in  1  lar-
va rd  law-school,  requesting  that  his  friend,  Judge
Joseph  Story,  should  occupy  the  chair,  which  he
did  until  his  death.  He  published  "A  Genera
Abridgment  and  Digest  of  American  Law"  (9  vols.,
Boston,  1823-'9),  and  «  Appendix  "  (1830).

I>  \  MIX  John  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1786;  d.  there  in  1856.  He  became
a  captain  in  the  Colombian  navy  in  1818,  and  served
the  republican  cause  in  South  America  as  com-
mander of  a  squadron,  by  fitting  out  vessels,  and
by  his  credit  as  a  rich  man.  When  the  Republic
of  Colombia  was  established,  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  gave  up  his  claims  for  money
due  for  his  services,  for  supplies  provided  by  him
for  the  Revolution  of  1818,  for  expenses  incurred
by  his  three  ships  in  the  blockade  of  Cumana  in
1821,  for  the  use  of  his  three  ships  in  the  blockade
of  Puerto  Cabello  and  in  guarding  La  Guayra,  and
for  the  expenses  of  a  journey  to  the  United  States
to  raise  funds  for  the  sloop-of-war  "  Bolivar."  The
executive  power  of  Colombia  gave  him  a  vote  of
thanks,  and  the  congress  of  Venezuela  in  1845  de-
creed that  his  name  should  have  an  honorable  place
as  captain  of  the  navy  in  the  military  list  of  the
republic. — His  son,  Simon  Bolivar  Daniel  Danels,
was  consul  for  Venezuela,  stationed  at  Baltimore,
Md.,  for  many  years.

DANENHOWER,  John  Wilson,  arctic  explo-
rer, b.  in  Chicago,  111.,  30  Sept.,  1849.  He  received
his  early  education  in  the  common  schools  of  Chi-
cago and  Washington,  entered  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  in  1866,  was  graduated  in  1870,  commis-
sioned as  ensign,  12  July,  1871,  as  master,  27  Sept.,
1873,  and  as  lieutenant,  2  Aug.,  1879.  He  served
on  a  surveying  expedition  in  the  North  Pacific  in
the  "Portsmouth  in  1873-4,  took  part  in  sup-
pressing an  insurrection  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii,  in
1873,  and  served  on  board  the  "  Vandalia  "  during
Gen.  Grant's  visit  to  Egypt  arid  the  Levant.  In
1878  he  joined  the  arctic  steamer  "  Jeannette  "  at
Havre,  France,  and  made  the  voyage  to  San  Fran-
cisco, and  thence  through  Bering  straits  into  the
Arctic  ocean.  The  expedition  left  San  Francisco,
8  July,  1879,  under  command  of  Lieut.  George  W.
De  Long.  The  vessel  was  beset  in  the  ice-pack  for
twenty-two  months.  Lieut.  Danenhower,  who  was
second  in  command,  suffered  severely  from  ophthal-
mia, and  was  confined  in  a  dark  room  most  of  the
time.  From  the  place  where  the  steamer  was
crushed  the  party  made  a  retreat  for  ninety-five
days  over  the  ice,  dragging  the  ship's  boats,  and
then  sailed  in  the  three  boats,  but  were  separated
by  a  gale.  The  boat  that  Lieut.  Danenhower  com-
manded reached  the  Lena  delta,  where  the  crew
were  rescued  by  Tunguses.  After  landing,  17
Sept.,  1881,  while  waiting  for  the  return  of  native
messengers  sent  to  Bulun,  Danenhower  made  an
ineffectual  search  on  the  delta  for  the  crews  of  the
other  boats.  With  his  crew  he  made  the  journey
of  6,000  miles  to  Orenburg,  leaving  Engineer  Mel-
ville to  continue  the  search  for  the  captain  and  his
party,  and  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  June,
1882.  He  has  published  "The  Narrative  of  the
Jeannette  "  (Boston,  1882).

DANFORTH,  Charles,  inventor,  b.  in  Massa-
chusetts about  1797;  d.  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  22
March,  1876.  He  was  educated  and  spent  his  early
life  in  New  England,  where  he  invented  in  1824  a
counter-twister,  spinning-speeder,  and  a  throstle-
frame.  These  inventions  ho  suoeossfullv  intro-
duced, both  in  the  United  States  and  in  England.
Later  he  settled  in  Ramapo,  N.  Y.,  «nd  there  in-


OKT11


7:i


.1  his  cap  spfoning-frame,  and  also  a  bobbin

Mid  flyer. About ls;s<»  he  removed  to  I'atcraoii,

re  In-  mdooad  the  ilnn  nf  Qodwha,  Rog-

.  I>>  manufacture  bit  spinners,  ami  thi-
led  to  a  large  business,  which  in  time  embraced
other  form  of  machinery.  Mr.  Dan  forth  acquired
an  Interest  in  the  firm,  which  Ijccamc  Charles  Dan-
fort  h \  ('<>.,  and la'  h company  with the

title  oi  the  Danforth  Looooxitiveand  jfsnhmeOom-

Cmy.  of  wliich  lie  was  president,  lie  amassed  a
rge  fortune,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  con-
sidered more  familiar  with  the  details  of  oottOU
spinning  and  manufacturing  machinery  for  that
j>ur|M»se  than  anv  other  |K'rson  in  the  United  States.
DANFORTH.  Oeorge  Franklin,  jurist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  5  July.  1810.  lie  was  graduated  at
I'nioti  in  1880,  ami.  after  studying  law,  liegan  prac-
tice in  [toohoster,  N.  Y..  where  be  was  eminently
essful,  and  soon  rose  to  the  front  rank  of  the

Srofession.  In  1876  he  was  the  republican  candi-
ate  for  indite  of  the  court  of  appeals  of  the  state
Of  New  York.  !>nt  was  defeated  by  Rohsjt  Kiirl.
Two  years  later  he  was  again  nominated  for  a  simi-
lar onOB,  and  after  being  elected  took  his  seat  on
the  bench.  1  Jan.,  1879.

D  VN  FORTH,  Joshua  Noble,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pitt -field.  Mas-..  1  April,  17!>H;  ,1.  in  New  Castle,
Del..  U  Nov.,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1*1  s,  and  s|K?nt  two  years  at  the  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary.  After  being  ordained  by  the
New  Brunswick  presbytery,  on  30  Nov.,  1888,  he
was  installed  pastor  of  the  ohttTCh  in  New  Castle,
Del.,  where  he  remained  untU  1828,  when  he  ac-
cepted a  call  to  Washington.  In  1832-'4  he  was
agent  of  the  American  colonization  society,  from
IXH  till  1838  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Lee,  Mass.,  and  then  for  fifteen  vears  in  charge
of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  in  Alexandria,  Va.
In  1860  he  again  accepted  an  agency  for  the  Amer-
ican colonization  society.  Dr.  Danforth  received
in  1866  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Delaware  college.
Be  contributed  largely  to  the  religious  and  secular
preen,  and  wrote  ••  (Meanings  and  Groupings  from
a  Pastor's  Portfolio"  (New  York,  1852).

DANFORTH,  Moseley  Isaac  engraver,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn..  7  Dec.,  1800;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  Jan..  1862.  He  became  a  pupil  of  the  Hart-
ford graphic  company  in  1818,  where  he  acquired
a  knowledge  of  bank-note  engraving,  and  three
years  later  settled  in  New  Haven.  Here  he  exe-
cuted a  plate  after  Raphael  Morghen's  engraving
of  the  "  Parce  somnum  rumpere,"  which  was  so
well  done  that  the  publisher  refrained  from  print-
ing it  for  years,  intending  to  dispose  of  the  proofs
as  genuine  Morghens.  Subsequently  he  came  to
New  York  and  studied  drawing,  meanwhile  con-
tinuing the  practice  of  his  art.  He  was  one  of  the
bonders  of  the  New  York  drawing  association  in
1888,  and  in  .January,  1888,  of  the  National  acade-
my of  design. His  large.  full-length  engraving  of

"Lafayette"  was  completed  at  this  time,  ami  -e-
cured  him  a  cordial  welcome  \,\  the  artists  of  Lon-
don on  his  arrival  in  England  in  1887.  For  ten
years  be  rctidcd  in  London,  studying  in  the  Royal
academy,  where  his  drawings  from  the  Elgin  mar-
bles were  much  admired,  and  enjoying  the  friend-
■hip  of  Thomas  Lawrence,  Charles  K.  Leslie.  Stewart
Newton,  and David Wilkic. Several  of  hi-  lH--t -

known  engraving!  were  made  during  this  period,
including  the  "Sentry-Box"  after  Leslie,  portraits
Of  Washington  Irving  and  Sir  Walter  .Scott  by  the
same  artist,  and  "  Don  Quixote,"  although  moat  of

hi-  work  while  in  London  seem-  to  have  been  given
to  -mailer  plates  f(,r  l*N>k-.  On  his  return  to  New
York  he  engraved  vignettes  for  bank-notes,  and


subsequently  became  partner  in  a  hank-note  en-
graving Arm,  which  in  i*vh  was  merged  in  the
American  bank-note  companv.  of  which  <^ri>ora-
tion  he  ww  vice-president  at  the  time (
His  w.,rk  was  character  '  rnonlinary  flnhth

and  exquisite  delicacy  of  tint

l>  \  N  FORTH,  Thomas,  colonial  governor,  b.  „,
Framlingham.  Suffolk,  England,  in  1622.
Cambridge.  Mesa,,  8  Nov.,  1068. B  eldest

son  of  Nicholas  Danforth, and  OHM  with  hi*  father
and  brother, Samuel, to N.  w Kimland  m 1684.
Soon  after  his.  arrival  in  this  countn  :
great influence in the managcim  nt of public
affair-. Banorofl  ■JMlkl  Oi  him  as  the  DfOCJahM
author of the  re|Mirt on natural and cnai
ri^ht-,  made  by  Sim<>n  Ilrad-trct,  faefSJSjsa  M
.John  Norton,  and  others,  in  1661. From  16
1678  he  was  an  assistant under  the  Ma-wachu-.u»
government,  becoming  in 1*!7S»  deputy  sjOfUfor.
In  the  latter  vear  he  WUS  elected  president  of  the
province  <»f  Maine,  then  Independent  of  the  colony
of  Massachusetts. He  o[»ened his  court  at  York.
and  granted several parcels  of  land. The  ossVOM
of ih  put  v  governor and  president were  held  by
him  until  the  arrival  of  Sir  Kduiund Am!

Meanwhile  he  had  also  b,-<>n  made  a  judge
of  the  superior  court,  and  in  10X1,  with  Daniel
(Jookin,  Klisha  Ooofca,  and  others.  op|x»ed  the
acts  of  trade  and  ■QSOTtod  the  charter  right-  of  the
country.  During  the  witchcraft  uWustrrn  in  16U2
he  showed  his  correctness  of  judgment  by  tie-
firmness  with  which  he  condemned  the  pfOfPOuhlfl
of  the  court.— His  brother.  Samuel,  clergyman,
b.  in  Pramlingham,  Suffolk.  England,  in  Septem-
ber, 1626;  d.  in  Koxhurv.  Mass.,  1U  Nov..  1674.  was
graduated  in  1648  at  Harvard,  where  be  was  at
once  appointed  a  tutor  and  the  second  fellow.  In
1641  be  was  invited  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Welde  to
become — with  the  Key.  John  Eliot,  whose  numer-
ous missionary  engagements  Interfered  with  his
ministerial  lalM.rs — colleague  pastor  of  the  church
in  Roxburv.  The  call  was  socepted,  and  he  was
ordained  on  84  Sept,  1850,  and  continued  *ith
this  congregation  until  his  death.  Hi-  sermons
were  elaborate,  judicial,  and  methodical  He
showed  great  interest  in  astronomy,  publishing  a
number  of  almanacs,  and  al-o -An  Asttunouueal
Description  of  the  Comet  of  ltKU."  in  which  he
maintained  thai  a  comet  was  a  heavenly  body
moving  in  accordance  with  divine  laws.  ,,nd  thai
the  appearance  was  indicative  of  approaching
misfortunes.  His  other  publications  arc  "An
Election  Sermon"  (1870) ana  "The  Cry  of  Sodom
Inquired  into,  npou  occasion  of  the  Arraignment
and  Condemnation  of  Benjamin  Qoad  for  hi-  PlO"
digious  Yillanies"  (Hi74>.— John.  3 .niiin-l.

clergyman,  b.  in Roxburv.  M  •-.  HHJO:  d.

in Dorebeater. 88 May,'  17:M». was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1877,  and  was  for  some  time  a  fellow
in  that  university. On  88  Joan,  1888,  be  ■
dained  sa  pastor  of  the  Ooogregatiooal  so

Dorchester,  and be continued with this

until  his  death,  receiving  ee  his  colleague  ti
Jonathan Bowman  in i72i». Mr.  Danforth  was  a
man  of  gnat  learning,  possessed  an  uncommon  ac-
quaintance with  mathematics,  ami  had  a  taste  f,.r
poetry. He  published  a  u Sermon  at  the  Kjiarturv

of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Lord  and  his  church  f
cheater,  8  I  ;  "The  Right  Christian  l

int  in  every  Condition.  'he  Iv-rd

voudi-ated  to  as-i-ti  to  U>  set forth  and nws>
mended  "(1702)!  "  The  Vile  Profanation- of  P
iH-ritv  bv  the Degenerate  among  the I'eopli

Fast Sermon  at  Boston"  (1708);  -The
Blackness  ,-f  Sins  sgainst  Light,  or  Men*-  offering


74


DAN FORTH


DANIEL


Violence  to  their  Knowledge,  a  Sermon"  (1710) •
"A  Sermon  on  King  Hczekiah's  Bitterness  and
Relief"  (1710);  "Judgment  began  at  the  Doom  of

God  ami  the  Righteous  scarcely  Saved"  (1716);
u  Two  Sermons  occasioned  by  the  Earthquake,  to
which  ii  added  a  Poem  on  Peter  Thatcher,  of
Milton,  and  Samuel  Danforth,of  Taunton"  (1727);
also,  "  Kneeling  to  God,  at  Parting  with  Friends ;
or  the  Fraternal  Intercessiory  Cry  of  Faith  and
Love :  Setting  Forth  and  Recommending  the
Primitive  Mode  of  taking  Leave,"  to  which  were
annexed  poems  to  the  memory  of  Mrs.  Anne  Eliot,
and  John  Eliot,  the  apostle  to  the  Indians  (Boston,
1697). — Samuel,  another  son  of  Samuel,  clergyman,
b.  in  Roxbnry,  Mass.,  18  Dec,  1666;  d.  in  Taunton,
Mlim  14  Nov.,  1727.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1683,  and  subsequently  became  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  Taunton.  All  of  his
contemporaries  represent  him  as  a  person  of  great
learning  and  ^as  having  influence  among  young
people.  During  1705  unusual  attention  to  religion
prevailed  among  his  congregation,  of  which  he
gives  an  interesting  account  in  three  letters  pub-
lished in  Prince's  "Christian  History."  He  also
published  "  A  Eulogy  on  Thomas  Leonard  "  (1713) ;
"An  Election  Sermon"  (1714);  and  "  An  Essay
concerning  the  Singing  of  Psalms"  (1723).  Mr.
Danforth  left  a  manuscript  Indian  dictionary,  a
part  of  which  is  now  in  the  library  of  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society.  It  seems  to  have  been
formed  from  Eliot's  Indian  Bible,  as  there  is  a
reference  under  every  word  to  a  passage  of  Scrip-
ture.— Samuel,  son  of  John,  b.  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  in  1696;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1777.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1715,  and  became
prominent  in  the  Massachusetts  colony.  For  sev-
eral vears  he  was  president  of  the  council,  and  also
a  judge  of  probate  for  Middlesex  county.  In  1774
he  was  made  a  mandamus  councillor.  Subsequent
to  the  last  appointment,  the  county  convention
adopted  the  following:  "Resolved,  That,  whereas
the  Hon.  Samuel  Danforth  and  Joseph  Lee,  Es-
quires, two  of  the  judges  of  the  inferior  court  of
common  pleas  for  the  county,  have  accepted  com-
missions under  the  new  act,  by  being  sworn  mem-
bers of  his  majesty's  council,  appointed  by  said
act,  we  therefore  look  upon  them  as  utterly  in-
capable of  holding  anv  office  whatever."  Mr.  Dan-
forth was  distinguished  for  his  love  of  natural
philosophy  and  chemistry. — Samuel,  son  of  the
third  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
in  August,  1740;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  Nov.,
1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1758,  and
studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Isaac  Rand.  At  first  he
settled  in  Newport,  but  soon  removed  to  Boston,
where  he  acquired  a  valuable  practice.  During
the  Revolutionary  war  his  professional  pursuits
were  disturbed,  and  he  was  harshly  treated  by  the
whigs  on  account  of  his  loyalty  to  Great  Britain,
but  later  he  regained  the  confidence  of  his  pa-
tients. In  all  difficult  medical  cases  his  opinion
was  relied  on  as  being  the  utmost  effort  of  human
skill.  He  practised  with  success  until  nearly  eighty
years  of  age,  and  increased  his  reputation  by  his
chemical  studies.  Dr.  Danforth  was  a  member  of
the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  from,  1795
till  1798  was  president  of  the  Massachusetts  medi-
cal society. —  Thomas,  son  of  thi  third  Samuel.
lawyer,  b.  in  Massachusetts  about  1T42 ;  d.  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1762,  and  was  one  of  the  addressers
of  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchinson.  Subsequently  he
studied  law,  and  became  a  councillor  in  Charles-
town.  He  was  the  only  lawyer  in  that  town,  as
well  as  the  only  inhabitant,  who  sought  protection


from  the  parent  country  at  the  l>oginning  of  the
Revolution.  After  being  pwcribeo  and  banished,
he  departed  for  Halifax  in  l??fi.  and  later  took  up
his  residence  in  England.

DANIEL,  Antony,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dieppe,.
France,  in  1601 :  d.  in  Canada  in  1648.  He  became
a  Jesuit  at  the  age  of  twenty,  and  was  sent  to
Canada  in  1633.  He  labored  at  first  among  the
Indians  of  Cape  Breton,  but  from  July.  1684,  till
July,  1648,  gave  his  attention  exclusively  to  the
Hurons.  Although  he  made  St.  Josephs  Ins  prin-
cipal residence,  he  ministered  to  the  entire  tribe.
When  celebrating  mass,  on  4  July,  he  heard  a  con-
fused noise,  and,  as  soon  as  he  had  finished  the
service,  he  ran  to  the  quarter  from  which  the  cries
proceeded.  He  was  at  once  surrounded  by  women
and  children,  and  learned  that  the  village  was  being
attacked  by  a  hostile  tribe  while  the  warriors  were
absent.  Father  Daniel  exhorted  all  who  could  to
escape  to  the  woods,  and  endeavored  to  inspire
those  who  were  unable  to  do  so,  from  sickness  or
age,  with  a  sentiment  of  Christian  heroism.  He
himself  refused  to  escape,  and,  in  order  to  gain  time
for  his  flock  to  reach  the  forest,  he  advanced  toward
the  enemy.  At  first  the  savages  recoiled,  awed  by
his  calmness  and  daring.  When  they  recovered
from  their  astonishment,  they  shot  their  arrows  at
him  and  he  fell  to  the  ground,  and,  after  lingering
some  time  in  agony,  was  despatched  by  an  Indian.

DANIEL,  John  Moncure,  editor,  b.  in  Stafford
county,  Va.,  24  Oct.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  30
March,  1865.  His  father  was  the  son  of  an  emi-
nent surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  who  married  a
daughter  of  Thomas  Stone,  of  Maryland,  signer
of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  John  Mon-
cure was  educated  mainly  bv  his  father,  and  studied
law  with  Judge  Lomax  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  but
did  not  complete  his  studies,  his  father's  death  ren-
dering it  necessary  to  earn  a  support  for  himself
and  aid  his  brothers.  In  1845  he  went  to  Rich-
mond, where  he  obtained  the  place  of  librarian  in
a  small  public  library,  which,  though  it  brought
little  money,  supplied  opportunity  for  indulging
his  passion  for  reading.  The  first  exhibition  of  his
prowess  as  a  writer  was  on  an  agricultural  monthly,
"  The  Southern  Planter,"  to  which  he  attracted  so
much  notice  that  he  was  invited  to  a  place  on  the
staff  of  a  new  democratic  newspaper  (1847),  the
"  Richmond  Examiner,"  which  speedily  became  the
leading  paper  of  the  south.  The  brilliant  invective
of  the  paper  led  to  his  fighting  several  duels.  Mr.
Daniel  s  "  democratic  "  principles  were  of  the  philo-
sophical European  school,  and  he  was  enabled  to
harmonize  his  pro-slavery  radicalism  with  these  by
the  adoption  of  Carlyle  s  theory  (in  "  The  Nigger
Question  "),  which  he  interpreted  as  meaning  that
negroes  were  not  to  be  considered  as  men  in  the
same  sense  as  whites.  He  was  heretical  in  religious
opinions,  and  his  columns  bore  witness  to  much
admiration  for  Emerson  and  Theodore  Parker.  He
even  published  Parker's  famous  sermon  on  Web-
ster in  his  paper.  The  literary  character  of  the
"  Examiner  was  very  high.  Mr.  Daniel  was  a
friend  of  Edgar  A.  Poe,  whom  he  aided  with
money,  and  of  whom  he  wrote  a  remarkable  sketch
in  the  "Southern  Literary  Messenger."  Some  of
Poe's  poems  were  revised  for  this  paper.  Mr.  Dan-
iel was  perhaps  the  earliest  apostle  of  the  seces-
sionists in  Virginia.  In  18553  he  was  appointed  by
President  Buchanan  minister  to  the  court  of  Victor
Emanuel,  and  while  there  he  took  high  ground  in
demanding  the  same  immunities  for  an  Italian
naturalized  in  the  United  States  ami  visiting  Sar-
dinia as  for  any  other  American,  and  was  indig-
nant that  Mr.  Marcy  did  not  supporf*him  in  threat-


DANIEL


DANIEL


98


sjjaga  rupture  <>f  diplomatic  relations. 1 1
some  scandal  by  escorting  t<>  a  royal  ball  at Turin
(on  oocaelnn  nf  t * »« -  betrothal  of  Prince  Napoleon
■ad  Plluuoss  Clotildc)  the  Countess  Marie  de  Solms
(afterward Madame Ratazzi), who had BOi been

invited. This

matter  wee  t  h«-

suhject of a

curious  oorre-
epondenee  be-
tveen Cevour

atnl  his  minis-
ter at  Washing-
ton. Qerfbaldl
reqoeeted  Dao-

icltoannexNice
to  the  Ameri-
can republic,
which Daniel

declined  on  the

ground that it
wax  contrary  to
f f* .q  . ^f theMonroedoo-

**-*-«-*  /1^- •  ^<*~~+-*~*L  trin.-!  His  so-
cial relations  at
Turin  were  for  a  time  rendered  unpleasant  through
the  imprudent  publication  by  a  friend  in  Richmond
of  a  private  letter  in  which  he  ridiculed  the  Italn-
iufs  of  the  court,  the  letter  having  found  its  way
to  Turin.  Nevertheless.  Daniel  passed  more  than
seven  agreeable  years  abroad.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  hastened  home,  and  served  <>n
the  staff  of  Gen.  A.  P.  Hill.  His  arm  being  shat-
tered, he  resumed  editorship  of  the  Richmond
"  Examiner."  He  attacked  Jefferson  Davis  and
Mr.  Baton  (Confederate  treasurer)  with  gnat
severity,  was  challenged  in  1864  by  the  latter,  and
met  him  in  a  duel,  where  he  was  "unable  to  point
his  pistol  on  account  of  his  wounded  arm.  He  was
shot  in  the  leg  in  this  duel.  He  predicted  the  col-
lapse of  the  Confederacy,  and  died  three  days  U--
fore  it  occurred.  Frederick  S.  Daniel  has  printed
privately  a  volume  containing  his  brother's  leading
articles  daring  the  war,  with  a  memoir.

DANIEL,  John  Reeves  Jones,  b.  in  Halifax
county.  N.  C,  about  1802 ;  d.  in  Louisiana.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in
1821,  studied  law,  and  practised  with  suooese,  sat
in  the  legislature  in  1832-'4,  and  was  elected  attor-
ney-general in  the  latter  year.  In  1840  he  was
elected,  as  a  democrat,  to  congress,  and  served
continuously  from  1  May.  1841,  to  :i  March.  1853.
He  afterward  removed  to  Louisiana.

DANIEL,  Peter  Vivian,  jurist,  b.  in  Stafford
countv,  Va.,  24  April  1784;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va..
80  June.  lMtiO.  His  fat  her,  Tra vers  Daniel,  was  ■
son  of  Peter  Daniel,  who  married  a  daughter  of
Raleigh  Travers,  of  the  Virginia  house  of  bur-
gesses. The  residence  of  Travers  Daniel,  Clow's
Nest,  near  the  mouth  of  Potomac  creek,  was  cele-
brated for  its  hospitalities,  and  the  family  l>ore  an
important  part  in  public  affairs.  Peter  Vivian  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1800. And  studied  law  in
the  i. Iliee  of  Kdmund  Randolph  (<>f  Washington's
cabinet),  whose  daughter.  LllCT Nelson Randolph,

he  married  in  1811.  He  was  chosen  a  member  of
the  privy  council  of  Virginia  in  1818,  and  served
part  of  the  time  as  lieutenant-governor  of  the  slate
until  ls:{.->.  in  is:tr,  be  was  appointed  by  President
Van  Boron  to  be  judge  of  the  district  circuit  court
of  Virginia,  end  was  raised  to  the  supreme  court,
!  trch,  1841,  to  raoceed  Mr.  Justice  Barbour.
Jttdge  Daniel  was  a  democrat,  and  a  personal  as
well  as  political  friend  of  President  Jackson.  He
was  a  gentleman  of  fine  taste  in  literature.  |


moaioal  at amHaooMOla.aad  h i»  judicial  opinion*

are  marked  l»v  can  nod  clearness.

DANI1  I  .  Kalclfrh  Traver*,  juri-t.  b.  in  Suf.
ford  county,  Vs.,  IS  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Kichnv
Aug..  1*;;. Hi-  father  wan  an  •
his  mother  a  daughter  of  Thorns

laration  of  Independence. Hi.  ear
ration  Waoaoqahod from  John  Lowta,  WOOBOpt  ■

classical  seoool  in  BooMwlnadi  eoaoty,  aod  »»*

perhajw  the  U>*\  teacher  of  Latin  and  Creek  in  that
region. At the  age

oJlice  of his lilK-le,  Judge P. V. Dallirl (afterward

>»f  tlie  C.  S.  supreuie  court),  at  Richmond,  and.
after  a  careful  training  for  the  pTOfaOOOtt  of  law.
took  a  high  p-sition  at tin-  bar. In  tin-  early  part

of  his  oareat  be  was  appoioted  ooosmoaweetthii
attorney  f<>r  Beariooeoantr,  in  which  Riehmood  i»

situated,  and he|«|  that 00908  until  1881 Though

belonging  to  a  democratic  family,  be  was  the
leader  of  the  whig  j>arty  in  Richmond  while  yet  a
young  man.  and  was  repeatedly  olootod  t"  rej

that  city  in  the  legislature.  He  was  the  favorite
orator  of  his  party  in  Virginia. always  chairman  of
it-  state  committee,  and  DO  It* electoral  ticket  ;  and
in  the  presidential  OtavaOBMOf  1840 aud  II
confronted  the  democratic  champions  in  e\erv  part
of  the  state.  Such  was  the  admiration  felt  for  him
bv  his  opponents  that  in  1M47  a  democratic  .
blv  elected  h i in  OM  of  the  thne  members  of  the
governor's  council.  By  seniority  he  became  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  state,  lb'  was  a  Strong
Union  man  so  long  as  that  sentiment  was  |
in  his  state;  but  when  the  war  came  be  considered
service  to  his  state  the  paramount  duty.  When
Richmond  was  occupied  by  the  national  forces  Mr.
Daniel  was  removea  by  Gen.  SchoAeld  from  the
office  of  city  attorney.  When  the  autonomy  of  tin-
state  was  restored  in  1888,  be  devoted  himself  to
the  work  of  organizing  the  conservative  |«rty.
which  triumphed  in  the  election  of  QQbsrl
Walker  as  governor.  In  1H?2  he  was  elected  at-
torney-general of  Virginia,  and  in  this  office
showed  such  capacity  for  mastering  the  novel  ques-
tions and  difficulties  thai  had  fo||. .wed  the  confu-
sion of  affairs  that  at  the  next  convention  he  was
re-nominated  by  acclamation.  He  WM  elected  by
an  overwhelming  majority,  on  11  Aug.,  ls77.  but
died  from  a  hemorrhage  four  da\s  later.  His  cul-
ture, eloquence,  and  social  qualities  are  still  re-
memberea  in  every  part  of  Virginia,  when-  no  man
of  his  political  opinions  had  ever  been  SO  p'pular.
DANIEL,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Cumberland
county,  Va..  in  l?7<»:  d.  in  Lynchburg,  Va..  20
Nov.,  1889.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia
house  of  delegates,  and  gained  reputation  as  an
orator  by  his  defence  of  the  ••  Res.. lut ions  of  W."
He  became  circuit  judge  and  a-oMeic  member  of
the  old  general  court  of  Virginia.  His  judicial
opinions  are  high  authority,  ami  SOOWOf  hi*  sav-
ings are  proverbial  in  his  neighborhood. —  His  son,
William,  jurist,  b.  in  Winchester.  Va.,  2»5  Nov.,
1N(m;:  .1.  in  I.vnchburg.  Va.. '.'N  March.  1n7;{.  was
educated  at  Hampden  Sidney  college  and  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  ami  while  yet  a  youth  was
a  lawyer  of  large  practice  ami  wide  reputation  for

eloquence.  He  was  elected  to  the  Virginia  house
of  delegates  before  be  was  of  age.  lie  was  an
elector  on  the  Polk  ticket  iii  1844.  He  was  a  jn
Of  the  supreme  curt  of  appeals  of  Virginia  from
1847 till  1885.  Hi- son,  John  Warwick,  saaior,
b.  in  Lynchburg,  Va-  •*>  SepL,  1848,  received  a
cla>..ieal~ education,  and in  May.  188L  volunteered

in  the  Confederate  army,  in  which  he  ssrvod
throughout  the  war.  rising  t..  be  major  and  ad-
jutant-general <•{  Karly's  division  in  the  Ann.


76


DAN  IK  I.


DARBY


Northern  Virginia.  In  1865-'6  he  studied  law  at
the  University  of  Virginia,  and  soon  after  entering
upon  practice  gained  a  high  reputation  as  an  advo-
cate. Be  has  published  "  Attachments"  (1869)
and  "Negotiable  Instruments"  (1870).  He  was
elected  to  the  state  house  of  delegates  in  1860,  and
to  the  state  senate  in  1875  and  1879.  In  1876  he
was  an  elector-at-large  on  the  Tilden  and  Hendricks
ticket.  He  was  nominated  for  governor,  in  1881,
by  the  debt-paying  democracy,  and  resigned  from
t lie  state  senate  to  accept  the  nomination,  but  was
defeated  by  William  E.  Cameron,  the  readjuster
candidate.  On  4  Nov.,  1884,  he  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative in  congress,  and  on  15  Dec,  1885,  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  to  succeed  William  Mahone,
whose  term  expires  3  March,  1887.

DANIEL,  William,  candidate  for  the  vice-presi-
dency, b.  on  Deal's  island,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  24
Jan.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college
in  1848,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1853,  and  introduced  a
bill  similar  to  the  Maine  liquor  law,  was  re-elected
on  the  temperance  issue  by  the  American  party,
and  on  the  completion  of  his  term  sent  to  the  state
senate  in  1857  as  a  supporter  of  local  option.  After
the  first  session  he  resigned,  and  removed  to  Balti-
more. He  became  an  earnest  anti-slavery  republi-
can, and  in  1864  was  a  member  of  the  State  consti-
tutional convention  for  the  emancipation  of  the
slaves.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the  Maryland
temperance  alliance  on  its  organization  in  1872,  and
continued  in  that  post  in  subsequent  years.  Through
the  efforts  of  that  society  and  the  energy  and  elo-
quence of  its  president,  the  Maryland  option  law
was  enacted,  and  adopted  by  thirteen  counties  of
the  twenty-three  composing  the  state.  On  14  July,
1884,  the  alliance  joined  the  national  prohibition
party.  Mr.  Daniel  appeared  at  the  head  of  the
Maryland  delegation  in  the  prohibitionist  conven-
tion"^ Pittsburg,  Pa.,  acted  as  temporary  chairman
of  the  convention,  and  was  nominated,  by  it  for
vice-president  of  the  United  States.  The  St.  John
and  Daniel  ticket  received  150,369  ballots,  or  1*49
per  cent,  of  the  total  popular  vote.

DANIELS,William  Haven,  author, b.  in  Frank-
lin, Mass.,  18  May,  1836.  He  entered  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, then  travelled  in  Europe,  became  librarian
in  Northwestern  university  in  1866,  and  was  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  in  Illinois  Wesleyan  university
in  1868-'9.  He  joined  the  Rock  River  conference
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1869,  was  a
minister  in  Chicago,  111.,  in  1870-'4,  then  at  River
Forest,  went  to  Europe  with  Dwight  L.  Moody,  the
revivalist,  in  1875,  became  a  supernumerary  in  1876,
and  since  1881  has  devoted  himself  to  literature,
and  to  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  to  enter  upon
which  he  resigned  his  connection  with  the  New
England  conference  in  1885.  He  is  the  author  of
"  D.  L.  Moody  and  his  Work  "  (London  and  Hart-
ford, 1875) ;  "  That  Boy :  Who  shall  Dave  Him  f  "
(Cincinnati  and  London,  1878) ;  "  The  Temperance
Reform  and  its  Great  Reformers  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
"  Moody,  his  Words,  Work,  and  Workers  "  (1879) ;
"The  Illustrated  History  of  Methodism  in  the
United  States "  (1880) ;  "  Graduated  with  Honor :
Memorials  of  Gilbert  Haven  "  (Cincinnati,  1880) ;
and  "A  Short  History  of  the  People  called  Method-
ist "  (London,  1882).

DANIELSON,  Timothy,  patriot,  b.  in  Brimfield,
Mass.,  in  1733;  d.  there,  19  Sept.,  1791.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1756,  and  studied  theology,
but  did  not  preach.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Hamp-
shire county  convention  in  September,  1774,  and  a
delegate  to  the  provincial  congress  that  met  at  Con-
cord in  the  following  month. In  May,  1774,  being


a  representative,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
council,  but  his  election  was  annulled  by  Gov.  Gage.
In  February  and  May.  1778,  he  attended  the  pro-
vincial congress  at  Cambridge  and  Watcrtown.  He
commanded  one  of  the  twenty-five  regiments  ojt
provincial  militia  organized  under  the  act  of  May.
1775,  but  served  the  cause  of  independence  chiefly
in  the  legislative  body,  where  he  sat  for  m
years,  lie  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1779,  and  afterward  of  the
senate  and  executive  council.  In  his  last  years  he
was  chief  justice  of  Hampshire  county.

DANKS,  Hart  Pease,  musician,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  in  1834.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1850
went  to  Chicago,  111.  His  first  musical  composition
was  inserted  in  Bradbury's  "Jubilee,"  under  the
name  of  "Lake  Street,"  and  is  well  known.  In
1856  his  first  song,  arranged  with  piano-forte  accom-
paniment, "  The  Old  Lane,"  was  published  in  Chi-
cago, since  which  time  he  has  issued  several  hundred.
Two  of  them,  "  Silver  Threads  among  the  Gold  "
and  "  Don't  be  angry  with  me,  Darling,"  have  at-
tained immense  popularity,  each  selling  to  the  ex-
tent of  several  hundred  thousand  copies.  The  pub-
lishers paid  the  author  thirty  dollars  for  the  copy-
right, and  realized  several  thousands.  From  1858
till  1861  Mr.  Danks  lived  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  from
1861  till  1864  in  Chicago,  and  from  1864  till  1887
in  New  York  city.  He  has  published  books  of  an-
thems that  have  met  with  favorable  acceptation.

DAOUST,  Jean  Baptist,  Canadian  politician,
b.  in  St.  Eustache,  Quebec,  18  Jan.,  1817.  After  hav-
ing been  magistrate,  commissioner,  and  municipal
officer,  he  was  elected  by  acclamation  in  1854,  for
Two  Mountains,  to  the  old  parliament  of  Canada,
in  which  he  held  his  seat  until  the  confederation  of
the  provinces  in  1867,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
house  of  commons  by  acclamation.  In  1872  he
retired  for  a  short  time  from  political  life.  In  1876
he  was  re-elected  to  the  house  of  commons  by  ac-
clamation, being  chosen  again  at  the  general  elec-
tion in  1878,  and  again  in  1882.  He  is  a  conservative.

DA  PONTE,  Lorenzo,  dramatist,  b.  in  Venice,
Italy,  10  March,  1749;  d.  in  New  York  city,  17
Aug.,  1838.  His  name  was  an  assumed  one.  He
was  for  two  years  professor  of  rhetoric  in  the  semi-
nary of  Porto  Gruaro,  and  then  removed  to  Venice.
But,  after  a  short  stay  in  that  city,  he  was  exiled
for  writing  a  political  satire.  His  next  place  of
residence  was  in  Vienna,  where  he  wrote  opera
libretti  and  dramas  for  the  theatres.  Among  his
productions  were  "  Don  Giovanni "  and  "  Nozze  di
Figaro,"  both  rendered  famous  and  enduring  by
the  musical  setting  of  Mozart. Da  Ponte  next

Sassed  several  years  in  London  as  secretary  and
ramatist  of  the .  Italian  opera,  and  also  kept  a
book-store.  In  1805,  becoming  financially  in-
volved, he  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and
settled  in  New  York  city,  where  for  many  years
he  gave  private  lessons  in  the  Italian  language
and  literature.  In  1828  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  Italian  in  Columbia  college.  Beetdee
his  many  plays,  he  wrote  sonnets  and  translations
from  the  English  into  Italian,  and  also  several
books  of  elementary  instruction  in  the  Italian
language.  He  published  his  own  "Life"  (3  vols..
New  York,  1823),  and  "History  of  the  Florentine
Republic  and  the  Medici "  (2  vols.,  1833).

DARBY,  John,  educator,  b.  in  North  Adams,
Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  in  New  York,  18  Sept.,  1877.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1831,  and  re-
mained there  as  an  instructor  till  he  accepted  a  pro-
fessorship in  Wesleyan  female  college  at  Macon.  ( ia.
Afterward  he  became  professor  of  mathematics  at


DARBT


DARi


77


Williams, in  ih4.')  be  wm obUfad, oo aeeoaid  of

BfsheaJtl  a  warm  climate.  He  was  e,. li-
ned ed  a ith  ti dueationaJ  department*  "f  Georgia

iitnl  Florida,  was  tin-  founder  01  thcCiillodcti  female

college,  and  afterward  profaaeor  of  natural  science

in Auburn  college,  Ala. In 1N(M)  he  was  elected

Eldent  of  tfa  m  university  of  Kentucky,

ut  in  1878  reeigned,  and  removed  bo  New  York
II.  w  ac  .1  regular  contributor  to  the  religious
proas,  and  was  the  author  of  several  educational
and  sdentinc  works,  Including  "  Manual  of  Botanj "
ii.  IH41);  "The  Botany  of  the  Southern  States"
Vork,  1855);  and  " Chemistry "  (I860).

DARBT,  William,  geographer,  b.  in  Fennayl-
vaniain  1775:  d.  in  Washington,  I>.  <'.,  UOct-  1864
Ha  was  an  officer  under  (Jen.  Jackson  in  Louisiana,
ami  one  of  the  surveyon  of  the  boundary  U-tween
the  United  states  ami  Canada.  With  Theodora
Dw  ight.  Jr..  he  edited  the  "United  States  Gazetteer"
in  1XH>.  His  works  include  "Geographical  Descrip-
tion  of  Louisiana"  (isiti);  ••  Plan  of  Pittaburgand
Adjacent  Country  "  (1817);  "  Emigrant's  Guide  to
the  Western  Country"  (1818);  "Tour  from  New
York  to  Detroit"  (N'.w  York.  1819);  "Geography
and  History  of  Florida."  with  a  map  (1821):  third
edition  of  "  Brooke's  Universal  Gazetteer"  (1828);
••  Yiew  of  the  United  States " (Philadelphia,  1828);
•'Lectures  on  the  Discovery  of  America"  (1828);
"  Mnemoniea,a  Register  of  Events  from  the  Earli-
er Period  to  1829"  (Baltimore,  1829);  and  "Geo-
graphical Dictionary"  (1843).

UARCEY.  John  "  S„  phvsician,  b.  in  Hanover,
Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  24  Feb.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Newark.  N.
J.,  II  I  ><t.,  1863.  His  father  was  a  physician,  and
with  him  he  studied  and  succeeded  to  his  large
practice.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-
ture in  1H19.  In  1832,  on  the  first  appearance  of
Asiatic  cholera  in  this  country,  he  removed  to
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  by  his  skill  in  the  treatment
of  that  disease,  and  his  devotion  to  his  patients
and  sympathy  with  their  sufferings,  attained  a
practice  more  extensive  and  exacting  than  any
other  in  the  state,  which  finally  impaired  his  re-
markably vigorous  constitution.  In  1835-'41  he
was  U.  S.  marshal  for  New  Jersey.  He  exerted
great  influence  in  his  party  in  the  state,  but  was
averse  to  holding  office.  On  the  incorporation  of
the  New  Jersey  railroad  company  he  waa  elected
its  president,  and  held  the  office  till  ins  death,  a
period  of  over  thirty  years.  In  1849,  his  health
failing,  he  made  theoverland  journey  to  California,
but  his  health  was  rather  injured  than  benefited.

HARDEN,  Miles,  giant,  b.  in  North  Carolina
in  179H;  d.  in  Henderson  county.  Teiin..  '•>■'{  Jan..
1857.  He  was  seven  feet  six  inches  in  height,  and
at  his  death  Weighed  more  than  one  thousand
pounds.  Until  1853  he  was  active,  energetic,  and
able  to  lalx>r,  but  from  that  time  was  obliged  to
remain  at  home,  or  be  moved  aliout  in  a  wagon.
In  1800  it  required  thirteen  and  a  half  yards  of
cloth,  one  yard  wide,  to  make  him  a  coat.  11 is
coffin  was  eight  feet  long,  thirty-five  inches  deep,
thirty-two  inches  across  the  breast,  eighteen  across
the  head,  and  fourteen  across  the  feet

DARE,  Virginia,  the  first  child  of  English
parents  botfl  in  the  New  World,  b. at  Roanoke,  Va.,
in  August,  1007.  She  was  the  granddaughter  of
John  White,  governor  of  the  colonv  sent  out  by-
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  found  an  agricultural  state.
The  expedition  sailed  from  Plymouth,  England, 26

April,  C>s?.  and  reached  the  island  of  RaStoke,
Yirginia,  in  July  of  the  same  year.  The  moiher
Of  UM  child  was  the  wife  of  one  of  her  father's
assistants.  Yirginia  was  liorn  aliout  a  month  after
the  arrival  of  the  expedition. Nine  days  after  her


birth  Gov.  White  Bailed  for  England,  and  when  ho
returned,  a  year  later,  nil  vtwtigt*  of  •
had  disappeared. An  Inscription  on  the  bnr

inted to  Ironfall,  a
long  to  a friendly  trilw  of  Indians,  but Cmatan
was  never  found.

DA  ID.  V  N.Clara  Victoria,  pott  b,  near  Winne*
DOTO,  S.  C.  about  1*40.  She  uas.,f  French  descent,
and  of  a  family  whose  wealth  was  lost  in  the  down-
fall of  the  Confederacy.  Ibr  early  education  wan
very  carefully  conducted,  and  ehe  »n.i  eepeeslflf
skill. -d  in  music.  From  1852  til
with her family in Columbia,  S.  C. She  began

writing ekatohaa  and  eongaal  the  age  of  t.n.  and

a  year  later  produced  a  story  that  was  much  nd-
mired. Her  first pubUahed  poem  v»i,
Thine,"  in  the  Charleston  "Coiirant  "  in  !*•
der the pseudonym of "Claudia," Durn
following  year  she  wrote  several  stories  f,,r  the
"Southern Guardian,"  signed  "  Esther  Chcaney."

In  1000 ehe  edited  the  Uierary depaftananl  of  the

'•  Edgefield  Advertiser,"  and  became  a  contributor

to  various  other  periodicals. After  the  .

the  civil  war  she  became  a  teacher  in  ForkriOe,

8.  C.  She  is  the  author  of  "  Kiverlands."  a  story
Of  life  on  the Kivcr  Ashley,  which  originally  ap-

t  oared  aa  a  prion  story  in  the  M Southern  Field  and
fireside "  flOOOX  ana  of  another  novel  that  ot>
tained  a  prize  and  was  pubUahed  us  a  larlal

DA  KG  AN.  Edmund  Siiann,  jurist,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  N.  ('..  18  April.  1800;  d.  in  Mobile.
Ala.,  in  November,  1879.  Ha  was  the  son  of  a
Baptist  minister  of  Irish  descent,  at  whose  death
he  was  left  without  means.  By  his  ..mm  exertions
he  obtained  a  fair  knowledge  of  English,  Ijitin.
and  Greek,  although  he  was  at  work  on  a  farm  un-
til he  was  twenty-three  years  old.  He  read  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  \*'2U.  went  to  Alabama.
and  taught  three  months  in  VTaahingtOU,  Autauga

co. Here  he  was  elected  a  Justice  of  the  peace,  and

filled  the  office  for  several  years,  meanwhile  en-
gaging in  the  practice  of  law.  In  lxti  be  ramoTad
to  Montgomery,  ami  in  1*41  was  elected  to  the
bench  of  the  circuit  court  of  the  Mobile  district.
and  removed  to  Mobile.  He  resigned  the  office  of
judge  in  1848,  and  in  1x44  waa  nleotod  to  the  state
senate.  He  was  also  mayor  of  Mobile  the  same
year.  He  resigned  from  the  senate  the  following
year,  and  was  elected  to  c.  rving  from  1

Dee..  1840,  till  :*  March.  1847.  <>n  the  queetJcsj  of
the  northwestern  boundary  of  Oregon  he  made  an
able  speech,  and  offered  some  valuable  amend-
ments to  the  resolution  of  notion.  Be  was  the
first  proposer  of  the  line  of  adjustment  finallv
adopted  on  the  settlement  of  the  question  with

the  British  government.  He  declined  a  leUOUU-
nation,  and  in  1847  was  elected  to  fill  a  vacancy
on  the  bench  Of  the  supreme  court  of  Alalwma.
In  July,  1840,  by  the  resignation  of  Juatke  Collier,
he  became  chief  justice,  which  office  be  resigned  in
December,  1000,  and  luwmsd  the  pnetssa  of  law
in  Kobfla.  In  is'*d  he  was  a  delegate  loth
convention,  and  voted  for  the  ordinance  of  Reces-
sion, lie  also  served  lot  one  term  aa  a  representa-
tive in  the  Confederate  congress.

DAM  VN.  Theodore  A.,  physician,  b.  in  -
Hollow,  S.  ('., in 1*S1. He  was  of  Scotch- Irish

daaoant,  and  taoaivad  his  early  ednoattnn  in  I>ar-

lingtoii.  S.  C. He  was  graduated at tie
Carolina medical college  in 1K44 at the age  of
twenty-one, At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
entered  the  Confederal  '■  •»"<l

served  until  the  end.  In  1H.'.1»  he  published  a.  pa-
per -«n  the  subject  ..f  "Typhoid  Fever."  which  was
extensively  noticed-


78


DARKE


dakling


DARKE,  William.  soldier,  b.  In  Philadelphia
OOOIltj,  Pa.,  ill  l?:!ti;  d.  in  Jefferson  fount y.  \';i..  96
Nov.,  1801.  When  he  was  four  years  old  Iris  par-
ents removed  to  Virginia.  At  the  age  of  nineteen
lit-  joined  tin'  BITOT,  anil  was  with Braddock  at  his

cl.iv.it  in  1755, .Utlie  beginning  of  the  Bevohv

tionary  war  he  was  made  a  captain,  and  was  taken

Erisoner  at  the  battle  of  Germaiitown.  Afterward
e  was  colonel  commanding  the  Hampshire  and
Berkeley  regiments  at  the  capture  of  Cornwallis.
He  was  often  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legisla-
ture, and,  in  the  convention  of  1788,  voted  for  the
Federal  constitution.  In  1791  he  was  commissioned
lieutenant-colonel  in  a  regiment  of  "levies,"  and
commanded  the  left  wing  of  St.  Clair's  army  at  its
defeat  by  the  .Miami  Indians  on  4  Nov.,  1791.  He
made  two  gallant  and  successful  charges  with  the
bayonet  in  this  fight,  in  the  second  of  which  his
youngest  son,  Cant.  Joseph  Darke,  was  killed  and
himself  wounded,  narrowly  escaping  death.  He
was  afterward  major-general  of  "Virginia  militia.

DARLEY,  John,  actor,  b.  in  England  in  1765;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1853.  He  made  his  first
appearance  on  the  American  stage  in  Philadelphia
in  1794,  and  afterward  became  a  lieutenant  of  ma-
rines in  the  U.  S.  navy,  but  returned  to  the  stage,
and  appeared  at  the  Park  theatre,  New  York,  20
July,  1801.  He  had  a  manly,  well-proportioned
person,  and  a  handsome  face,  and,  although  not
warmly  attached  to  his  profession,  possessed  great
merit  as  a  singer,  and  played  frenchmen  and
walking  gentlemen  well. — His  son,  Felix  Octa-
vins  Carr,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  23  June,
1822 ;  d.  in  Claymont.  Del.,  27  March.  1888.  He  was
placed  in  a  mercantile  house  in  1836,  but  spent
his  leisure  in  drawing.  Some  of  his  sketches  at-
tracted attention,  and  he  received  from  the  pub-
lisher of  the  "  Saturday  Museum "  a  handsome

sum  for  a  few
di  signs,  which
encouraged  him
to  devote  him-
self to  art.  For
several  years  he
was  employed  by
largepublishing-
houses  in  Phila-
delphia, during
which  he  pro-
duced the  se-
ries of  drawings
for  the  "  Libra-
ry of  Humor-
ous American
Works,"  which
became  very  pop-
(— ~*^%  ^-"v— **y^~/)-~r s  ularinthesouth-

'■^  '  ern  and  western
states.  He  re-
moved in  1848
to  New  York,  where  he  occupied  himself  in  illustrat-
ing Irving's  humorous  writings.  In  1856  he  pub-
lished a  series  of  designs  in  outline  from  Sylvester
Judd's  novel  of  "  Margaret,"  which  met  with  such
favor  that  he  was  commissioned  by  the  American
art  union  to  illustrate  in  similar  style  u  Rip  Van
Winkle  "  and  "  Sleepy  Hollow."  His  elaborate  out-
line drawings  of  these  subjects  led  to  his  recog-
nition, both  at  home  and  abroad,  as  a  worthy  suc-
cessor of  Retzsch  and  Flaxman.  He  declined  an
advantageous  offer  to  settle  in  London,  and  applied
himself  assiduously  to  his  art.  In  addition  to  il-
lustrating James  Fenimore  Cooper's  works,  for
which  he  furnished  more  than  500  designs,  he  was
also  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  vignettes  for


pa

l't


bank-notes.  Be  riM  Uhtstiafced  Dickens's  works
and  Simuis's  novels,  and  executed  the  "  Massacre  at
Wyoming,"  and  various  Revolutionary  piece*  Mr.
Dariey  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Academy  of
design  In  1859,  l>eeame  a  member  of  the  Artists'
fund  society,  and  was  one  of  the  early  members  of.
the  American  society  of  painters  in  water-colors.
In  1859  appeared  his  drawing  of  the  wedding  pro-
cession in  Longfellow's  "  Courtship  of  Miles  Stan-
dish."  After  that  time  he  executed  many  large
works,  among  which  were  four  ordered  by  Prince
Napoleon,  viz. :  '•  Emigrants  attacked  by  Indians
on  the  Prairie,"  "The  Village  Blacksmith,"  "The
Unwilling  Laborer,"  and  "The  Repose."  During
the  civil  war  he  delineated  many  dramatic  and
characteristic  scenes,  including  one  representing
"Dahlgren's  Charge  at  Fredericksburg,"  and  an-
other representing  "Sherman's  March  to  the  Sea."
Some  of  the  most  elaborate  figures  and  scenes  on
the  government  bonds  and  legal-tender  notes  of
the  national  banks  were  designed  by  him.  Toward
the  close  of  the  war  he  visited  Europe,  added  many
scores  of  sketches  to  his  portfolio,  studied  models  in
Rome,  and  made  a  large  number  of  drawings,  many
of  which  appeared  in  periodicals.  On  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  published  "  Sketches  Abroad
with  Pen  and  Pencil ''(New  York,  1868),  for  which
he  furnished  both  letter-press  and  illustrations.
His  "  Cavalry  Charge  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.,"  was
at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867.  His  "  Street  Scene
in  Rome,"  in  water-color,  was  at  the  Centennial
exhibition  of  1876.  In  1875  he  engaged  in  pre-
aring  500  drawings  to  illustrate  a  "  History  of  the
'nited  States  "  by  B.  J.  Lossing.  His  later  work
consists  of  "  Outlines  to  the  '  Scarlet  Letter ' "  of
Hawthorne  (1879),  and  twelve  outline  illustrations
to  the  "Evangeline"  of  Longfellow,  issued,  not  in
lithograph  print  as  heretofore,  but  in  phototypes
taken  from  the  originals  (1883),  and  "  Illustrations
to  Shakespeare's  Plays  "  (1886).

DARLING,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Reading,
Pa.,  27  Dec,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1842,  studied  theology  in  Union  seminary,  New
York,  in  1842-'3,  at  Auburn  in  1843-'5,  and  was
ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  Columbia,  30  Dec,
1847.  He  first  settled  in  Vernon,  N.  Y.,  then  be-
came pastor  in  Hudson  in  1847-53,  pastor  of  the
Clinton  street  church,  Philadelphia,  in  1852-'62,
and  permanent  clerk  of  the  Presbyterian  general
assembly  in  1854-'63.  He  was  an  invalid  in  1861-'3,
after  which  he  removed  to  Albany,  and  became
pastor  of  the  4th  Presbyterian  church,  where  he
remained  until  1881.  In  that  year  he  was  elected
president  of  Hamilton  college.  He  presided  as
moderator  to  the  general  assembly  in  1881.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  in  1860  by
Union,  and  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  both  Hamilton
and  Lafayette  in  1881.  In  addition  to  many  pam-
phlets and  articles  in  periodicals,  he  has  published
"  The  Closer  Walk  "  (Philadelphia,  1862),  "  Slavery
and  the  War"  (1863),  "Conformity  to  the  Wrorld''
(1873),  "  Not  Doing,  but  Receiving  "  (Albany,  1875).
DARLING,  Noyes,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Wood-
bridge,  Conn.,  in  1782;  d.  in  New  Haven,  17  Sept.,
1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1801,  and  was
a  tutor  there  in  1804-'8,  after  which  he  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits  in  New  York  city.  He  was
especially  interested  in  horticulture,  and  also  in
investigating  the  habits  of  insects  injurious  to
vegetation,  and  wrote  many  valuable  papers  on  the
subject.  The  latter  years  of  his  life  were  passed
in  New  Haven,  of  which  city  he  was  at  one  time
mayor.  He  had  also  served  for  a  long  time  as
county  surveyor,  and  was  at  the  time  of  his  death
a  judge  of  the  county  court.


Darunh


DAB1  in<..  Millhim.  phyvician, b. in Berwick-
■hire,  Scot  laud,  in  1815.  Hi-  early  education  wit
nhtaintd  at  ■  private  Nminarv,  after  which  be
went  t..  the  Univerotty  of  Edinburgh,  v/here  b<
tainod  a  prize  by  competitive  examination  for  hif
proficiency  in  tin-  elamioa  1 1 « -  *tnili<-<l  medicine
in  tin-  College  of  phyelciane  and  onrgeone  la

Vi>rk  f.>r  mx  year*,  ami.  in  1*40,  was  ap|>ointcd
physician  to  liollcvue  hospital,  and  also  took  charge

iiu-  i>f  the  hospitale  on  Ward's  bland,
degree  "f  m.  i>.  was  reoeired  in  1848  from  the  I'ni-
ity  of  the  city  of  New  York,  which  also  in  a
few  weeka  appointed  him  its  prosector  of  surgery.
In  \*4~)  In-  was  called  to  the  professorship  of  demon-
ntratorof  anatomy,  whan  lie  remained  until  1808,
when  he  Ix-came  connected  with  the  quarantine
lios|(ital,  staten  [aland. In  1888  ho  eerved  aeeenior

assistant  rurgeoo  in  the  emigrants'  hospital,  Ward's
island.  In  ls"><>  he  went  to  London,  Kngland,  and.
on  '-'I  Nov.  in  that  year,  was  admitted  a  member
of  the  Royal  college  of  surgeons  of  Kngland.  lie
rmnelnod  In  Bnrope  ten  years,  most  of  the  time  In
London,  attending  the  lectures  and  nliniqnm  at  the

hospitals,  M  well  m  leetWM  at  the  College  0>f  sur-
geons, the  Royal  institution,  (frcsham  college.  School
of  arts,  School  of  mines, etc. During  the  same

{period  he  also  attended  various  lectures  in  Paris.
Edinburgh, and Olaagow,  On  14 June,  istiti.  shortly
before  his  departure  for  the  United  States,  he  re-
ceived the  fellowship  of  the  Royal  college  of  surgeons.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was  appointed
professor  of  anatomy  in  the  University  of  New  York.
and  in  1868  censor  of  the  New  York  college  of
veterinary  surgeons. In  1873  he  was  appointed

f professor  of  anatomy  in  the  University  of  \  ennont.
Ie  is  a  member  of  many  medical  societies,  at  borne
and  abroad,  and  OO  8  Nov.,  1877,  was  elected  corre-
spondent of  the  Sx-iete  d 'anthropologic  of  Paris.

DARLINlt,  William,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
>Bdinburgb,  Scotland,  In  1819;  d.  in  Montreal,  l
Nov.,  1885.  He  arrived  in  Canada  in  1840,  and,
taking  up  his  residence  in  Montreal,  established  an
iron  and  hardware  business,  which  ultimately  Ih--
came  the  wholesale  firm  of  William  Darling  &  Co.
He  actively  promoted  the  commercial  welfare  of
that  city,  ana  was  for  some  years  president  of  its
board  of  trade,  and  also  vice-president  of  the  Do-
minion board  of  trade.  He  was  largely  instru-
mental in  framing  the  insolvent  act  of  1875.  Dur-
ing the  Mackenzie  administration  be wm appointed
arbitrator  <>n  the  I.achiuc  canal  claims,  an  office  in
which  he  was  continued  by  Sir  John  A.  Macdon-
ald.  He  was  a  director  of  the  Merchant's  Itank,
and  chairman  of  the  Temporalities  lioard  of  the
Presbvterian  church  of  Canada.  In  1878  he  was  a
candidate  for  a  seat  in  the  Dominion  parliament,
in  the  lilieral  interest,  but  was  defeated.

DARLINGTON,  William,  scientist,  b.  in  Bir-
mingham, Pa..  89  April.  1782;  d.  in  West  Chester.
Pi..  M  April.  1888.  His  parents  were  (Quakers,  and
his  early  education  was  received  in  the  country
school.  He  began  the  study  of  medicine  at  the  age
of  eighteen,  ami  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1804.  He  studied  languages
and  botany  two  years,  and  in  180(5  went  to  India  as
a  ship's  surgeon,  for  which  (joining  a  military  or-
ganization) he  was  disowned  by  the  Society  of
Friends.  A  sketch  of  his  voyage,  under  the  title  of
"  I/etters from Calcutta." was published in the

••  Analectic  Magazine."  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  lf-M>7.  and  for  several  ream  practised  medi-
cine in  West  Chester.  Hen-  he  entered  into  politics,
wrote  in  defence  of  thcpoUoy  of  President  Madi-
son, and  at  tin-  beginning  of  the  war  of  1818  aided
in raising  an armed  OOrpe  in  his  ncighl>orhood.


D'ARI


n


and.  nftlt  the  d.-M ruction  ,,f  Washington  i>

boeea  major  oi  a  volunt<
ronnded  an  ethenemm,  ami  a  ■  natural

of  which  he  became  the  preaid.

he  began  a  d.-s.  nptive  catalogue  of  plant*  gi
aroun.l  Weal  Chester,  with  the  title  "Florida  <"«•%-
triea"  d^Jni,  afterwanl  enlarged  M  the  "Flora
Cestrica  "  (1X17;  now  eel,  1888%  containing
oleic  description  ami  .  I  a- >  ideation  of  even  plant
known  in  the  count  v.  He  wa*  a  member  'of  con-
gress from  j  i>. ....  1*1.-,.  mi  :<  March,  1817, and  from
<i  I),  p..  IN11I,  till  ;{  March,  l*^. In  |s;

the  oofrmmmdoaee  of  his  friend.  Dr.  William

Baldwin,  with  a  memoir,  entitling  the  work  ••  K...
liquhl  Raldwiniana"  In  1868  the  name  of  b
tin  urn  Califiirma  was  given,  in  his  honor,  t
and  remarkable  variety  of  pitcher-plant  found  in
California,  in  addition  to  which  a  number  of  ran-
plants  were  named  in  his  honor  bv  uaturali»l%  m
Switzerland  and  America.  The  degree  >-f  I.I..  I».
was  conferred  on  him  by  Vale  in  1k»*  ,„„!  j,,  |gaj
that  of  Doctor  of  Pbyemal Seienoe, bj  IMekiaaoa
college.  He  was  a  member  Of  the  American  philo-
sophical  eooietv  and  of  forty  other  loomed  mea>

ties  in  America  and Europe. In addition to  the

works  noted  above,  be  published  "  Mutual  Influence

of  Habits  and  Disease"  (1NM)  mid  "  Agricultural
Botany"  (Philadelphia.  1847),

DAkKAH.  Mrs.  I.ydla,  heroine.  Of  her  birth
and  early  life  nothing  is  known,  except  tl
was  a  Quaker.  During  1777.  while  the  British  army
held  possession  of  Philadelphia,  the  adjutant -gen-
eral rented  one  of  h'-r  chamUrs.  a  retired  room,
for  private  conferences.  On  '2  IVc.  he  went  to
her.  required  that  the  room  be  ready  with  tin-  and
candles  by  seven  o'clock,  that  her  family  retire  to
their  ImmIs,  and  that  the  utmost  lilenee  \»-  kept  r»-
garding  the  visit.  Them  minute  directiom  ex-
cited her  curiosity,  and.  divested  of  her  shoes,  she
crept  to  the  door,  listened  at  the  key-hole,  and
heard  an  order  read  for  all  the  British  troops  to
march  out  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  and  attack
Washington's  army,  then  at  White  Marsh,  eight
miles  distant.  Returning  to  her  room,  she  feigned
sleep  when  called  by  the  oilier,  at  the  close  of  the
meeting,  thai  be  might  depart.  Keeping  theeeeret
from  her  husband,  she  at  an  early  Inmr  in  the  morn-
ing informed  the  family  that  they  were  out  of  flour,
and  she  would  go  to  Frankfort,  outside  of  the
British  lines,  and  procure  some.  A  |wiss  was  read i ly
procured  from  (Jen.  Howe,  and  she  was  soon  beyond
the  British  lines,  and,  leaving  her  Iwg  at  the  mill,
hastened  to  the  American  army,  walking  in  a
snowy  road  for  MTeral  miles.  She  met  I.ieut.-
CoL  Craig,  who  knew  her,  and.  under  a  solemn
pledge  of  secrecy  regarding  her  agency,  received
the information that placid  the  American  army

on  its  guard. She  returned  to  the  mill,  procured

her  flour,  and  went  home.  That  night  she  watched
the  British  troops  departing,  and  when  they  re-
turned she  did  ii'pt  dare  to  seek  any  information.
The  next  evening  the  adjutant-general  ask.tl  her  to

walk  up  t<>  his  room,  kicked  the  door,  ami  inquired

whether  anv  of  the  family  were  up  when  he  and
the  other  officer!  met. She  told  him  they  hail  all
"retired  at eight o'clock." He  then  said:  "1
rerj  Strange  ;  I  know  you  wen- asleep,  for  1  kno»  k>-d
at  voiir  ohamber-door  three  titm-s  I  a- fore  you  heard
me.  vet  i! is  certain  that  we  wen-  Ixtraxd. I  am
entirely  at  a  loss  to  imagine  who  ga>c  (bn.  Wash-
ington' Information  of  our  intended attack.
arriving  near  his  encampment we  found  his  can-
non mounted,  the  troopf  under  arms,  and  pn  |
at  evert  pothi  to  meet  us.  and  we  have  been  coin-
paUod  *  march  l«ek  like  a  parcel  of  fools."


80


DASHIELL


D.MVKAV


DASHIELL,  George,  clergvman,  b.  in  Stcpnev.
Md.,  in  l?si»:  (1.  in  New  York  city  in  April.  1862.
He  was  licensed  us  lay-reader  at  the  age  of  twenty.
tad  admitted  to  orders  by  Bishop  White  in  1805.
He  was  in  charge  of  several  parishes  in  Maryland.
was  distinguished  for  pulpit  eloquence,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  general  convention,  and  lx;came  rector  of
St.  Peter's  church,  Baltimore.  Mr.  Dashiell  was
violently  opposed  to  the  election  of  the  Rev.  Dr.
Kemp  as  suffragan  bishop  of  Maryland  in  1814,
and  with  a  small  number  of  sympathizers  began  a
schismatical  movement,  by  which  (as  he  said)  it
was  proposed  to  make  "  the  evangelical  part  of  the
church  a  distinct  body,  and  to  enlarge  its  bounda-
ries by  admitting  faithful  men  to  labor  in  the  work
of  the  Lord."  Attempts  were  made  to  get  some
one  of  the  bishops  to  consecrate  Mr.  Dashiell  for  the
purpose,  but  without  success,  and  he  was  degraded
for  contumacy  early  in  1816.  Some  adherents  of
his  in  St.  Peter's  church  endeavored  to  aid  him  in
keeping  possession  of  St.  Peter's,  but  loyal  mem-
bers of  the  church  invoked  the  help  of  the  courts
to  prevent  it.  As  the  judges  disagreed,  no  result
was  attained.  A  new  vestry  was  elected,  and  the
difficulty  was  disposed  of  by  choosing  the  Rev.  Dr.
Henshaw  to  be  rector.  Mr.  Dashiell,  however,  as
he  could  not  get  Episcopal  orders,  undertook  to
ordain  ministers  for  what  he  called  "The  Evan-
gelical Episcopal  Church."  In  this  he  was  the
forerunner  of  the  movement,  half  a  century  later,
known  as  "  The  Reformed  Episcopal  Church,"
originated  by  Dr.  Cummins,  assistant  bishop  of
Kentucky.  Mr.  Dashiell's  movement  lasted  only  a
few  years,  and  bore  no  fruit.  He  removed  to  a
western  state  in  1826,  and  spent  there  most  of  the
remainder  of  his  life.

DASTON,  Sarah,  one  of  the  later  victims  of  the
witchcraft  delusion  in  Salem,  b.  about  1613.  In
January,  1693,  when  "the  jails  were  full,  150  pris-
oners awaited  trial,  and  200  more  were  under  ac-
cusation," the  grand  jury  went  into  session,  and
dismissed  more  than  half  the  complaints.  Public
feeling  was  changing,  but  the  party  of  superstition
desired  one  conviction.  The  victim  selected  was
Sarah  Daston,  a  woman  eighty  years  old.  In  Feb-
ruary she  was  tried  in  Charlestown,  but  the  common
mind  was  disenthralled,  and  she  was  acquitted,
while  her  persecutor,  Minister  Parris,  was  soon
afterward  driven  from  Salem.

DAUCHER,  Louis,  musician,  b.  in  France  in
1837;  d.  in  Nancy,  France,  16  Aug.,  1878.  He
came  to  the  United  States  when  still  a  young  man,
and  early  embraced  the  musical  profession.  He
was  for  over  six  years  organist  of  St.  Ann's  Roman
Catholic  church  in  New  York,  where  he  was  at  one
time  the  proprietor  of  a  music-store.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Daucher's  Mass "  and  several  other
works,  and  received  the  first  prize  for  original  com-
position at  the  Paris  conservatory  of  music.

DAUILA,  Alonso  de  (dah-wee'-lah),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Toledo  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century;  d.  in  Guatitlan,  Mexico,  in  1536.  On
16  Nov.,  1518,  he  sailed  from  Santiago  de  Cuba  in
the  expedition  under  command  of  Hernan  Cortes
as  a  lieutenant  in  Juan  Velasquez's  company.  He
assisted  in  the  whole  Mexican  campaign,  begin-
ning in  1519  in  Tabasco,  and  is  said  to  have  taken
part  in  seventy  battles.  When  Narvaez,  sent  by
Diego  Velasquez,  jealous  of  Cortes,  landed  in  Mexi-
co and  was  defeated,  Dauila  was  commissioned  by
Cortes  to  go  to  Hispaniola  and  ask  of  the  audien-
cia  of  that  island  that  he  might  not  be  hampered
in  his  enterprise  by  further  interference  from  Ve-
lasquez. He  obtained  a  favorable  .  result  of  his
mission,  and  returned  to  Mexico  on  the  day  of  the


entry  of  Cortes  after  his  victory  of  Panueo.  To
reoompeoM  Danfla  for  this  service,  and  also  be-
cause ne  mist  rusted  him  on  account  of  his  friendly
relations  with  Bishop  Fonscca.  the  presidenl  of  the
Indian  council,  Cortes,  besides  giving  him  a  con-
siderable amount  of  gold,  appointed  him  military
f:overnor  of  the  village  of  Guatitlan.  In  LfiH
)auila  was  commissioned  by  <  'ortes  to  carry  to  the
emperor  a  tribute  of  80,000ounces  of  gold  in  bars
obtained  from  the  treasure  of  Montezuma.  With
Antonio  de  Quinones  he  left  Vera  Cruz  on  this
commission  with  two  ships,  20  Dec.,  1022,  ami
reached  the  Terceira  islands.  During  their  stay
there  to  take  stores,  Quiflones  was  Killed  in  ii
brawl.  Dauila  set  sail  for  Spain,  but  his  ships
were  captured  by  the  French  corsair  "Jean  Flo-
rin." As  the  French  demanded  a  heavy  ransom  for
him,  he  was  for  a  long  time  prisoner,  but  won  the
friendship  of  the  officer  that  guarded  him.  ami
was  enabled  to  send  the  despatches  and  letter!  re-
ceived from  Cortes  to  the  emperor,  who  at  the  time
was  in  Flanders.  Later  he  escaped  from  prison
and  went  to  Spain,  presenting  himself  at  court,
and  returned  to  Mexico  in  1526  with  the  appoint-
ment of  treasurer  of  Yucatan ;  but  in  later  years
joined  Cortes  again  in  the  capital.

DAULAC,  Adam,  b.  in  France  in  1635 ;  d.  in
Long  Sault,  Canada,  in  1660.  He  was  trained  to
the  profession  of  arms,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1657.
He  was  appointed  commander  of  the  garrison  in
Montreal  soon  after  his  arrival.  As  the  Iroquois  were
devastating  the  French  settlements,  he  adopted  a
desperate  plan  to  repel  their  attacks.  He  persuaded
sixteen  young  men  of  the  garrison  to  devote  them-
selves to  the  safety  of  the  colony.  They  took  their
way  up  the  Ottawa  in  canoes,  and,  on  reaching  the
foot  of  Long  Sault,  landed  and  took  possession  of
an  abandoned  palisade  fort,  constructed  of  small
trees,  and  almost  defenceless.  They  were  joined
afterward  by  forty  Hurons  and  four  Algonquins,
who  asked  to  be  allowed  to  share  their  enterprise.
Next  day  the  Frenchmen  fired  on  two  canoes  con-
taining Iroquois,  killing  several.  The  survivors
rushed  to  the  woods  and  informed  their  compan-
ions, who,  to  the  number  of  200,  attacked  the  fort,
but  they  were  repelled  with  great  loss,  and  built  a
fort  at  some  distance.  In  a  second  and  third  as-
sault they  fared  still  worse,  and  then  sent  for  500
warriors  who  were  on  their  way  to  join  in  an  attack
on  Quebec.  On  the  arrival  of  this  re-enforcement,
the  French  were  deserted  by  all  the  Hurons  except
the  chief.  Daulac,  however,  still  held  the  palisade,
and  for  three  days  repelled  every  assault  of  the  700
Iroquois  and  their  Huron  allies.  Many  of  the  In-
dians were  now  desirous  to  retreat,  but  others  in-
sisted that  a  final  attack  should  be  made,  led  by  a
body  of  their  bravest  warriors.  This  assault  was
successful,  a  breach  was  made,  and  Daulac  and  his
companions  were  killed  after  they  had  slain  a  large
number  of  the  enemy.

DAUVRAY,  Helen,  actress,  b.  in  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  14  Feb.,  1859.  Her  true  name  is  Gib-
son, and  she  was  also  known  as  "  Little  Nell,  the
California  diamond."  During  her  childhood  she
resided  in  Virginia  City,  Nev.,  and  made  her  first
appearance  on  the  stage  in  San  Francisco,  playing
Eva  in  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  Afterward  .she  ap-
peared as  the  Duke  of  York  in  "Richard  III.,"  as
the  child  in  "The  Scarlet  Letter,"  with  Matilda
Heron,  and  in  other  roles.  About  1869  she  was
announced  as  a  child  star,  and  her  first  tour,
opening  in  the  west,  was  made  in  protean  plays,
such  as  "  Fidela,"  "  No  Name,"  and  "  Katy  Did."
She  continued  eastward,  meeting  with  indifferent
success,  reached  New  York  in  June,  1870,  appear-


D.w  I


HI


tod's  museum,  where  she  played  twice  a

in  ••  Popsey  Wopsey," niid  hIs4.  ;i|.|M-nrc<l in

Blake.  ** Shi* again went west,  hihI  lat«T

sailed  f. T  Australia. Alter  playing  in that  «-«.un-

nif  time,  she  returned  to  the  United

■ -,  iiiul.  withdrawing  from  tin-  -tn:r'\  wnt  t>.
Europe,  where  she  acquired  the  French  language.

old  fondness  for  thr  stage  reviving,  she  dctcr-
nined  on  an  appearance  abroad,  rwl  Perrier
adapted  fi»r  her  a  French  version  of  "Nan the

l-for-nothing," which he  called "Miss Mag-

Sand  "ii  1  Sept..  1864.  ahe  acted  at  the  PoUee
raraatiqaee  in  Paris  under  the  name  of  Mile.
Helens  Dauvray.  Her  engagement  lasted  over
time  months,  atter  which  she  returned  t<>  the
I'nited  States.  The  novel  of  "  Mr>.  I  leoffrey  "  was
adapted  for  her.  under  the  name  of  "  Mona."  I > v
Felix  Morris,  and  she  took  the  titular  character  in
the  Star  theatre.  New  York.  27  April,  1866,  DOl
without -  Miss  Dauvray  had  forsaken her

old  aoubrette  part-,  and  was  ambitious  of  winning
distinction  in  serious  roles.  She  then  attempted
comedy,  and  Branson  Howard  wrote  for  her  "One
of  OUT  Girls,"  which  was  originally  prcdoccd  in  the
um  theatre.  New  York,  10  Nov.,  1HN5.  This
play  ran  for  several  months,  and  proved  a  great
success.  A  year  later,  Mr.  Howard  prepared  for
her  "Met  by  Chance,"  which  was  first  played  on
11  Jan.,  ls,s7.  bat  was  not  successful.

DAVALOS,  (ill  de  (dah-vahdos),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Baeza  de  Cast  ilia,  Spain ;  d.  in  Quito,
Ecuador,  in  1562.  He  went  to  Peru  with  tin
viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  and  in  1557  found-
ed the  city  of  Cncnoa  by  order  of  Viceroy  Andres
Hurt  ado  de  Mendoza,  by  whom  he  was  also  or-
dered to  conquer  Qoijos  and  Macas,  which  be
did.  In  1550  he  founded  Baeza,  the  capital  of
Quijos;  also  Archidona,  Avila,  Logrofio,  and  other
towns,  and  the  town  of  Sevilla  del  Oro,  or  Ma-
cas, capital  of  this  district.  Gil  de  Davalos  had
been  mayor  of  Cuzco  at  the  time  of  the  disturb-
ances at  Chmpiisaca  in  1553,  and  when  the  "  en-
eomenderos"  were  asking  for  the  revocation  of
some  instructions  given  by  the  audiencia  of  Lima,
which  were  opposed  to  their  interests,  Davalos
est  about  carrying  out  these  instructions  with  such
diligence  as  to  destroy  a  bill  presented  to  him  on
the  subject  by  Capt.  Francisco  Hernandez  (Jiron.
It  was  believed  that  this  act  of  Davalos  precipi-
tated the  revolution  at  Cuzco  at  the  close  of  that
year.  The  agitators  persuaded  Nuno  Mendiola  to
go  to  the  mayor  on  some  pretext  and  stab  hi  in.
This  was  not  done;  but,  at  the  moment  of  the  re-
volt, Davalos  was  made  a  prisoner  and  taken  out
of  the  city  to  a  distance  of  sixty  miles,  where  he
was  left  at  liberty.  He  went  to  Lima  and  served
in  the  army  of  the  king  daring  the  campaign  that
end..!  with  the  defeat  and  death  of  Giron.  From
November,  1550,  till  his  death,  Davalos  was  chief

justice  of  Quito.

DAY  KISS,  Mrs.  Maria  (Thompson),  author,  b.
in  Harrodsburg,  Ky..  81  Oct..  1*14.  Her  early  edu-
cation was  received  in  the  schools  of  Harrodsburg.
In  l^!!t  she  married  William  Daveiss. Her  [mm-iii

I  hi  compliment to  a  bride  was  extensively  copied.
and  was  followed  by  "The  Nun  "  and  "  A  Harvest
Ilvinn." "  Soger  Sherman, A Tale  of  "7l»."  and
44  Woman's  Lorn,"  are  her  U-st-known  stories she
1 from the Kentucky state agricultural
society  a  premium  for  an  essay  on  the"  Cultivation
and  uses  of  the  Chinese  Sugar-Cane."  which  she
introduced  into  the  state. She  has  bsSB  an  8Xf*JO-
ntributor to agricultural papers,  and has
published  a  "  History  of  Mercer  ami  Boyle  Conn-
ties,  Ky."  (1880).
VOL.  H.— 6


Pv\  ENPORT,  Adelphas  II  •  t

Stamford.  Con  I8e9]  d.  in  New  » >rle»na,

M  Oct-  is.  rlv  foiidncasfot  th.-  Slap

infiuence<l  him  to  become  an  actor,  and
lag hi-, name, which was Adolpl  |M>rt

Hoyt,  he liecame known  u,  "Dolll DavcapOf
Hi-  lir-t ap|«arance  was  SJ  Willie,  in  "  Pin]  P
at  the  Baltimore  athena'iim  during  1848,afjd
•access  was  sooh  that  he  was  soon  intrusted  wita

the role of ChiUile Meln..tte, wlll'l, |„.  phned  to

Mrs.  W.  11.  ItusscH's  (now  Mr-.  John  II
line.  At  the  solicitation  of  hi-  parent-,  bsstodiad
law  with  HoiniT  II.  Stewart,  of  New  York...
after  two  wars'  preparation,  wn- admitted  t«.  tin-
Init.  Hut  M  soon  reappeared  on  the  Stags,  and
played  fo  Wallaak's  old  theatre,  for  the  benefit  of
David  S.  rainier.  a-  Box  in  "  liox  ami  OoX." Karlv

in  in.V!  he  appeared  as  Montane  la  "Othello," sjm

a- Capt.  Charles  in  "  Who8psakl  Fir-t  |"  at  the  old

Broadway  theatre.  Hi-  first  ■npoaiania  in  Phflai
delphia  was  at  the  old  Chestnut  street  theatre,  and
he  was  a  member  of  the  company  during
Subsequently  be  was  a  member  of  the  Walnut
street  theatre's  company,  and  played  there  during
the  season  of  l*55-'o.  He  then  drifted  southward,
and  acted  principally  in  southern  cities.  He  was
manager  of  the  Mobile  theatre  during  1*72.  and
was  connected  with  Bidwell't  academy  of  music.

I>\\  IM'tHM.  Bennett  Franklin,  sanitary
chemist,  b.  in  Cambridge,  '  May,  1MY He

was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1*07.  then  spent  some
time  in  the  university  In  Tubingen,  after  which
be  was  graduated  at  Harvard  medical  college  in
1*71,  and  also  at  the  College  of  physicians  ana  sur-
geons in  New  York  in  1*71.  After  settling  in
Boston,  be  devoted  his  attention  to  sanitary  chem-
istry. In  1*7!)  he  became  professor  of  chemistry
in  the  Massachusetts  college  of  pharmacy,  and  in
1883  inspector  of  milk  end  vinegar  to  the  dty  of
Boston, and  also  analyst  to  the  Massachusetts  state
board  of  health.  In  these capacities  be  has  regularly
furnished  reports  to  the  annual  documents  of  the
Boston  and  State  board  of  health.  lie  has  also
prepared  the  semi-annual  reports  on  food-  and
drugs  in  the  Boston  "  Medical  and  Surgical  .Jour-
nal." Dr.  Davenport  i-  s  member  of  the  chemical
societies  of  London.  Berlin,  and  New  York,  and  of
other  scientific  bodies,

DAVKNPORT.  Edward  Laasala,  actor,  b.  in
Boston.  Ma--.,  15  Nov.,  1*14:  d.  in  Canton.  Pa,
1  Sept..  1*77.  lie  made  hi-  tir-t  appearance  on  the
stage  in  Providence,  U.  I.,  in  1888,  as  Parson  Will
in  "A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debt-."  with  .luniu-
Brutus  Booth  as  Sir  Giles  Overreach,  a  iwrt  in
which  Mr.  Davenport  afterward  became  famous.
He  then  appeared  in  New  York  at  the  Bowery
theatre,  under  the  management  of  Thosnas  If.
Hamlin,  and  in  1888  played  lir-t  in  Philadelphia,
in  the  Walnut street theatre,  as  Count  Montallian

in  -The  Honey  moon."  Hut  be  appeared  chiefly
in  Boston  until  1*17.  when,  with  Mrs.  Anna  Cora
Mowatt,  be  \i-it«-d  England,  appearing  with  her.

on  <i  Dee..  1*47.  at  the  Mam ihester  theatre,  as  Claude
Melnotte  to her Pauline. While in Kuglaiid  he

supported  William  c.  Macnady  for  two  seasons,

including hi- farewell engagement,  and U-<-ame

vary  popalar  at  the  Hayasaraal  theatre.  Lpssdoa.

A  dliam in  "  Hlack-ey.-d  Su-an." lb- returned
to  the  I'nited  Slate-  in  i*54.  and  filled  \

Bwerneats  under  the  management  of  Mm  I.  H.

Marrow.  Ib-nrv  (  .  J  arret  t,  Mark  Smith.  James  W.
Walla.k.  an.l  "William  Wheathv. In I8M  he  be-
came manager  of  the  Howanl  at
and ten  vears  later  undert«N.k the  mauairiMtii  I

the  Chestnut  street  theatre  in  Philadelphia Dur-


82


DAVENPORT


DAVENPORT


big  1873  he  acted  in  Wood's  museum,  New  York,
and  in  l875-*6  played  with  great  success  the  part
of  Brutus  in  a  protracted  engagement  of  "Julius
Ct'sar"  at  Booth's  theatre,  New  York.  His  last
appearance  in  New  York  was  also  in  Booth's  the-
atre, where  he  plaved  in  "  Daniel  Druce."  Ho  was
one  of  the  most  finished  actors  on  the  American
stage,  and  possessed  great  versatility,  being  equally
successful  in  tragedy  and  comedy. — His  wife,
Fanny  Elizabeth  Vi'ning,  b.  in  London,  6  July,
1880,  was  the  daughter  of  Frederick  Vining,
manager  of  the  Haymarket  theatre  in  Londou.
Her  professional  education  began  with  playing
baby  parts  when  she  was  but  three  years  old.  Sub-
sequently she  spent  a  few  years  at  boarding-school,
and  then  made  her  first  appearance,  in  1847,  as
Juliet,  with  G.  V.  Brooke  as  Romeo  and  her  father
as  Mercutio.  She  continued  to  play  leading  juve-
nile parts  at  the  Haymarket  and  Drury  Lane  thea-
tres with  Charles  Kean,  William  C.  Mac-ready,  and
other  distinguished  actors,  until  her  marriage  with
Mr.  Davenport,  on  8  Jan.,  1849.  Her  first  appear-
ance in  the  United  States  was  as  Margaret  Elmore,
in  "  Love's  Sacrifice,"  in  the  Broadway  theatre.
New  York,  on  11  Sept.,  1854.  Afterward  she  was
associated  with  her  husband  in  many  of  his  star-
ring engagements,  and  she  has  played  in  the  princi-
pal cities  of  the  United  States. — Their  daughter,
Fanny  Lily  Gipsy,  b.  in  London,  10  April,  1850,
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Boston,  and
made  her  first  appearance  at  the  Howard  athenaeum
as  the  child  in  "Metamora."  In  New  York  she
appeared  first  as  King  of  Spain  in  "Faint  Heart
never  Won  Fair  Lady,  on  14  Feb.,  1862,  at  Niblo's
Garden. Subsequently  she  acted  at  the  Little  Tre-

mont  theatre,  Bos-
ton, and  in  the
south,  where  she
played  soubrette
parts  for  a  sea-
son. Afterward  she
played  in  the  Arch
street  theatre,  Phil-
adelphia, then  un-
der the  manage-
ment of  Mrs.  John
Drew,  where  she
attracted  the  at-
tention of  Augus-
tin  Daly,  who  in-
troduced her  in
jf Ov,.  9TL, ^ew  York  at his

Fifth  avenue  thea-
tre in  1869.  There
she  played  Lady
Gay  Spanker  in  "  London  Assurance " ;  Rosalind
in  "  As  You  Like  It " ;  Nancy  Sykes  in  "  Oliver
Twist " ;  Lady  Teazle  in  "  School  for  Scandal " ;
Lu  and  Fanny  Ten  Eyck  in  "  Divorce  " ;  the  title-
role  in  "  Leah  "  :  and  Mabel  Renfrew  in  "  Pique,"  a
play  in  which  she  won  great  success,  and  which
ran  for  250  nights.  She  has  made  starring  tours
throughout  the  United  States,  frequently  adding
new  parts  to  those  previously  plnveu.  In  1880  she
played  Olivia  successfully  in  Philadelphia,  and
afterward  brought  out,  in  New  York,  Miss  Anna
Dickinson's  play  of  "  An  Ameritom  Girl."  She
also  introduced  in  New  York  Sardcui's  "  Feodora,"
acting  the  title-role,  and  received  lfcuch  approba-
tion for  the  magnificent  manner  m  which  the
play  was  mounted.  On  30  July,  1879,  she  married
Edwin  H.  Price,  an  actor. — Another  daughter,
Blanche  (Blanche  Maria),  b.  in  London,  11  July,
1852,  was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Boston,
and  in  the  convent  of  Notre  Dame. In  1867  she


played  at  the  Boston  museum,  where  she  attracted
attention  by  her  singing,  and  afterward  studied
there  under  M.  Adavani.  In  1869  she  went  to
Milan  to  cultivate  her  voice,  and  remained  abroad
six  years,  studying  and  afterward  ringing.  She
was  a  great  favorite  in  Naples,  as  well  as  Milan.
She  returned  to  America  under  Maurice  Strakosch
in  October,  1879,  and  made  her  lUbut  in  opera  in
Philadelphia.  Her  personation  of  Marguerite  in
••  Faust '  met  with  warm  praise,  both  for  her  pure.
clear  soprano  voice  and  her  dramatic  skill.  She
filled  an  engagement  at  Booth's  in  1880.  She  ringj
in  most  of  the  Italian  operas,  her  favorite  being
"La  Traviata." — Another  daughter,  Lily  (Lily
Antoinette),  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  2  Nov.,  1854;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  13  Jan.,  1878.  She  made  her
first  appearance  in  the  Chestnut  street  theatre,
Philadelphia,  while  her  father  was  manager,  and
played  juvenile  parts  there  and  elsewhere  until
1875.  She  married  Frost  Thorn  in  1874.— Another
daughter,  May  (Marion  Caroline),  b.  in  Boston,  21
July,  1857,  made  her  first  appearance  at  the  Chest-
nut street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  under  her  father's
management,  in  1872,  and  nas  since  plaved  in  ju-
venile parts.  In  the  winter  of  1879  she  filled  an  en-
gagement at  the  Standard  theatre,  New  York,  play-
ing in  "  My  Uncle's  Will."  She  acted  at  the  Boston
museum,  in  the  winter  of  1880,  as  Lady  Gwendoline
Loftus  in  Boucicault's  "  Daddy  O'Dowd,"  and  May
Edwards  in  the  "  Ticket-of- Leave  Man."  She  mar-
ried William  Seymour  in  1882. — A  son,  Edgar
Loom  is,  b.  in  Boston,  7  Feb.,  1862,  played  with
his  sister  Fanny  in  1879  at  the  Grand  Opera-house,
New  York,  personating  Thorsby  Gill  in  "  Pique."
— Another  son,  Henry  George  Bryant,  b.  in  New
York  city,  19  Jan.,  1866,  has  playea  at  the  Walnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  as  Hendrick,  with  Jo-
seph Jefferson  in  the  comedy  of  "  Rip  Van  Winkle,"
and  in  1879  he  appeared  at  Wallack's  theatre,  New
York,  as  Sir  Joseph  Porter  in  the  juvenile  "  Pina-
fore "  troupe.

DAVENPORT,  Franklin,  senator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa. ;  d.  in  Woodbury,  N.  J.,  about  1829.
He  received  an  academic  education,  and,  after
studying  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
in  Woodbury.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  he
served  as  captain  of  the  artillery  in  Col.  Newcomb's
New  Jersey  brigade,  and  for  some  time  was  under
Col.  Samuel  Smith  in  Fort  Mifflin.  He  was  a  colo-
nel in  the  New  Jersey  line  during  the  whiskey  in-
surrection in  1794,  and  marched  with  the  troops  to
Pittsburg.  Subsequently  he  became  the  first  sur-
rogate of  Gloucester  county,  and  was  appointed  U.
S.  senator  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resig-
nation of  John  Rutherford,  serving  from  19  Dec.,
1798,  till  3  March,  1799. He  was  then  sent  to  con-

Sress,  and  served  through  the  entire  term  from  2
>ec,  1799,  till  3  March,  1801.
DAVENPORT,  Henry  Kallock,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  10  Dec,  1820;  d.  in  Franzens-
bad,  Bohemia,  18  Aug.,  1872.  He  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman  in  February,  1838,  and  served  on
various  vessels  until  1844,  when  he  was  made  passed
midshipman  and  attached  to  the  coast  survey.
Later  he  sailed  on  the  "  Columbia,"  and  from  1849
till  1853  was  connected  with  the  mail-steamship
service.  After  being  promoted  to  lieutenant  in
December,  1852,  he  spent  some  time  on  sea  duty  in
various  squadrons,  being  present  at  the  capture  of
the  Barrier  forts.  Canton  river,  in  1856,  and  later
on  shore  duty  at  the  U.  S.  observatory  in  Wash-
ington. During  the  civil  war  he  was  attached  to
the  "Cumberland,"  and  was  present  at  the  engage-
ment off  Hatteras  Inlet.  From  1861  till  1864  he
commanded  the  steamer  "HetzeV  and  was  en-


DAVENPORT


D.WESPollT


J^ot"  0**e*/b*v£


gSged  in  the  naval  light  <>n  James  river  in  IWl,  in

ind,  »t  Newbern,  and  was

•r  officer  in  cotnmaml  of  the  sounds  of  North

nut  in  1802  'I.  during  which  time  be  wm  In

al  battles  and  expeditions  in  t  In  —••  waters,

ring  the  Hunks  of  tin-  army. He  liecamc  com-

mender  in .lulv. 186*), and from 1864  till

served  in  the  rseiflc  squadron,  mrnimamting  the

"Lancaster  " ami "  I'owhatan." In lNi't* lie  was

|in»ni"t.-.i  captain,  and,  after  being  engaged  in

navigation  duty  in  Washington navy-yard  during
vils  given  command  <>f  tin-  " Congress,
of  the  European  squadron.

D  v  \  KNPOKT,  John,  clergyman,  l».  in  Coven-
try, England,  in  1597;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15
March,  1070. His  futhcr  bad  ben  mavor  of  the

city,  Hcwasedu-
eated  at Oxford,

and  bMSsneehep-

lain  in  Hilton  cas-
tle, near  Durham.
Subscqm  ntly he

Jireached  in  Lon-
Ion,  and  later
became  minister
of  St.  Stephen's
church  in  Cole-
man street.  Here
he  became  cele-
brated not  only
for  his  high  ac-
complishments as
a  preacher,  hut
for  very  faithful
discharge  of  his
pastoral  duties.
In  1025  he  re-
turned to  Oxford  and  passed  his  examinations  for
the  B.  D.  ami  M.  A.  degrees.  During  the  following
year,  in  conjunction  with  Drs.  Richard  Sibhs  and
William  Gouge,  the  lord-mayor  of  London,  and
others,  he  devised  a  plan  to  purchase  "  lay  impro-
priations," from  the  profits  of  which  a  number  of
ministers  should  be  maintained  over  destitute  con-
gregations. But  Archbishop  Laud  regarded  it  as
favorable  to  the  cause  of  non-conformitv,  and  pro-
cured its  condemnation,  with  the  confiscation  of
the  money  to  the  king's  use.  A  few  years  later
Davenport  was  summoned  before  the  archbishop
and  subjected  to  considerable  trouble  and  expense
on  account  of  his  puritan  principles.  About  this
time  John  Cotton  nad  resigned  his  charge,  with  a
view  of  escaping  to  America,  and  Davcii|x>rt,  after
an  interview  with  him,  became  convinced  of  the
desirability  of  withdrawing  from  the  Established
church.  He  then  resigned  from  St.  Stephen's,  and
near  the  end  of  10S3  removed  to  Holland,  where
he  became  the  colleague  of  Hev.  John  Paget,  pas-
tor of  the  English  church  in  Amsterdam;  but.  as  he
objected  to  the  promiscuous  baptism  of  infants.
he  relinquished  his  pastoral  work  and  conducted

Srivate  classes  until  1035.  when  he  returned  to
Ingland.  Meanwhile  he  had  been  actively  con-
cerned in  obtaining  the  patent  of  the  Massachusetts
colony,  and  had  contributed  l»oth  money  and  time
in  its  aid.  A  favorable  account  of  the  success  ,,f
the  colony  having  reached  him.  he  Bailed  on  the
"Hector,  "reaching  Boston  on  20  June,  1(>:17.  He
was  heartily  welcomed,  ami  was  regarded  as  an  im-
portant aid  in  sustaining  the  interests  of  religion.
During  August  of  the  same  year  he  sat  with  the
famous  synod  of  Cambridge.  In  March,  1MB,
with  many  of  the  families  that  had  accompanied
him  from  England,  he  sailed  from  Boston  totjuini-
piac,  which they afterward named New Haven.


The  party  reached  their  new  home  on n
and  mi  the  following  dnv.  which  wm  the  Sn
Mr.  Daveh|H.rt preached  under  the  i.t

ik  on  -The  Temptations  ,,f
neas."  In  June  of  the  following  year  "all  the
fr.v  planter*"  met  in  a  l«arn  for  tlie  i>uqioae  of
holding  a  constitutional  assembly.  It  was  re-
solved that  only  church  imiiil«r>  «hould  \»  bur-
gesses, and Dav.-n|M.rt wit- bJmMbI MM of the

pillar."  to  support  the  .-mi  government
His  carefulness  in  regard  to  the  admission  of  MMs>
U-rs  to  the  church  ^ave  him  sJao  the  ke\,  ,.f  ,.,.
litical  |».wer.  When  the  regicides.  Willi'am  Goftt
and  Edward  Whallcy.  wen-  Hying  in  I860,  he  con-
cealed them  in  his  own  house  for  more  than  a
month,  and  delivered  a  sermon,  for  the  purpose  of
enlisting  sympathy  in  their  U-half.  from  the  text
"Make  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  tin-  ■
noonday,  hide  the  outcasts,  Inwrav  not  him  that
wandereth."  He  continued  bj  New  Ha\en  until
1007.  when,  on  the  death  of  John  WBson,  he  was
invited  to  succeed  him  as  pastor  of  the  llr>t  chunh
in  BoMOB.  This  call  In-  BOOSpted,  and  ■
stalled  on  9  Dec..  1688.  The  "half-way  c.\.  i.ant."
which  had  bOBD  adopted  by  the  s\  m-d 'held  in  B~-
ton  in  1002,  provided  that  all  peoOM  who  had
lieen  baptised  in  their  infancy,  and  who.  on  arriv-
ing at  years  of  discretion,  would  MO MBfasl  th.ir
covenant  obligations,  should  be  allowed  to  bring
their  children  for  baptism.  This  Mr.  DfcTBnpon
was  unwilling  to  accept,  and  he  vigorously  opposed
its  execution;  consequently  some  of  the  members
withdrew  from  the  first  church,  and  wen*  organ-
ized into  the  "Old  South  church."  The  contro-
versy continued  between  the  two  churches  for
many  vears,  but  Mr.  Davenport  died  of  apoplexy
soon  after  it  began,  and  was  buried  in  the  tomb  of
his  friend,  John  Cotton.  He  published  many  ser-
mons, theological  tracts,  and  controversial  J«ara-
phlets,  and  also  "Instructions  to  Elders  of  the
English  Church  "(HUM):  "  <  'atechiMiicontainingthe
Chief Heads  of  Christian Religion"  (1688); and

•*A  Discourse  about  Civil  Qovernmenl  in  a  New

Plantation  " (1678). — His  son.  John,  b.  in  England
in  1035;  d.  in  Boston,  sXsss-81  March,  1677, ap-
pears to  have  remained in England  "iii  care  of
kind  friends"  until 10.'}».  when be  came •
Haven in  one  of  the  only  two  ships  that «\er  ar-
rived at  that port from England. In May.  1657,
he  was  admitted  a  freeman in New Haven,  and
later  appears  to  have  ln-en  one  of  the  fad
the  courts  of  New Haven. He  removed  to  Bos-
ton in  100H,  and  was  regjjstei  of  probata  in  I
and  also  a  merchant.— His  s.,n.  John,  clergvman.
b. in Boston. 88 I'el>.. 1668: d. in Stamfonl.
Omul,  B l-'eh., 17iU.  was graduated si Harvard
in  1667,  and  began  pmsfihing  in  10UO. Early  in
the following  year  he  was invited to  the  church

thampton, L  I.,  but docHnod  the  nfMf,
and  in 16M  wm  ordained  pastor  of  the  church

in  Stamford,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.
Prior  to  his  settling  in  Stamfonl  he  MM
have  taught  the  BopUM  grammar-school  in  New
Haven,  and  he  was  a  mcinUr  of  the  OOnOMtfcM
of  Vale  college  from  ITiiT  till  17:tl.— Ilia  son,
Ahruhaili.  bwjer,  b.  in  Stamford.  Conn.,  in  1715;
d.  th'rc.  86  Nov..  17*1».  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
nd  practised  law  in  his  native  town.  Dur-
ing tlie  Revolution  he  wiy<  a  staunch  petrl
served  on  the  state  committee  of  safety.  He  was  a
man  of  stem  integrity  and  generous  lienefleence,
and  in  times  of  scarcity  ami  high prices  MM  the


|H>or  at  less  than the

ime  he  was  a  MMnfaM

of  the  executive  council  oft  .  for  twenty-


product  i>f  hi-  farm  to  DM  |

current  value. For  some  time  he  was  a  member


84


DAVENPORT


DAVENPORT


live  wars  he  was  a  member  "f  tin'  statr  legislature.
and  state  senator  from  lTUii  till  i?n4.  Se  also
held  the  offloeof  judge  of  the  court  of  common

Ideas.  When  he  was  a  member  of  the  council  in
Utttford,  "ii  the  dark  day  in  1780.  it  was  proposed
to  adjourn,  as  some  thought  the  day  of  judgment
was  at  hand;  hut  he  objected,  saying :  "That  day
is  either  at  hand  or  it  is  not :  if  it  is  not.  there  i-
no  cause  of  adjournment ;  if  it  is,  I  choose  to  be
found  doing  my  duty.  I  wish,  therefore,  that
candles  may  lie  brought." — James,  another  son
of  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  in
1716;  d.  in  Hopewell,  N.  J.,  10  Nov.,  1757,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1732,  and  subsequently  pur-
sued his  theological  studies  in  New  Haven.  He  is
supposed  to  bare  preached  first  in  New  Jersey,  and
then  was  called  to  Southold,  L.  I.,  where  he  was
ordained  on  26  Oct.,  1738.  Soon  after  his  settle-
ment the  revival  known  as  the  "  Great  awakening  "
occurred,  during  which  he  was  very  active  and
successful.  Subsequently  he  held  services  at
Baskingridge,  N.  J.,  where  likewise  there  was  a
revival,  and  in  1741  he  visited  Connecticut,  preach-
ing in  various  places,  everywhere  exciting  great
attention,  At  Stonington  one  hundred  persons
are  said  to  have  been  converted  by  his  first  sermon.
Thence  he  proceeded  to  Westerly,  R.  I.,  accom-
panied by  the  people  in  solemn  procession,  singing
as  they  moved  along  the  road.  His  zeal  in  effect-
ing conversions,  and  the  methods  employed,  were
not  altogether  to  the  liking  of  his  Connecticut
brethren,  and  later  the  assembly  decided  "that
the  behavior,  conduct,  and  doctrines  advanced  by
said  James  Davenport,  do,  and  have  a  natural
tendency  to  disturb  and  destroy  the  peace  and  or-
der of  this  government.  Yet  it  further  appears
to  this  Assembly  that  the  said  Davenport  is  under
the  influence  of  enthusiastic  impressions  and  im-
pulses, and  thereby  disturbed  in  the  rational  facul-
ties of  his  mind,  and  therefore  to  be  pitied  and
compassionated,  and  not  to  be  treated  as  otherwise
he  might  be."  He  was  expelled  from  the  colony,
but  shortly  afterward  appeared  in  Boston,  where
his  erratic  actions  led  to  his  arrest  and  imprison-
ment. In  the  trial  that  followed  he  was  declared
"  non  compos  mentis,  and  therefore  not  guilty."  His
relations  with  the  Southold  congregation  were
severed  by  a  council  of  ministers  in  1742,  and  a
curious  document  giving  the  reasons  for  such  ac-
tion was  published.  In  March,  1743,  he  went  to
New  London,  by  request  of  a  company  of  his  par-
tisans, to  organize  them  into  a  church.  Here  he
continued  his  peculiar  habits,  destroying  by  fire
"  wigs,  cloaks,  breeches,  hoods,  gowns,  rings,  jewels,
necklaces,  and  certain  books,  in  order  "  to  cure
his  people  of  their  idolatrous  love  of  worldly
things."  He  was  prostrated  by  a  serious  illness,
and  influenced  to  publish  a  retraction  of  his  errors
in  the  Boston  "Gazette"  in  July,  1744.  In  Sep-
tember, 1746,  he  became  a  member  of  the  New
Brunswick  presbytery,  and  two  years  later  was
transferred  to  the  New  York  presbytery,  preach-
ing in  various  places.  In  1750  he  visited  \  irginia
for  his  health,  where  his  labors  proved  acceptable
and  successful.  On  his  return  he  was  installed,  in
October,  1754,  as  pastor  of  the  Newside  church  of
Hopewell  and  Maidenhead.  During  the  same  year
he  was  moderator  of  the  New  York  synod,  and  de-
livered the  opening  sermon,  with  the  title  "The
Faithful  Minister  Encouraged."  Mr.  Davenport
continued  with  this  parish  until  his  death,  and  lies
buried  near  Pennington,  X.  J.  Whitefield  speaks
of  him  as  "a  sweet,  pious  soul." — John,  son  of
Abraham,  lawyer,  b.  in  Stamford,  Conn..  16  Jan.,
1752 ; d.  there,  28  Nov.,  1830,  was  graduated  at


Yale  in  1770,and  was  atutor  there  during  1 1
After  studying  law.  he  was  admitted  to  the  liar
and  practised  in  Stamford.  During  the  Revolu-
tionary war  he  served  in  the  commissary  depart-
ment, and  attained  the  rank  of  major.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  federalist,  and  -
continuously  from  2  Dec,  17!)!),  till  3  March.  1*17.
— James,  son  of  Abraham,  lawyer,  b.  in  Stamford,
Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1758;  d.  there.  3  An-.  17!»T.  lie  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1777,  and  served  in  the  com-
missary department  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.
He  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and
a  representative  in  congress  from  5  Dec.  1  ?'.»»;,  till
3  Aug.,  1797.  He  was  a  member  of  the  corpora-
tion of  Yale  college  from  1793  till  1797,  and  Presi-
dent Dwight  says  of  him :  "  Few  persons  have  been
more,  or  more  deservedly,  esteemed  than  the  Hon.
James  Davenport."

DAVENP6RT,  Nicholas  T.,  actor,  b.  in  1831 ;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1867.  His  real  name
was  Deven,  and  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage
was  in  1849,  at  the  Chatham  theatre.  New  York.
In  September,  1850,  he  made  his  first  appearance
in  Philadelphia,  at  the  Arch  street  theatre,  as
Valaire  in  "  The  Secret,"  but  the  greater  portion
of  his  life  was  spent  in  Boston,  where  he  was  con-
nected with  a  theatre  company  that  was  organized
in  that  city.  He  was  a  careful  and  conscientious
actor,  and  maintained  a  good  position  in  society
by  his  talents  and  integrity.  Mr.  Davenport  was
likewise  an  excellent  sketch-writer.

DAVENPORT,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1606;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  July.  1665.
He  came  to  America  in  the  ship  "Abigail"  with
John  Endicott,  leaving  Weymouth,  England,  20
July,  1628.  In  November,  1636,  he  was  elected
ensign  of  Gov.  Endicott's  company,  and  at  his
command  cut  out  the  cross  from  the  British  flag.
In  memory  of  this  circumstance  he  subsequently
named  a  daughter  Trucross.  He  was  lieutenant
of  a  Salem  company  in  the  Pequot  war,  and  be-
came commander  of  the  castle  in  Boston  harbor
in  July,  1645.  He  was  killed  by  lightning. — His
grandson,  Addington,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
3  Aug.,  1670 ;  d.  there,  2  April,  1736.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1689,  visited  England,  Spain,
and  the  West  Indies,  and,  on  his  return  to  Boston,
became  register  of  deeds  for  Suffolk  county.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  Brattle  street  church  in
1698.  He  was  afterward  successively  clerk  of  the
house  of  representatives,  supreme  court,  and  court
of  common  pleas,  was  elected  a  member  of  the
council,  served  as  a  representative  in  1711 -'3,  and
was  judge  of  the  supreme  court  from  1715  till  the
time  of  his  death. — His  son,  Addington,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  16  May,  1701;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 8  Sept.,  1746,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1719,  studied  law,  and  was  attorney-general  from
1828  till  1832,  but  turned  his  attention  to  the  min-
istry and  went  to  England  to  receive  orders.  On
his  return  he  became  minister  of  St.  Andrew's
church,  Scituate,  Mass.,  on  15  April,  1730,  and  re-
mained until  15  April,  1737,  when  he  was  chosen
assistant  minister  of  the  1st  Episcopal  church  in
Boston  (King's  chapel).  Here  he  remained  until
8  May,  1740,  when  he  was  elected  the  first  rector
of  Trinitv  church,  Boston.  <  hi  leaving  Scituate  he
gave  his  house  and  land  to  the  Society  for  propa-
gating the  gospel  in  foreign  parts.

DA  V  FN  PORT,  Thomas,  inventor,  b.  in  Will-
iamstown.  Vt..  !i  July.  1802:  d.  in  Salisbury.  Vt-
6  July,  1851.  He  was  apprenticed  at  the  age  of
fourteen  to  a  blacksmith,  and  his  opportunities  for
education  were  limited.  In  1833  ne  began  the
study  of  electro-magnetism,  and  iu  1835  exhibited


H  \\  KXI'nUT


HAVIH


88


a  rotary  engine  driven  Wv  .  U-«t  ri«it  y.  at th

selacr  institute  in  TlOjr,  ami  tin-  Franklin  institute

in  Philadelphia, I>i*t<'  in  the  year  be  oonstrnctsd

a  small  circular  railway  driven  by  an  electro-mag-
netic engine.  Patents  WON  s.iutv.1.  a  coni|>aiiy
formed,  ami  the  manufacture  of  elect  nvmagnetii
engines,  as  ■  motive  power,  begun.  Hut  in  N< -\\
Yi>rk  city  in  lx:t7,  by  the  dishonesty  of  its  agent,
■patty  liecame  eml)arrassed  ami  VM  dis-
banded. In  tin"  pronMotlon  i»f  his  tiptriirrinti  h<-

found  that  a  l«>lt  of  iron  could  be  drawn  with  gnat
force  into  a  helix  of  wire  whenever  the  liatten  cur-
retit  wa>*  suffered  to  pass  through  the  roil.  ifc  im-
mediately constructed  a  small  engine  on  this  j >rin-
ci|>li'.  whirh  resembled  a  little  steam-engine,  the
repeated  reversal  of  the  magnetic  |«>li's  producing
a  nioM'inrnt  like  that  of  a  piston-roil,  instead  of
the  rotary  motion  hitherto  employed.  Patents
were  secured,  engines  manufactured,  ami  he  began
the  publication  of  a  newspaper,  "The  Flectro-
Magnet,"  which  was  printed  on  a  press  propelled
by  one  of  these  engines.  Mi-  experiments  were  so
numerous  and  costly  as  to  exhaust  his  resources,
and  in  1811  he  returned  with  his  family  to  his
home  in  Brandon,  Vt.,  and  theme  to  sidishury.
In  1846  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  application
of  the  electric  current  to  the  strings  of  musical  in-
struments. As  applied  by  him.  the  impulsive  ami
evanescent  nature  of  the  tone  is  chunged  at  the
will  of  the  player  into  a  full,  perfect  and  pro-
longed vil>ration.  The  caveats  protecting  this  in-
vention were  prepared  for  filing  in  the  l".  S.  patent-
office,  when  lie  was  stricken  bv  a  fatal  illness.

DAYENPOBT,  William, 'philanthropist,  b.  in
Culpepper  county.  Va.,  12  Oct.,  1??<»:  d.  in  Walnut
Fountain,  Caldwell  co..  N.  C,  19  Aug.,  1859.  About
the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  went  with
his  father  to  what  is  now  Mitchell  county,  N.  C.
He  represented  Burke  county  in  the  legislature  in
1800,  and  was  state  senator  in  1802.  Tie  was  also
justice  of  the  peace,  county  survevor,  and  a  colonel
of  militia.  Col.  Davenport  was  the  chief  founder
Of  Davenport  female  college,  at  Lenoir,  N.  C.  lie
married  the  widow  of  Maj.  Charles  Gordon,  one  of
the  heroes  of  King's  Mountain.

DAVENPORT,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  North
Carolina;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  April,  1858.
He  was  appointed  captain  in  the  16th  infantry,  88
Sept..  1M12,  and  distinguished  himself  at  Chippewa
and  Lundy's  Lane  in  the  war  with  Great  Britain.
He  was  brevetted  major  on  28  Sept.,  1888,  ••  tor  ten
years'  faithful  service,"  and  made  major  in  the  6th
infantry,  16  Dec.  1825,  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  1st
infantry.  4  April.  188$  and  was  distinguished  at
the  battle  of  Bad  Axe,  under  Gen.  Atkinson,  in  the
Black  Hawk  war.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  "  for
meritorious  service  in  Florida."  ?  July,  l^W,  was
made  colonel  of  the  6th  infantry.  14  June,  1842.
transferred  to  the  1st  infantry  in  July,  184^,  and

lesJiuul  on  :'>i  Ian-  1800.

DAYENPOBT,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ken-
tucky in  17!»?;  d.  in  Nebraska  City,  Neb..  24  June,
1860.  He  was  a  slave-holder  in  early  life,  but
manumitted  his  slaves  before  1834  and  removed  to
Tazewell  county.  111.,  where  he  was  pastor  of  the
Christian  denomination  for  over  thirty  years.  In
1848,  with  his  brother,  he  nstahlithol  a  school  at
Walnut  grove,  which  afterward  became  Kureka
college.  Ho  was  a  Union  man  during  the  civil  war.
and  was  taken  prisoner  by  Gen.  John  iforgan'i  men.

DATED,  Edward  (dab-reed'),  Flemish  bnoca-

neer,  lived  in  the  Utter  part  of  the  17th  century.

He  enrolled  himself  in  early  life  in  the Brothcr-

f  the  Coast,  was  soon  acknowledged  as  a

leader,  and  sailed  in  1081  with  an  expedition,  con-


sisting of  the  frigate  "  Tiger."  «-f  :tfl  ^njn^  aIl(j  lw„
smaller  vesssla,  wiih  an  English  er*w,  for  I

otfteeasst  of  South  Amen..,  f  the  »tnm

•  llun. The  V.
PalaU,  received  information.  12 '
David's  ships  hud  been  slanted  on  tns  c<«*t  of

Chili,  and  in the Kim.''*  island*,  on i
coast. David  was  joined  b]  two  part  i.*  of  French
filibusters,  who  had landed  in  the  gulf  of Iterien
and. crossing the isthmus to Panama, had  ca|>-
tured  some  Teasels,  with  which •

tating  th .ast  of  Mexico. With  thi*  n-< ■;

limit,  his  squadron  consisting  now  <<t  the  vi-mtU
and  a  tire-ship,  he  attacked  the  Penman  coast  and
vessels,  and  laid  waste  a  numlx-r  of  fertile  district*
Of  Peru  and  Chili.  ThSTieSTO]  litt.il  out
(■edition  against  the  audacious  bnosanosr,  and
after  many  delays  the  squadron,  consisting  of  four
powerfn]  galleons  and  two  tin-ships,  MUM,  7  May.
1080.  from  Callao  under  the  command  of  the  chief
admiral  of  the  Pacific  .oast.  Antonio  Bras,  to-
gether with  the  viceroy's  brother-in-law,  Tomis
Paravicino.  Yice-Ailmiral  Santiago  Pont,  jus,  and
a  large  number  of  the  nobility  of  Lima. After

landing  the  government  treasure  and  silver  remit-
tances of  the  Lima  merchants  in  the  port  of  P»n-

oos,  to  be  transported  overland  t<<  Porto  Bsllo,  he

sailed  in  search  of  the  pinttes,  whom  he  lie

the  King's  islands. On  s  June a  spirited  Itattle

was  fought,  and  the  bueconean  wen  almost  de»

feated,  when  the  want  of  united  action  among  the

Spanish  leaders  gave  the  boooaneera  an  opportn-
nit y  t<»  escape. The  French  filibusters  bow  sspn-

ratiil  from  David,  one  of  their  shi|»s  sailing  f«>r
the  coast  of  Mexico,  and  the  other  for  Chili,  in-
tending to  return  to  the  Atlantic  coast  "f  the  con*
tinent  through  the  straits  of  Magellan.  The  S|«n-
ish  fleet  was  also  in  need  of  repairs,  ami  anchored
in  Paita,  where,  by  carelessness,  the  admiral's  ship
took  fire,  and  over  4<h»  persons  perished  in  the
flames,  only  a  son  of  the  vice-admiral.  Pontejos,
being  saved.  Emboldened  by  this  diaaafor  to  the
Spanish  navy.  David  returned  to  continue  his
depredations  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  ami  in  tns
latter  part  of  1088  sicked  the  cities  of  tiuaya.piil,
Paita,  Santa,  and  Casma,  and  in  March.  IW
city  of  Sana.  At  Casms  be  ordered  the  priest  t<>
Ik?  killed,  BJ  be  thought  be  was  concealing  his
treasures.  At  Huaura  he  tix.k  prisoner  the  mayor,
Bias  de  la  Carrera,  and.  a  large  sum  for  his  nin-
som  not  being  delivered  promptly,  Derid  had  the
mayor*!  head  cat  <>fT  and  hoisted  at  the  yard-arm
Of  his  frigate.  He  afterward  occupied  and  plun-
dered (unite.  Pisco,  atul.  on  11  June,  after  a  SITarS
fight, the  city of Panicas.  taking prisoners the

principal  persona  of  the  <  it>.  whom  he  released  for
a  ransom  of  ♦24JHM).  Hearing  that  a  new  and
powerful expedition was fitting out at Callao

against  his  fones.  be  abandoned  the  coast  of  Peru.

sailing  to  the  northern  shores,  where  he  continued

his  plundering  expeditions  sjEsinsl  tns  eitias  along
the  coasts  of  Mexico  ami  Central  America.  In
1688  be  took  advantage  of  an  amnesty  granted  bv
James  ii.  ami  returned  t.»  England,  where  hs  in. si

in  pates  to  old  ace.  enjoying  IhS  riches  gathered

during  his  flre  years'  erase,

IK  MB. Jean  Baptist.  B.  C  bishnp,  k  near

Nantes,  France,  in  17<»1  :  d.  in  Bardstown.  K\..  in
1H41. At  the  age  <>f  fQurtSOn  he  wa>  M-nt  I

adnoted  by  Oitttorian  priests,  after  whionhs

entered  the  diocesan  seminary  of  Nantes.  He  was
ordained  deacon  in  17X1,  joined  the  Sulpitians,  and,
on  the  completion  of  his  theological  studies  in  their
OOUoge  of  Iss\,  mar  Pal  i  mh!  to  the  priest-

h.*..!  in  17^.' Until  i?.m»  he  .lis.  barged  the  duties


86


DAVIDGE


DAVIDSON


of  professor  of  philosophy  and  theology  in  the
colleges  of  his  order.  During  the  next  two  years
he  was  obliged  to  conceal  himself  from  the  terror-
ists. He  embarked  for  this  country  in  1792,  and
studied  English  during  the  voyage.  Bishop  (  'arroll
sent  him  to  superintend  some  missions  in  the  lower
part  of  Maryland.  He  was  the  first  American
priest  to  institute  spiritual  retreats  for  the  benefit
of  the  laity.  In  1804  he  was  recalled  and  appointed
professor  in  Georgetown  college,  where  he  remained
two  years.  In  1806,  in  compliance  with  the  desire
of  the  Sulpitians  of  Baltimore,  he  accepted  a  pro-
fessorship in  the  theological  seminary  and  college
of  St.  Mary's.  Though  his  health  was  impaired
by  his  labors,  he  offered  n  is  services  to  Bishop  Flaget,
and  accompanied  him  to  the  west  in  1810.  He  es-
tablished the  theological  seminary  of  St.  Thomas
in  Bardstown,  Ky.,  and  discharged  the  office  of
president,  as  well  as  attending  several  congrega-
tions in  other  parts  of  the  state.  Father  David
also  introduced  the  Sisters  of  Charity  into  Ken-
tucky, founded  a  convent  of  the  order,  and  was
appointed  their  spiritual  director  by  Bishop  Flaget.
He  was  nominated  bishop  of  Philadelphia,  but  de-
clined the  honor.  Yet  when  Bishop  Flaget  peti-
tioned the  pope,  in  1817,  to  appoint  him  coadjutor
of  the  diocese  of  Bardstown,  he  reluctantly  ac-
cepted the  place.  In  1823  he  obtained  a  charter
from  the  legislature  of  Kentucky,  raising  the  col-
lege he  had  founded  to  the  rank  of  a  university.
Bishop  David  published  a  large  number  of  works,
chiefly  controversial  or  religious,  and  translations
from  the  French.  The  principal  are  "  Vindication
of  the  Catholic  Doctrine  concerning  the  Use  and
Veneration  of  Images,"  "  Address  to  his  Brethren
of  other  Professions,"  "  On  the  Rule  of  Faith,"
"True  Piety,  or  the  Day  Well  Spent,"  and  a
Catholic  hymn-book.

DAVIDUE,  William  Pleater,  actor,  b.  near
Ludgate  Hill,  London,  England,  17  April,  1814;
d.  in  Cheyenne,  W.  T.,  7  Aug.,  1888.  He  joined  an
amateur  dramatic  society,  and  appeared  first  at
Drury  Lane  theatre,  in  the  part  of  James  in  "  The
Miller's  Maid."  He  appeared  at  Nottingham  in
1836,  and  acted  in  London,  on  26  Sept.  of  that  year,
in  the  "  Haunted  Tower."  After  acting  in  Great
Britain,  he  settled  in  Manchester,  and  in  1850  came
to  the  United  States,  where  he  made  his  first  ap-
pearance in  the  old  Broadway  theatre,  New  York,
as  the  blacksmith  in  "  Used  Up."  He  supported
the  popular  stars  of  the  day — Edwin  Forrest,  Gus-
tavus  V.  Brooke,  Julia  Dean,  Lola  Montez,  and
others — and,  after  leaving  the  old  Broadway  theatre
in  1855,  made  a  tour  through  the  country.  He  was
a  member  of  F.  B.  Conway's  "  star  combination,"
and  in  1863  was  one  of  Mrs.  John  Wood's  company
at  the  Olympic  theatre,  where  he  remained  two
seasons,  lie  afterward  took  part  in  the  Shake-
spearean revivals  at  Winter  Garden  theatre,  and,
in  August,  1867,  appeared  as  Eccles,  in  "  Caste,"  at
the  new  Broadway  theatre  near  Broome  street.
He  was  at  Daly's  Fifth  avenue  theatre  from  1869
till  1877,  then  travelled  with  Miss  Fanny  Daven-

Bort's  company,  and  in  1879  was  the  original  Dick
>eadeye,  in  "  Pinafore,"  at  the  Standard  theatre.
In  1885  he  became  a  member  of  the  Madison
square  theatre  company.  Mr.  Davidge  played
over  one  thousand  parts  during  his  career,  and
played  them  all  with  zeal,  intelligence  and  humor.
Among  his  best  parts,  besides  those  already  men-
tioned, were  Bishopries  in  "  Man  and  Wife,"  Old
Hardy  in  the  "Belles  Stratagem,"  Hardcastle  in
"  She  Stoops  to  Conquer,"  and  Croaker  in  "  The
Good-Natured  Man."  In  Shakespeare's  comedies
he  was  successful  as  Caliban,  Touchstone,  Dog-


berry, Nick  Bottom,  and  Old  Gobbo. — His  son,
William,  comedian,  b.  in  Manchester,  England,
11  March,  1847,  made  his  first  appearance  in  the
French  theatre,  New  York,  in  the  burlesque  of
"  The  Lady  of  the  Lions."

DAVIDSON,  George,  astronomer,  b.  in  Not-
tingham, England,  9  May,  1825.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1832,  and  was  graduated  at  the
Central  high-school  in  Philadelphia  in  1845,  stand-
ing first  in  his  class.  While  a  student  he  had
shown  interest  in  scientific  work,  and  had  assisted
Alexander  D.  Bache  in  his  observations  of  the
magnetic  elements  at  Girard  college.  On  his  grad-
uation he  became  the  secretary  of  Prof.  Bache,  who
had  been  appointed  superintendent  of  the  coast-
survey.  In  1846-'50  he  was  occupied  in  geodetic
field-work,  and  in  astronomy,  serving  in  the  dif-
ferent eastern  states.  In  1850  he  went  to  Califor-
nia under  the  auspices  of  the  coast-survey,  and
was  for  several  years  engaged  in  the  determination
of  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  prominent  capes,
bays,  etc.,  and  of  the  magnetic  elements  of  the
Pacific  coast,  re-
porting also  upon
the  proper  loca-
tions for  light-
houses. His  work
included  a  survey
of  Washington
and  Puget  sounds,
and  he  had  charge
of  the  main  tri-
angulation  of  the
coast  in  the  region
of  San  Francisco.
From  1861  till
1867  he  was  on
the  Atlantic  sea-
board, principally
engaged  in  en-
gineering work  on
coast  and  river  de-
fences. At  one  time  he  was  in  command  of  the
coast-survey  steamer  •'  Vixen,"  and  later  performed
astronomical  work  along  the  eastern  coast.  In
1866  he  became  chief  engineer  of  an  expedition
for  the  survey  of  a  ship-canal  across  the  isthmus
of  Darien,  and,  in  1867,  was  appointed  to  make
a  special  examination  and  report  upon  the  geog-
raphy and  resources  of  Alaska,  pending  its  pur-
chase; and  his  published  report  and  conferences
with  congressional  committees  influenced  the  pas-
sage of  the  bill.  He  was  placed  in  charge,  during
1867,  of  the  work  of  the  coast-survey  on  the  Pa-
cific, planned  work  for  the  land  parties  from  1868
till  1875,  and  inspected  all  the  fields  of  work.  From
1876  till  1886  he  had  charge  of  the  main  triangula-
tion  and  astronomical  work  on  the  western  coast ;
and  the  records  of  the  computing  division  show
that  the  results  of  his  observations  stand  higher
than  any  ever  executed  in  America,  Europe,  or  In-
dia, and  they  have  been  characterized  as  "  unique
in  the  history  of  geodesy."  In  1881  he  measured
the  Yolo  base  line,  the  "longest  yet  attempted  in
trigonometrical  operations,  and  the  system  of  tri-
angulation  directly  connected  therewith  is  called
in  his  honor  the  "Davidson  quadrilaterals."  He
founded  the  Davidson  observatory  in  San  Fran-
cisco, which  was  the  first  astronomical  observatory
on  the  Pacific  coast  of  North  America,  and  in  1869
brought  the  Pacific  geodetic  of  the  coast  survey
in  telegraphic  longitude  connection  with  Green-
wich. His  astronomical  work  includes  the  obser-
vation of  the  total  solar  eclipse  under  the  60th
parallel,  in 1869; determination  "of the 19001


DAVIDSON


DAVIDSON


87


meridian  in  l*?:i ;  charge  of  the  U.S.  transit  ..f
rpeditkm,  in  1874;  recovery  of  the  inm-

am  station  of  170H  in  Lower  California

tpfod by Autcroche de la  Chap|M>; ohserva-

HOBOftlM  total -o]ar  eclipse  of  7  Jan.. 1880;  and

in l-  "f the  party  to  observe  the  tran-

f  Ycmis  in  tfltl MojJf  ■  ■. 1 1  •  -  holds  tin-  BOO
n  chair  of  geodesy  and  astronomy  in  the  Cni-

Itv  of  California,  and  was  a  nx'nil  of  that  in-
stitution from  is;?  till  1884  Prof.  Davidson  has
been  appointed  OH  many  im|>ortant  government
commissions,  and  in  such  capacity  lias  made  vain
able  rf|Mirts  t>>  the  department*.  1 1 « -  is  a  im-m-
ber  of  numerous  scientific  societies,  and  has  been
president  of  tin-  (ieographical  society  of  the  Pacific
states  since  1881,  and  of  the  California  acailemy  of
sciences  from  1*71  till  1880.  In  1874  he  was  elected
to  the  National  academy  of  sciences. His  puhli-

;is,  besides  numerous  pjipers  OMltrlbuted  to
the  California  academy  of  sciences,  are  principally

:al  report!  contained  in  government  ptihlica-
tions,  and  the  "Coast  Pilot  of  California,  Oregon,
and  Washington  "(1857-'87)  and  the  "Coast  Pilotof
Alaska"  (Part  I.,  1808).— His  brother,  Thomas,
naval  constructor,  b.  in  Nottingham,  England.  2M
Aug.,  1828;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  Feb.,  1874,
came  to  the  United  States,  at  the  age  of  four  years.
with  his  parents,  who  settled  in  Philadelphia.  He
early  develo|>ed  a  talent  for  mechanical  invention
and  construction,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was
apprenticed  to  the  trade  of  ship-building  with  Mat-
thew Van  Dusen,  at  the  same  time  studying  mat  he-
matics with  his  brother  George.  His  capabilities
soon  attracted  the  attention  of  Join  Lcnthall.  then
chief  constructor  of  the  U.S.  navv.  In  1850,  when
but  twenty-two  years  old,  he  buflt  his  first  vessel
"from  the  stumps"  on  the  banks  of  the  James
river,  and  soon  afterward  entered  into  business  in
Philadelphia.  In  1801  he  was  appointed  quarter-
master over  the  ship-carpenters  in  the  Philadelphia
navy-yard,  and  in  1803  was  promoted  to  assistant
naval  constructor.  He  attained  the  full  grade  in
1888,  with  the  relative  rank  of  commander,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.  At  one  time  during
the  civil  war  he  was  conducting  the  repairs,  at  the
Philadelphia  navy-yard,  of  forty-two  vessels,  large
and  small,  and  also  building  several  new  ones,
The  "Tuscarora,"  sister  ship  of  the  "  Kearsarge."
was  built  under  his  direction  in  fifty-eight  work-
ing days,  and  the  "  Miami  "  in  twenty-seven  days.
But  his  greatest  feat  was  the  building,  in  seventy
days,  of  the  "Juniata"  (1,240  tons,  7  guns)  from
the  frame  of  a  Florida  live-oak  frigate  that  had
been  seasoned  for  twenty-three  years.  Mr.  David-
son displayed  his  engineering  abilities  in  the  float-
ing of  the  ••  Monongahela."  which  had  been  driven
inland  on  the  island  of  Santa  Cruz  during  the  earth-
quake of  18  Nov.,  1SII7.  and  left  stranded  forty  feet
high.  With  a  body  01  skilled  men  selected  from
the  different  navv-vards.  in  a  little  over  three
months  he  succeeded  in  moving  the  ship  sidcwNc
to  the  water's  edge,  and  thence  for  2,500  feet  over

th >ral-bed  to  deep  water. Bnhoeqnantly  he  was

ordered  on  duty  at  the  bureau  of  construction  in
Washington,  and  was  busy  with  plans  for  dOTelop-
ing  a  navy  of  armored  vessels,  torpedo-boats,  and
fa-t  cruisers, The  modeb  and  drawing!  for  the

first lam  torpedo-lnrnts  built in New  York  were
Med  by  him. He  was  about  to  l>e  sent  to  Fu-
n>|M'  for  an  exhaustive  study  of  foreign  navies  and
navv-vards.  when  his  health  failed.

I>  VV  I  DSON.  James  Wood,  author,  b.  in  Hew-
iN-rry  district.  S.  ('.,  i»  March,  1888. He  was  gradu-
ated at  South  Carolina  college,  Columbia,  in
studied  languages  under  private  tutors,  in 1884V8


was  professor  of  Greek  in  Mount  Zion  college,
V\  Innsboro,  s.  <  .,  and  ,„  m.19  became  principal  of
Carolina  high-school.  Columbia.  In  18&-*8  he  was
adjutant  of  infantrv  in  Jaokm
army.  He  left  Columbin  in  1*71.  and  lived  two
I) Washington, |).  C..  at,  ,-ars  |n

1  >rk  city,  when-  he  wits  litcrarv  .s|it.',r  of  th..
"  Evening  Posl  "  in  1*;:!.  and  Ann
tpondentof  the  London  "Standard"  in  ;
lie  reniov.d  to  Figulu...  Dade  <•....  Fla.,  in  1884,
where  he  continues  his  litcrarv  w..rk.  and  is  en-
gaged in  fruit-culture.  In  1*m5  he  was  a  member
of  the  Florida  constitutional  convention.  Mr.
Davidson has  tiuhlished  "  Living Writers  of  the

s.uth"  (New  York.  1888); "  School Hid

South  Carolina"  (Columbia,  |088j  new  .-d..  1888):
and  "The  Correspondent "  (New  York,  1898);  and
has  edited  "Lyrics  and  Sketches."  bv  Willi
Martin  (1888\  and  "The  Kduc-atioiial  Yeer-Ifciok  "
(1M7'.').  He  has  in  preparation  a  "  D;
Southern  Authors,"  and  "  Helen  of  Troy,"  ■  fiction
of  Homeric  times.

DAVIDSON,  John  Wynn.  soldier,  b.  in  Fairfax
county.  Va..  18  Aug..  IN'-M:  d.  in  St.  Paul.  .Minn..
20  June,  1881. He  was  graduated  at  the  C.  S.  mili-

tarv  academy  in  Iftift  aaahTrail  to  the  1st  dragoon*.

and  accompanied  (Jen.  Kearny  to  California  in
1840,  in  charge  of  a  howitzer  battaty.  During  the
Mexican  war  he  served  in  the  Army  of  th
being  present  at  the  combats  of  San  Pasqual,  San
Bernardo,  Saa  Gabriel,  and  Mesa.  He  was  a  scout
in  I860,  and  was  at  the  action  of  Clear  I-ake,  17
May,  and  at  Russian  River,  17  June,  under  (apt.
Nathaniel  Lvoti.  From  this  time  till  the  civil  war
he  continued  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty,  lb-
fought  tin'  battle  of  Cieneguilla.  New  .Mi  \i. ...  .,ti  :U)
March,  1854,  against  the  Apache  and  I'tah  Indians,
losing  three  fourths  of  his  command,  and.  being
himself  wounded.  He  was  promoted  to  captain  on
20  Jan.,  1855,  to  major  on  14  Nov.,  1801.  and.  after
■erring  in  defence  of  Washington,  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-genenil  of  volunteers  on  •'<  Feb.,
1802.  In  the  Virginia  peninsular  caui|>aign  of  1881
he  oommanded  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Smith's  division,
and  received  two  brevets  for  gallant  oondnet — that

of  lieutenant-colonel  for  the  bat  tie  of  Gaines's  Mills,
and  that  of  colonel for  (folding's  Farm, lb MM
also  engaged  at  lice's  Mills.  IfecnaniosviUe,  B
Station, ami (Jlendale. He  OOmmanded the  St.
Louis  district  of  Missouri  from  0  Aug.  till  b't  Nov.,
1SI5-J.  the  Army  of  Sontheatl .Missouri  till  H  F.  fak,
18IU1.  and  the  St.  Louis  district  again  till  0  June,
OO-operating  with (Jen.  Steele  in  his  Little  Rock
expedition  and  directing  the  movements  of  troon
against  Pilot  Knob  ami  Frodetioktown,  and  in  the
pursuit  of  the  enemy  during  Mannadukc's  raid  into
Sliss,,iiri. He  led  a  cavalry  division  from  June  till
September,  commanded  in  the  actions  at  BWBjm>
ville. BayOU Metre,  and Ashley's  Mills.  Ark.,  and
took  |>ari in the  capture  of  Little  Kock. He  was
made  chief  of  cavalry  of  tbi  military  d
of  the  Mississippi  on  20  June.  1*04,  ami  on  I  ■
led  a  oavabry  expedition  from  Baton  Bi
oagoula. lie  was  brevet  ted brigadier-general in
the  regular  army  on  II  March,  lN<i5.  for  the  capture

of  Little  Book, and  major-general  for  •
during  the  war.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  Kith  cavalry  on  1  Dec..  \*M\,  was  acting  b>
s|«-<  tor-general  of  the  Department  of  the  IfisaOttTI
from  November,  1888. till  December,  1887,  and  pro*
feasor  of  military  essence  In  Kansas  agricultural
college  from  1N<>H  till  1*71.  He  then  commanded
various  posts  in  Idaho  and  Texas,  and.  in  It
the  district  of  Upper  Braaoa,  Tex  «m  86  March,
was  made  oosontl  Of  the  2d  cavalry.


88


DAVIDSON


DAVIDSON


a>vtf&/a?0,


DAVIDSON,  Lucretla  Maria,  poet.h.  in  Platts-
burg,  N.  Y..  27  Sept..  1808;  d.  there,  27  Aug..  1886.
Her  father.  Oliver  Davidson,  was  a  physician,  ami
her  mother,  Margaret  Miller,  was  an  author.  A
volume  of  select  ions  from  Mrs.  Davidson's  writings
was  published,  with  a  preface  by  Miss  0.  M.  Sedg-
wick, in  1844,  after  the  poems  of  her  daughter  had
made  them  famous.  Lucretia,  when  four  years
old,  was  sent  to  Plattsburg  academy,  where  she
learned  to  read  and  to  form  the  Roman  letters  in
sand.  Soon  afterward  her  mother  observed  that
her  writing-paper  was  disappearing  strangely,  and

finally  discov-
ered a  pile  of  lit-
tle blank-books,
containing  art-
fully sketched
Sictures,  with
escriptions  in
poetry,  all  print-
ed in  Roman  let-
ters, turned  and
twisted  in  cu-
rious fashion.
The  child  was
so  mortified  at
the  discovery  of
what  she  had
been  doing  that
she  burned  all
her  work.  She
learned  to  write
in  her  seventh
year,  and  devel-
oped a  great
fondness  for
reading.  Before  she  was  twelve  she  had  read
much  history,  and  the  dramatic  works  of  Shake-
speare, Goldsmith,  and  Kotzebue,  with  many  popu-
lar novels  and  romances.  She  continued  to  write
poetry,  and,  when  nine  years  old,  composed  an
"Epitaph  on  a  Robin,"  which  is  the  earliest  re-
maining specimen  of  her  verse.  She  wrote  poetry
rapidly,  when  in  the  mood,  but  preferred  to  be  alone
while  composing,  often  burning  an  unfinished  piece
that  had  been  seen  by  others.  She  was  fond  of
childish  sports,  but  would  often  stop  in  the  midst
of  them  to  write,  when  struck  with  an  idea  for  a
poem.  When  about  fourteen  years  old  she  was
allowed  to  attend  a  ball  in  Plattsburg,  but,  in  the
midst  of  her  preparations,  was  found  sitting  in  a
corner  writing  verses  on  "  What  the  World  Calls
Pleasure."  Her  mother's  friends  advised  that  pen
and  ink  be  kept  from  her,  and,  hearing  of  this,  she
voluntarily  gave  up  her  favorite  pursuit  for  sev-
eral months,  till  her  mother,  seeing  that  she  grew
melancholy,  advised  her  to  resume  it.  In  October,
1824,  a  gentleman  visiting  Plattsburg  saw  some  of
her  verses,  and  offered  to  give  her  a  better  educa-
tion than  her  parents  could  afford.  She  was  ac-
cordingly sent  to  Mrs.  Willard's  school  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  Dut  her  studies  undermined  her  health,  and
she  returned  home.  After  her  recovery  she  was
sent  to  Miss  Gilbert's  school  in  Albany,  but  re-
mained there  only  about  three  months  before  she
was  taken  home  to  die.  Miss  Davidson  was  a
small,  delicately  formed  brunette.  'Vshe  had  all
the  elements  of  personal  beauty,"  wrote  Mrs.  Wil-
lard,  "yet  she  was  so  shy  that  manyla  girl  less
perfectly  endowed  in  that  respect  woulA  be  sooner
noticed  by  a  stranger."  Her  poetical  writings  in-
clude, beside  the  numbers  of  pieces  destroyed  by
her,  278  poems  of  various  lengths.  Among  these
are  five  pieces,  of  several  cantos  each.  The  poet
Southey  said  of  her :  "  In  our  own  language,  except


in  the  cases  of  Chatterton  and  Kirke  White,  we  can
call  to  mind  no  instance  of  so  early,  so  ardent,  and
>o  fatal  a  pursuit  of  intellectual  advancement."
Her  poems  were  collected  and  published,  with  a
sketch  by  S.  F.  B.  Morse,  under  the  title  "Amir
Khan,  and  Other  Poems  "  (New  York,  1825) ;  n.  w
ed.,  edited  by  her  brother.  M.  0.  Davidson,  with
illustrations  bv  Darley,  1871).  See  a  biography  by
Catharine  M.  Sedgwick  in  Sparks's  "  American  Bi-
ographies," vol.  vii. — Her  sister,  Margaret  Miller,
b.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  26  March,  1823;  d.  in
Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  25  Nov.,  1838,  had  the  HUM  ■  n-
sibility  and  precocity,  and  began  to  write  at  >ix
years  of  age.  At  ten,  while  visiting  in  New  York,
she  wrote,  in  two  days,  a  drama  entitled  the  "  Trag-
edy of  Alethia,"  and  acted  in  it  with  some  young
friends,  taking  the  principal  part.  Notwithstand-
ing her  sister's  fate,  her  intellectual  activity  was
not  restrained.  Her  poems  were  introduced  t<>  the
world  by  Washington  Irving,  and  the  works  of  the
two  sisters  were  afterward  published  together  (New
York,  1850).— Their  brother,  Levi  P.,  b.  in  1817;
d.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  27  June,  1842,  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1837,  assigned  to
the  1st  dragoons,  and  after  serving  on  frontier
duty  at  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  and  Fort  Wayne,
Indian  Territory,  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in
1840. He  wrote  verses  with  elegance  and  ease.

DAVIDSON,  Robert,  educator,  b.  in  Elkton,
Md.,  in  1750 ;  d.  13  Dec.,  1812.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1771,  ap-
pointed instructor  there  in  1773,  and  in  1774  was
given  the  chair  of  history  and  belles-lettres.  In  the
fatter  year  he  was  also  licensed  to  preach,  and  a
year  later  was  ordained  by  the  second  Philadelphia
presbytery,  becoming  Dr.  Ewing's  assistant  in  the
first  church.  In  1775  he  composed  a  metrical  dia-
logue, which  was  recited  at  commencement  before
the  Continental  congress,  and  in  July  of  the  same
year,  one  month  after  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,
delivered  before  several  military  companies  a  ser-
mon from  the  text  "For  there  fell  down  many
slain,  because  the  war  was  of  God."  In  1777  the
occupation  of  Philadelphia  by  the  British  compelled
him  to  retire  to  Delaware.  In  1784  he  was  appoint-
ed vice-president  of  the  newly  organized  Dickin-
son college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  given  the  chair  of
history  and  belles-lettres  there,  also  acting  as  pas-
tor of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Carlisle.  He
held  this  last  office  till  his  death,  and  succeeded
by  his  tact  in  harmonizing  the  discordant  elements
in  his  congregation.  In  1794  he  preached  twice
before  troops  on  their  way  to  suppress  the  whiskey
insurrection,  and  in  1799  delivered  a  eulogy  of
Washington.  After  Dr.  Nisbet's  death  in  1804,  Dr.
Davidson  discharged  the  duties  of  president  of  the
college  till  1809,  when  he  resigned.  He  had  a  high
reputation  as  a  scholar,  but  was  especially  fond
of  astronomy,  and  invented  an  ingenious  COMDO*
sphere  or  compound  globe.  He  was  also  a  skilful
draughtsman,  and  was  the  composer  of  several

Eieces  of  sacred  music.  Besides  numerous  sermons,
e  published  an  "  Epitome  of  Geography,  in  Verse,"
for  the  use  of  schools  (1784);  "  The  Christian's  A,
B,  C,"  or  the  119th  psalm  in  metre,  each  stanza
beginning  with  a  different  letter  (1811);  and  a
"  New  Metrical  Version  of  the  Psalms,"  with  an-
notations (1812).— His  son.  Robert,  clergyman, '».
in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1808;  d.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  6  April,  1876,  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  col-
lege in  1828,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary
in  1831.  He  was  pastor  of  the  second  Presbyterian
church  in  Lexington.  Ky.,  in  1832-'40,  and  in  the
latter  year  l>ecame  president  of  Transylvania  uni-
versity there. After  his  resignation  yi  i842  he  held


DAVIDSON


I'WIK


m


pastorates  in  New Unit  !..  in  im.:

York  city  in  MMO-'a,  and  Huntington,  L  I  .
in  l^H-'N,  n- ring  U)  Philadelphia  in  tin-  last-
named  year.  .Mr.  Davidson  was  SOT  ft  quarter  of  a
century  a  member  of  the  American  l»oard  of  oejn-
mjseioneri  f'>r  fnriign  ■tasiona^  was  mhmmbI

.  .if  the  MMll  assembly  in  1848-  .*>(»,  and  in
1809  was  a  delegate  to  tin-  general  assembly  <>f  tin-
Free  church  <>r  Scotland,  in  Edinburgh.

D  V  I  IWK)N,TfcO«M,  philosopher,  b.  in  the  par-
ish ..f  Deer.  Alierdecnshire,  Scotland,  89  Oct..  ls-10.
Il<  was  graduated  at  the  I'niversity  of  AU-rdcen
in  1n»'><».  beings  first  graduate  and  Greek  prizeman.
IVoni  1880  till  1WW  he  was  reetor  of  thegrammar-
fLatta-)  school  of  Old  Aberdeen,  and  from  imw  till
B  ma>tcr  in  several  English  schools,  sticud-
ing  his  vacations  on  the  r..ntinent.  In  lsiiti  be  re-
moved tn  Canada.  tO  occupy  a  hlacc  in  the  London
collegiate  institute.  In  the  following  year  he  came
to  the  United  States,  and,  after  sending  some
iimnths  in  Boston,  removed  to  St.  Louis,  where,  in
addition  to  work  on  the  New  York  "  Round  Table  *'
and  the  "  Western  Kdueational  Monthly,"  he  was
classical  master  in  the  St.  Louis  high-school,  and
subsequently  principal  of  one  of  the  branch  high*
schools.  In  1875  he  removed  to  Cambridge,  Mass.
He  has  travelled  extensively  in  Euro|K>.  es|>ecially
in  Greece  and  Italy.  In  the  former  country  he  de-
voted himself  mainly  to  archaeology  and  modem
Greek,  in  the  latter"  to  the  study  < If  the  Catholic
church,  of  scholastic  philosophy,  of  Dante,  and  of
Rosmiui.  For  studying  the  Catholic  church  un-
usual opportunities  were  thrown  open  to  him,
chiefly  through  the  Princess  Carolyne  of  Sayn-
Wittgenstein  and  Cardinal  Hohenlohe,  who  offered
him  an  apartment  in  his  episcopal  palace  at  Alhano.
and  also  in  the  villa  D*Ben  at  Tivoli.  His  Interest
in  Thomas  Aquinas  having  come  to  the  ears  of  the
pope  through  Bishop  (now  Cardinal)  Schialhno,  he
was  invited  to  the  Vatican,  where  the  holy  father
suggested  that  he  should  settle  in  Rome  and  aid
his  professors  in  editing  the  new  edition  of  St.
Thomas.  For  more  than  a  year  he  lived  at  Domo-
dossola,  in  Piedmont, where  the  Institute  of  charity,
founded  by  Kosmini,  has  its  novitiate.  Here  he
produced  the  work  that  first  brought  Rosmini  to
the  notice  of  English-speaking  Rodents:  "  The
I'hilosop Ideal  System  of  Antonio  Rosmini-Serbati.
translated,  with  a  Sketch  of  the  Authors  Life.  Bib-
liography, Introduction, and  Notes" (London,  1882).
At  the  same  time  he  wrote  essays  on  classical  sub-
jects, mainlv  archaeological,  published  under  the
title  "The  Parthenon  Frieze  and  other  Essays"
(London.  1882).  He  also  translated  "  RnamUli's
l'-y  hologv"  <:{  vols.,  London,  1884).  In  Iks:?  he
OOCUpJed  a  villa  in  Capri, and  there  translated  Ros-
minis  "Anthropology.**  Mr.  Davidson  has  been
a  frequent  contributor  to  periodicals,  and  deliv-
ered courses  of  lectures,  baton  the  Lowell  institute
in  Boston  and  elsewhere.  on  modern  Greece,  on
Greek  sculpture,  etc.  He  was  mainlv  instrumental
in  founding  "The  Fellowship  of  the  New  Life."
which  has  branches  in  London  and  New  York.  He
speaks  French.  German,  Italian,  ami  modern  Greek.
let  the  works  named.  Mr.  Davidson  lias  pub-
lished "The  Fragments  of  Parmenides,"  in  English
hexameters,  with  Introduction  and  notes  (St.
Louis,  lMll'b;  -On  the  Origin  of  Language,*1  from

the  German  of  \V.  EL  J.  Sleek  (New  Sorts,  I860);

>'i..rt  Account  of  the  Niobe  Group  "(New  York.

I  lie  Place  of  Art  in  Education"  (Boston,

:  "Giordano  Bruno,  and  the  Relation  of  his

Philosophy  to  [free  Thought  "(Boston,  1888):  and  a

"Hand-Book to  Dante,  from  the Italian  of  Scar-

taaaini,  with  Notes  and  Addition* **  (Boston,  1887).


DATID80N,  William,  soldier,  bin
county,  Pa.,  in  1746;  killed  at  the  Utile  of  Cow.

with  his  family  to  Rowan  count.

and William,  the TCHIIIfSJl MO,  wa»  educa

Quean's  mnaaam,  afterward  Liberty  halL  Charlotta,

At the U'ginning  of  the  Revolution hi wan  ai»
pototed  major  in  one  of  the  first  regiment*  raised
in  North  Carolina,  and  was  in  th<
Brandy  wine. (Jermantown.  Hl„i Monmouth. |n
Noramber,  177!>.  he  wa  roe  the

army  of  Qen,  Lincoln  in  the  south,  at  which  time
he  commanded  his  regiment  with  the  rank  .if  liru-
tenant-colonel. In  an  engagement  with  a  |
loyalists,  near  Calson's  Mill,  a  ball  iia.ss.-d  through

his  body;  i>ut  ba  t«M.k  the  laid  algal  vaaki  later.

with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  conferred  on
him  bv  the  state  of  North  Carolina,  and  i

himself  to  interrupt  the  program  of  CornwaltJBi

Detached  by  (Jen.  Greene  on  :tl  Jan..  17M.  to  guard
the  wagon  ford  chosen  by  Cornwallis  for  his  night
passage  of  the  Catawba,  Gen.  Davidson  |«-st.-d
himself  on  the  bank  of  the  river  with  MO  men.

The  British  army  forced  its  way  across.  reserving
its  tire  until  it  had  reached  the  Iwuik,  when  the
militia  lied.  Gen.  Davidson  was  the  last  on  the
held,  ami  was  pierced  by  a  rifle-ball  through  the

breast.  Congress  voted  fc-'ioo  for  a  monument  to
him,  but  it  has  never  been  erected.  Davidson  col-
lege, N.  ('..  is  named  in  his  honor,  and  hi*  sword
hangs  in  one  of  its  halK

DAVIE,  William  Richardson,  soldier,  b.  in
Egremont,  near  Whitehaven.  England,  2<»  June.
I  :.")<»:  d.  in  Camden,  S.  C.  h  Nov.,  1880.  Be  came
t«>  this  country  with  his  father  in  ITM,  ami  was
adopted  by  his  uncle.  Rev.  William  Richardson,
who  lived  near  the  Catawba,  in  South  Carolina.
Young  Davie  was  graduated  at  Princeton,  in  the
autumn  of  177f>,  after  serving  with  a  party  of
his  fellow-studci.ts  as  a  volunteer  in  the  vicin-
ity of  New  York  during  the  summer  of  that
rear.  He  then  began  to  study  law  in  Salisbury,
N".  ('..  but  was  commissioned  lieutenant  of  a  new-
ly organized  company  of  dragoons  on  •"»  April.
1779,  and,  succeeding  to  the  command  of  the
troop,  joined  Pulaski's  legion  ami  n»so  to  the
rank  of  major.
At  the  battle  of
Stono  Perry,  IS
June,  17TU,  lie  re-
ceived a  severe
wound  in  the
thigh,  and  on  his
recovery  returned
to  Salisbury,  re-
sumed his  studies,
and  was  admitted
to  the  Iwr  in  Bep-
tomber,  177'.».  In
the  winter  of  17X0
he  raised  a  body
of  cavalry.  s|M-nt
in  its  equipment
the last shilling

of 'he estate In-

qneathed  to  him

M  his  uncle,  and

with this force

protected  the  southwestern  part  of  the  state  frwn

the  attacks  of  the  British  in  Bottth  Carolina. He

Bought  in  the  kittles  at  Hanging  Ron!  and  Rat  ky

Mount,  did  good  service  in  saving  the  remnant  of

thaamrj  after  Gateaii  defeat  at  Cnasdan,  ami  on

:>  Sept..  i;s< >.  **■  appointed  oolonal  oonunaadhuj

ilrv  in  North  Carolina. He  surprised  the


90


DAY IKS


DA  VIES


enemy  at  Wahab's  plantation,  and  when  Cornwal-
lis  entered  Charlotte,  N.  C,  he  withstood  three
charges  by  Tarleton's  legion,  in  the  presence  of  the
whole  British  army,  and  then  retired  in  good  order.
In  17N1  OoL  Davie,  yielding  his  hopes  of  gaining
additional  honor  in  the  field,  accepted,  at  the  urgent
request  of  Gen.  Greene,  the  post  of  commissary-

Senoral  of  the  southern  army,  and,  by  his  zeal,  h>
uence,  and  local  knowledge  in  this  difficult  po-
sition, added  much  to  the  success  of  the  military
operations  that  followed.  After  the  war  he  settled
at  Halifax,  N.  C,  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,
and,  by  his  sagacity  and  eloquence,  soon  rose  to
eminence.  He  served  many  terms  in  the  legisla-
ture, and  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  Federal  constitution,  favoring  the  equal
representation  of  the  states  in  the  national  senate,
and  the  taking  into  account  of  the  slaves  in  assign-
ing representatives  to  the  south.  His  name  does
not  appear  as  a  signer  of  the  document,  as  he  was
called  nome  by  illness,  but  he  was  one  of  its  most
earnest  defenders  in  the  North  Carolina  convention
that  followed.  He  drew  up  the  act  for  establishing
the  University  of  North  Carolina,  which,  after
much  opposition,  was  passed  in  1789,  and  was  active
in  providing  for  its  support.  The  erection  of  its
buildings,  the  choice  of  professors,  and  the  arrange-
ment of  studies,  received  his  personal  attention.
He  was  influential  in  securing  the  cession  of  the
present  state  of  Tennessee,  was  three  times  a  com-
missioner to  settle  boundary  disputes  between
North  and  South  Carolina,  and  in  1794  was  made
major-general  of  militia.  He  was  elected  governor
of  the  state  in  1799,  but  before  the  close  of  his
term  was  sent  by  President  Adams,  with  Oliver
Ellsworth  and  William  V.  Murray,  on  a  special
embassy  to  the  French  government,  the  result  of
which  was  the  convention  signed  30  Sept.,  1800.
President  Jefferson  appointed  him  to  treat  with  the
Tuscarora  Indians  in  1802.  In  1803  he  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  congress,  and  after  his  de-
feat he  withdrew  to  his  farm  on  the  Catawba  river,
S.  C,  where  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  days,  declining
a  major-general's  commission  in  the  IT.  S.  army  in
1813  on  account  of  failing  health.  He  was  a  man
of  commanding  appearance  and  dignified  yet  affa-
ble manners.  See  nis  life,  by  Fordyce  M.  Hubbard,
in  Sparks's  "  American  Biographies."

DA  VIES,  Charles,  mathematician,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  22  Jan.,  1798;  d.  in
Fishkill  Landing,  N.  Y.,  17  Sept.,  1876.  When  a
boy  he  removed  with  his  father  to  a  farm  in  St.
Lawrence  county,  N.  Y.,  then  an  unsettled  part  of
the  state.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  December,  1813,  graduating  in  December,  1815,
and  was  assigned  to  the  light  artillery.  After
brief  service  in  New  England  garrisons,  he  was
transferred  to  the  engineer  corps  in  1816,  and
ordered  to  duty  at  West  Point,  but  resigned  on  1
Dec,  1816,  and  became  principal  assistant  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  and  natural  and  experi-
mental philosophy.  He  was  made  ful\  professor
of  mathematics  on  1  May,  1823,  and  >neld  the
office  till  31  May,  1837,  when  he  was  forced  to  re-
sign by  illness  consequent  upon  overwork  \in  pre-
paring" his  mathematical  text-books.  A  trip  to
Europe  restored  his  health,  and  he  accepted  the
chair  of  mathematics  in  Trinity  college,  Hartford,
Conn.,  holding  it  from  1839  till  1841,  when  he  was
again  forced  to  resign  by  threatened  illness,  and
was  appointed  paymaster  in  the  U.  S.  army,  with
the  staff  rank  of  major.  He  served  as  treasurer  of
the  U.  S.  military  academy  from  1841  till  1846,
and  in  1848  became  professor  of  mathematics  and
philosophy  in  the  University  of  New  York. In  the


following  year  he  retired  to  Fishkill  Landing,  on
the  Hudson,  that  he  might  have  leisure  to  complete
his  series  of  text-book-.  After  teaching  in  tlu«
Normal  school  at  Albany,  he  was  made  professor
of  higher  mathematics  in  Colombia  coll.
.May,  1K57,  and  in  June,  1866,  emeritus  pn
His  works,  which  are  distinguished  by  plainness
and  close  logical  arrangement,  Include  an  entire
series  of  mathematical  text-books  (1837- V.;
tending  from  a  primary  arithmetic  to  the  higher
mathematics,  and  including  editions  of  LegenSre'i
"Geometry"  (1840)  and  Bourdon's  "Algebra"
(1851).  Among  his  more  advanced  works  are
"  Descriptive  Geometry  "  (New  York,  1826) ;  u  Sur-
veying and  Navigation"  (1830);  "Shades.  Shad-
ows, and  Perspective"  (1832);  "Differential  and
Integral  Calculus"  (1836):  "Logic  and  Utility  of
Mathematics"  (1850);  and  a  " Mathematical  Dic-
tionary," written  in  conjunction  with  his  son-in-law,
Prof.  William  G.  Peck,  of  Columbia  (1855).  His
last  work  was  a  treatise  on  "  The  Metric  System  "
(1870).— His  brother,  Henry  Eugene,  b.  in  Black
Lake,  near  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1805 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  17  Dec.,  1881,  spent  his  early  years
upon  his  father's  farm,  and.  after  receiving  a  com-
mon-school education,  began  in  1819  the  study  of
law  with  Judge  Alfred  Conkling,  living,  as  "was
then  the  custom,  in  the  family  of  his  preceptor.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Utica,  N.  Y,  in
1826,  and  began  to  practise  in  Buffalo,  where  he
soon  became  prominent  in  politics  as  a  whig.  He
removed  to  New  York  in  1830,  and  formed  a  part-
nership with  Judge  Samuel  A.  Foot,  which  was
dissolved  in  1848,  and  Mr.  Davies  entered  into  a
new  one  with  Judge  William  Kent,  son  of  Chan-
cellor Kent.  In  1850  he  was  chosen  corporation
counsel,  and  was  elected  justice  of  the  state  su-
preme court  in  1855,  but  was  obliged  to  establish
nis  right  to  the  office  by  litigation,  as  no  notice  of
a  vacancy  had  been  filed  with  the  sheriff.  In  the
summer  "of  that  year  he  accompanied  ex-President
Fillmore  to  Europe,  having  been  his  confidential
adviser  during  his  term  of  office  as  chief  magis-
trate. In  the  autumn  of  1859  Judge  Davies  was
elected  to  the  court  of  appeals,  where  he  served
from  1  Jan.,  1860,  till  1869,  being  the  chief  justice
for  several  years.  He  then  entered  into  partner-
ship with  Judge  Noah  Davis,  with  whom  he  prac-
tised until  the  latter  was  elevated  to  the  bench.
After  that  time  Judge  Davies  was  conspicuous
only  in  his  practice  as  counsel  and  trustee  of  the
Mutual  life  insurance  company,  receiver  of  the
Erie  railway,  counsel  for  the  American  exchange
bank,  and  member  of  the  commission  to  determine
the  advisability  of  constructing  an  underground
railroad  in  Broadway.  The  day  before  his  last  ill-
ness he  sat  for  manv  hours  listening  to  testimony
on  that  subject.  For  several  years  before  his
death  he  took  no  part  in  politics,  but  served  often
as  referee  or  chamber-counsel  in  important  legal
cases. — Another  brother,  Thomas  Alfred,  soldier,
b.  in  St.  Lawrence  county,  N.  Y.,  in  Decern  bar,
1809,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1829,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  infantry.  After
serving  on  frontier  duty,  he  resigned  on  31  Oct.,
1831,  and  was  employed  on  the  Croton  aqueduct  as  a
civil  engineer  till  1833,  when  he  became  a  merchant
in  New  York  city,  but  was  again  employed  on  the
aqueduct  in  1840-'l.  He  re-entered  the  national
service  on  15  May,  1861.  as  colonel  of  the  16th  New
York  regiment,  was  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Bun,
and  in  the  defences  of  Alexandria  from  Novem-
ber, 1861,  till  7  March,  1862,  when  he  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  lie  was  engaged
in  the  siege  of  Corinth  in  April  **nd  May,  1862,


DAN


owns


01


itattlo  <>f  Corinth  on  8-4  0  ommanded

district  i if  Colnmbna,  K\..  m  1888-j8,  that  ..f
i, M-...  i  rtli Kansas  in

1864-"5.  nii'l  thnt  of  wleoonain  from  April  till
June,  186&  11''  m  brevet  ted  major-general  <>f
volu nt een  «'ii  11  -Inly,  IHft'i,  ami  shortly  afterward
rn.'.l  to  New  York  city.  He  has  published
-  .iiy  :  or  Mysteries  of  Creation."  hii  analy-
sis of  the  natural  facts  stated  in  the  Hebraic  ac-
count of  uiaallmi  (Nnw  fork,  1858);  "Adam  and

II, \:,:: |M5«); "(Jcnesia DiMlOMdN (1*60);
••  Lnewerto  Hugh  Miller  ami  Theoretical  (Jeoio-

ffat-  •  How  to  make  Monev,  and  How  to

*  II);  ami  "  Appeal  of  a  Layman  to  the
Committee  on  tin1  Revision  Of  the  English  Vir-
i  of  the  Holv  Scriptures,  to  have  Adam  ami
II  i -Ailain  restored  to  the  English  General  when
Ifft  out  by  foniitT  Translators"  (18781  HwilJ
mc'sffXL  Henry  Eugene,  lawyer.  I>.  in  New
York  city,  8  July,  1886.  was  educated  at  Harvard.
Williams,  ami  Columbia,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1807.  B«  thru  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  l>ar.  ami  Ix-gan  practice.  He  entered  the
army  in  April,  1N61,  as  a  captain  in  the  5th  New
I  \'.lunteers,  became  major  in  the  2d  New
York  cavalry  in  July,  and  subsequently  its  colonel.
He  was  made  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
16  Sept..  1888,  and  served  with  distinction  in  the
cavalry  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  till
the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  brevetted  major-
general  of  volunteers,  1  Oct.,  1864,  given  his  full
commission  on  4  Mav,  1865,  and  commanded  the
middle  district  of  Alabama  till  his  resignation  on
1  Jan..  lHtifi.  He  was  public  administrator  of  New
York  city  in  I M06-'».  assistant  district  attorney  of
the  southern  district  of  New  York  in  1870-'2,  and
since  is?:',  das  been  engaged  in  law  practice.

DAVIES,  Louis  Henry,  Canadian  state-man.
b.  in  ("harlot tetown,  l'rince  Edward  island.  4
May,  1845.  He  was  educated  at  the  Central  acad-
emy and  Prince  of  Wales  college,  Charlottetown.
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1866.  He  «;i>
solicitor-general  of  his  native  province  in  1869,
and  again  in  1872-'8 ;  was  the  leader  of  the  oppo-
sition in  the  legislative  assembly  until  September,
1876,  when  he  became  premier  and  attorney-
general,  which  portfolios  he  retained  till  1  *?'.».
when  his  administration  resigned.  He  was  elected
to  the  local  legislature  in  1873,  and  re  elected  from
time  to  time  till  1H?!).  when  he  was  defeated.  In
1881  he  was  elected  to  represent  (Queen's  county.
Prince  Kdward  island,  in  the  Dominion  jmrlia-
ment.  and  still  (lKX»i)  represents  that  constituency.
He  was  counsel  for  the  tenantry  of  Prince  Kdward
island,  before  the  land  commission,  pterin* en*  over
by  the  Right  Hon.  H.  C.  K.  Childers.  which  sat
in  lM?5-'6,  when  the  estates  of  all  proprietors  in
the  island  were  expropriated  by  the  province.  He
was  also  one  of  the  counsel  representing  (Jreat
Britain  before  the  international  fishery  commis-
si, hi.  which  s,»t  at  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in  1877,  under
articles  of  the  Washington  treaty. He  is  a  liberal

DAVIES,  Marianne,  muafcaan, b. in  New  Eng-
land  alniut  1788;  d.  in  Loudon  in  1188.  She  wa-
ttle elder  of  two  riaten,  both  of  whom  maili'  a  Eu-
ropean  reputation  as  musicians.  They  were  daugh-
ters of  a  relative  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  Marianne
achieved  some  distinction  as  a  performer  on  the
harpsichord  and  piano.  Imt  eboul  176J  acquired
much  greater  repute  for  her  skill  00  the  harmonica
or  musical  glasses,  which had  then been  recent  1>

improved  by  Franklin. She wm enbrBqnontlyoom-
paued to  retire  from  tin-  ntofejeakn,  owing  to  the

effect  on  her  nerves  of  constant playing  ii|hiii  the
harmonica. This  was  so  frequent a  re-ult  of  Hfl


u«e  thnt  it  ww  haaUhai  fmm  many  continental
towns  by  official  prohibition. II  l

I,  1>.  in  1740;  d.  in  lioiidon
1866,  visited Eun>pe in com|ian)  with Marianm-.
with  whom *h< always  Ngided. \lvr  flr»t
appearance  wax  made  at the aoocrrt-room, l>r»n
street.  Soho,  London,  2H  April,  l ;
OaaafbJ  career  in  the  English  metro|>olbi, « 'erilia  and
Marianne  left England in 1788,  and  rWted  Paris
and Vienna. Wliile tiny  were  in  the lair
Metastasio  wrote,  and  Bmm  enauoaea1  tie
for,  an  ode  that  was  sung by  Cecilia,  accompanied
iiy  Marianne  mi  the  harmonica. In  •
Hi  Jan..  1778,  the  pool  describe- the  beeattfu]  tone
of  the  instrument,  ami the  admirable  manner  in
which  Cecilia  assimilati-d  her  voice  to  it.  making  it
ditllciilt  todi-lingui-h  the  one  from  the  other. Fn»m
Vienna  the  -i-ters  went  |o  Milan.  where  the  younger
appeared  with  great siiccc**.  in 1771.  in  the

of  *•  Bnggiero,  t>>  Metaetajao  and  aaaae.  GeefUa
was  tin-  I'nvt  Bngnah-apaaking  woman  towhoai  the

Italians  accorded  the  rank  of  prima  donna,  U-
stowing  00  her  the  sohriipiet  "  l'lngle-ina,"  and
admitting  her  to  be  the  ■nperior  of  an  Italian
singer  of  thai  time,  except  QahrieUL  Ceouia  after-
ward  tang  in  Florence,  and  returned  in  1778  to
London,  where  she  ap|warcd  successfully  in  Italian
opera.  Her  voice  is  rhmiiihoil  as  being  deficient  in
I M>th  (lower  ami  volume.  Imt  she  possessed  a  neat
and  facile  execution. She  revisited  Ploranee,  and

sang  there  until  17*4.  when  the  once  more  retained
to  England,  and  retired  from  the  profession  soon
after  the  death  of  her  sister.  Aboal  1*17  she  puln
lished  a  collection  of  six  -.n:;-  by  Hassc.  Jomelli,
(iiiluppi.  and  other*.  She  lingered  until  her
ninety-sixth  year,  borne  down  by  the  accumulated
ireighl  of  years,  disease,  and  poverty.

DAVIES,  Samuel,  clergyman,  h.  near  Summit
Ridge,  Newcastle  co..  Del,  .1  Nov..  1724;  d.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  4  Feb..  1761. His  paranta  ■

Welsh decent. He  Was educated  at home and  in

Rev,  Samuel  Blair's  seminary  at Poj

and  licensed  to  preach  by  Newcastle  presbytery  in
1746.  He  was  onlained  as  an  evangelist  in  1747.
and  sent  to  Hanover  county.  Va..  which  the  enmity
of  the  civil  authorities  toward  disaenten  made  a
very  diflicult  field. Throogfa  the  influence  <>f  the

governor  he  obtained  a  license  to  officiate  at  four
places  of  worship  aboul  Hanover,  which  in  174H
was  extended  to  three  additional  chiinhe-.  He
rabsequentlT engaged  in  a  controversy  with  rVytoa
Randolph,  the  king's  attorney,  a>  to  whetiber  the

English  act  of  toleration  extended  to  Virginia,
Mr.  Davie-  argued  his  sideof  the  oaae befbre the
genera]  court,  and  afterward,  when  on  a  %i-it  to
England,  brought  the  matter  before  the  ■
council,  by  whom  the  oneation  was  decided  in  the
affirmative.  In  17-^t  >ir.  Daviei  undertook  a  suc-
cessful mi— ion  to  England,  with  (Jillx-rt  Teiinent.
to  solicit  funds  for  the  CoUagS  of  New  Jersey,  and
rived  with much fa\<>r  as  a  pn-adier. He

returned  amid  the  excite nt  of  the  Ptranah  and

Indian war.  and  shortly  after !tradd<-  k-
delirered a  sermon  OB  that event. In  a  note  t.»
another  pubUabed  S.TI11011.  delixenil  in  the  follow-
ing Aucu-t. In- alludes pn.phetically to "that
heroic youth,  Col.  Washington,  whom  I
i.ut  bona  Frovidenee  has  preferred  li

a  manner  for  some  important  service  to  hii
trv."  The  first  i l-vt.ry  in  Virginia  was  estab-
lished in  1785  through  his'  exertions,  and  in  1758
he  was  ohosen  to  succeed  Jonathan  Edward*  as
pre-uieiit  of  Princeton.  He  declined  the  honor.
Imt  it  was  again  urged  u|h.ii  him  in  the  following
year,  ami  he then accepted  it.  but held it  only


99


DAY  IKS


DAVILA


eighteen  months  before  his  death.  He  was  a  fine
pulpit  orator,  and  published  numerous  sermons,  a
collection  of  which  appeared  after  his  death  (Lou-
don, 1767)  and  passed  through  several  editions,
both  in  this  country  and  in  Great  Britain,  one  of
which  (:{  vols..  New  York,  1851)  contains,  an  eMQ
on  the  "Life!  and  Times  of  Davies"  by  the  Rev.
Albeit  Barnes.  Dr.  Davies  also  wrote  verses  of
merit,  including:  an  elegv  on  his  old  preceptor,
Samuel  Blair. — His  son,  William,  leaving  Prince-
ton college  in  1765,  entered  the  army,  became  in-
spector-general under  Steuben  in  1778,  and  enjoyed
tne  friendship  of  Washington.  He  was  afterward
in  the  auditor's  office,  in  Richmond,  Va.

DAVIES,  Thomas,  clergvman,  b.  in  Kinton,
Herefordshire,  England,  21  Dec,  1736 ;  d.  in  New
Milford,  Conn.,  12  May,  1766.  His  grandfather,
John  Davies,  emigrated  from  England  about  1740,
and  settled  at  Davies  Hollow,  then  a  part  of  Litch-
field, Conn.,  but  now  a  part  of  the  town  of  Wash-
ington. He  was  the  first  Episcopalian  in  the
town,  and  by  his  efforts  the  present  parish  of  St.
Michael's  was  organized  in  1745.  He  gave  it  a
tract  of  land,  and  contributed  largely  to  the  erec-
tion of  a  church.  There  is  a  tablet  to  his  memory
in  the  present  St.  Michael's  church,  Litchfield.
Thomas  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1758,  and  or-
dained by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  on  23
Aug.,  1761.  He  then  returned  to  this  country  with
a  commission  from  the  Society  for  propagating  the
gospel,  as  missionary  to  New  Milford,  Roxbury,
Sharon,  New  Preston,  New  Fairfield,  and  Litch-
field. Here  he  labored  zealously,  holding  occa-
sional services  also  in  other  towns.  Though  he
met  with  many  obstacles  from  the  intolerance  of
the  times,  he  overcame  them  by  his  prudent  and
conciliatory  spirit,  and  to  him  the  growth  of  the
Episcopal  church  in  that  part  of  the  state  was
largely  due.  The  church  at  New  Milford  and  sev-
eral others  were  built  under  his  care.

DAVIESS,  Joseph  Hamilton,  lawyer,  b.  in
Bedford  county,  Va.,  4  March,  1774;  killed  in  the
battle  of  Tippecanoe,  7  Nov.,  1811.  He  accom-
panied his  parents  in  1779  to  Kentucky,  where  they
settled  first  in  Lincoln  county  and  then  near  Dan-
ville. Young  Daviess  received  his  education  in  an
academy  at  Harrodsburg,  becoming  an  excellent
classical  and  mathematical  scholar,  and  afterward
pursued  a  wide  course  of  reading.  He  served  for
six  months  as  a  volunteer  in  the  Indian  campaign
of  1793,  and  then  studied  law.  In  1795  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar  and,  settling  in  Danville,  en-
tered on  a  career  that  made  his  name  a  household
word  in  the  west.  Being  a  federalist,  he  was  ex-
cluded from  any  hope  of  political  advancement,
and  consequently  devoted  himself  to  his  profession
and  attained  a  high  position  at  the  bar.  His  ec-
centricities made  him  famous.  Instead  of  "  riding
the  circuit,"  he  used  to  shoulder  his  rifle  and
range  the  woods  from  town  to  town ;  and  he  usu-
ally appeared  in  court  in  a  hunting  costume.  In
1799  he  acted  as  second  to  John  Rowan  in  a  duel
in  which  Rowan's  antagonist  was  killed,  when  both

Brincipal  and  seconds  fled  to  avoid  prosecution,
•aviess  was  for  some  time  a  fugitive ;  but,  after
hearing  that  Rowan  had  been  arrested,  returned,
appeared  in  court  as  his  counsel,  and  secured  his
acquittal.  It  is  said  that  he  was  the  first  western
lawyer  that  ever  argued  a  case  in  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  He  came  to  Washington  in  a  dilapidated
hunting  uniform,  gained  an  important  suit,  and
returned  home  in  the  same  peculiar  costurtie.
About  this  time  he  married  a  sister  of  Chief-Jus-
tice Marshall,  and  afterward  became  U.  S.  attorney
for  Kentucky,  in  which  capacity,  on  3  Nov.,  1806,


he  moved  for  an  order  requiring  Aaron  Burr  to
ap|>ear  and  answer  to  a  charge  of  levying  war
against  a  nation  with  which  the  I'nited  States  was
at  peace.  The  judge  overruled  the  motion:  but
Burr  appeared  in  court  next  day  and  requested
that  the  motion  be  granted.  After  this  was  ac-
complished. Burr,  with  liis  counsel,  Henry  Clay,
boldly  courted  investigation;  but  the  witnesses
upon  whom  the  prosecution  relied  could  not  be
brought  into  court,  and  it  was  impossible  to  sus-
tain the  charges.  This  event  almost  entirely  de-
stroyed the  popularity  of  Daviess,  which  even  tin-
subsequent  revelation  of  Burr's  plot  could  not
fullv  restore.  In  1811  he  joined  the  army  of  Gen.
William  H.  Harrison  as  major  of  Kentucky  vol-
unteer dragoons,  and  served  in  the  campaign
against  the  northwestern  Indians.  In  the  battle
of  Tippecanoe,  seeing  that  an  exposed  angle  of  the
line  was  likely  to  give  way  before  a  determined
assault,  he  led  a  cavalry  charge  against  the  savages
at  that  point.  The  manoeuvre  was  completely
successful,  but  Maj.  Daviess  fell,  shot  through  the
breast.  Counties  in  Indiana,  Illinois,  Kentucky,
and  Missouri  have  been  named  for  him.  He  pub-
lished "  A  View  of  the  President's  Conduct  con-
cerning the  Conspiracy  of  1806"  (1807).

DA  VILA,  Gil  Gonzalez  (dah'-vee-lah),  Spanish-
American  author,  b.  in  Avila,  Spain,  in  1570:  d.  in
Madrid,  Spain,  in  1658.  He  was  an  attendant  of
Cardinal  Deza  at  Rome,  studied  there,  and  returned
to  Spain,  where  he  published  several  works  that
met  with  public  approval,  and  was  appointed  preb-
endary of  the  cathedral  of  Salamanca,  chronicler  of
Castile,  and  in  1612  chronicler  of  Spanish  America.
His  publications  include  "  Historia  de  las  antlgtte-
dades  de  Salamanca"  (1606);  "La  vida  de  Don
Alonso  Tostado  de  Madrigal  Obispo  de  Avila"
(1611);  "Teatro  de  las  grandezas  de  Madrid"
(1625);  "Vida  del  rey  de  Castilla  Don  Enrique
III."  (1638);  "Teatro  de  las  iglesias  de  Esnafia"
(1640);  and  "Teatro  de  las  iglesias  de  las  Indias
Occidentals,  sus  arzobispos  y  obispos  y  cosas
memorables"  (2  vols.,  1645-'9).  He  left  unpub-
lished works,  including  "  La  vida  de  Felipe  III."
He  was  the  first  to  write  the  ecclesiastical  his-
tory of  Spanish  America.

DAVILA,  Nepomuceno,  naturalist,  b.in  Castro
Urdiales,  Spain,  in  1574 ;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in
1647.  He  was  a  monk,  and  arrived  in  Mexico  about
1600,  and  devoted  his  whole  energy  to  the  founda-
tion of  a  convent  for  his  order.  In  1619  he  acquired
for  $3,000,  from  the  Count  de  Cortina,  the  title-deed
of  the  ground  on  which  afterward  the  convent
of  San  Augustin  was  built,  which  to-day  is  occu-
pied by  the  National  library.  But  he  did  not  live
to  see  his  work  finished,  as  in  1640  he  was  thrown,
by  order  of  the  Inquisition,  into  its  dungeons,  on  a
charge  of  sorcery',  and  died  after  seven  years  of
incarceration  and  torture.  Davila  was  a  close  stu-
dent of  natural  history,  especially  the  Mexican
fauna,  and  wrote  several  treatises,  of  which  the
most  notable  one  is  "Afinidades  entre  algunas
plantas  y  los  mamiferos."  The  principal  cause
of  his  imprisonment  was,  besides  his  advanced
ideas  about  the  sensibility  of  plants  and  the  in-
telligence of  certain  animals,  and  the  relations
existing  between  them,  the  finding  in  his  cell  of
many  dried  and  stuffed  animals,  and  collections  of
plants,  as  Davila  devoted  his  leisure  to  studies  of
the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms.  He  wrote  also
the  following  works,  which  have  never  been  pub-
lished, but  are  preserved  in  the  National  library  of
Mexico :  "  Un  afio  de  caza  en  Sierra  Madre,"  u  Los
Anfibios  del  Pacifico,"  "  Los  Fosiles  de  la  Mesa
(  entral,"  and  "  Los  Paquidermos  de»Araerica."


D\\  II. A


l>.\\  Is


1»  \  >  II  V. I'.ilro Franco. Spanish- American

naturalist,  l>.  in  <  *wiiya«|iiil  in  l?bl:d.  in  1788. 1 1 « -

went  in  Paris  m  1  7  Is.  ami  there  formed  an  extensive

cal'inct  of  natural  history. In  1707  this  cabinet  wan

for 800,000  real* In  1788  he  went  to  Madrid.

tod  RM  chosen  jMTjx-tiial  din-dor  of  tliiM-aliimt  of

natural  history,  winch,  under  his  management,  be-
came one  uf  the  finest  in  BUDIM.  lie  Belonged  to
the  |f< .y.'ii  -.m -iety  Of  Madrid,  the Ib.yal MMfefltV  of

London,  and  the  Royal  sooietj  of  l^-rlin. The

catalogue  of  his  cabinet  is  beld  in  high  estimation.

DATILi  I PADILLA, \irusti... Mexican  his-

torian.  I».  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  IS88;  <|.  in  1IJ04.

He  was  a  Dominioan  lecturer  on  philosophy  and

theology  in  the  oollcgas  of  Poeblaand  Mexico, and

became  an-hbishop  of  Santo  Domingo  in  Biol, lie

d  Rome  and  Spain  to  represent  the  Dominicans

i,  and  waa  appointed  preacher  of  the  king,

Philip  111. He  left  several  works,  including  "  1 1  i--

toria  do  la  Pnnincia  «le  Santiago  do  Mcjico  de  la

/mien  de I'redicadores"  (Madri<l.  1.r>!M)),  and  "  His-

toria  de  las  antignedades  do  los  Indioa, ta  MS,

DA  VI  ON,  Antony,  clergyman.  I>.  in  Isslgny,
Normandy;  d.  in  New  Orleans  in  1 7"2T.  He  wa>
educated  in  the  seminary  of  the  Foreign  missions,
Paris,  and  after  his  ordination  embarked  for  (Que-
bec in  18801  Ho  was  appointed  pastor  of  a  church
in  Quebec,  and  continued  a  year  in  this  place.  In
the  early  port  of  17<M)  he  went  to  the  Mississippi.
and  in  .lulv  reached  Hiloxi.  He  then  tailored
•mono  the  ToniflO  tribe,  but  after  a  time  was  com-
|M-lle<i  to  take  rofngO  in  a  French  fort..  In  1704
the  Ton icas  sent  deputies  to  Mobile,  where  be  was
stationed,  begging  him  to  come  back  to  them,  and
he  returned,  lie  was  allowed  to  preach  without
interruption,  but.  finding  them  deaf  to  his  appeals,
be  deotroyed  their  temple  and  quenched  their  sa-
cred fires.  He  was  at  once  compelled  to  fly  from
the  village;  but  the  Tonicas  had  become  very
much  attached  to  him,  and  invited  him  to  return
again.  He  made  few  converts  among  them,  al-
though he  persuaded  the  chief  to  be  baptized  in
1716  and  to  wear  European  costume.  On  leaving
the  Tonicas  he  went  to  New  Orleans.

DAVIS.  Andrew  Jackson,  spiritualist,  b.  in
Orange  county,  N.  Y.,  11  Aug.,  \W>.  His  youth
was  passed  in  hard  lat>or,  and  with  little  educa-
tion, owing  to  the  extreme  poverty  of  his  parents.
In  1M43  Mr.  Levington,  of  Foughkeepsie,  is  said  to
have  developed  in  him  extraordinary  clairvoyant
powers.  Although  quite  un instructed,  it  was
said  that  he  was  able  to  discourse  fluently  upon
medical,  psychological,  ami  general  subjects.  On
7  March.  1*14,  he  fell  into  a  trance,  which  lasted
sixteen  hours,  during  which  time  he  asserts  be  con-
versed with  spiritual  lx'in<_'s  and  received  instruc-
tions M  to  his  future  teaching  from  the  Interior
state.  In  November.  1846,  while  clairvoyant,  he
dictated  to  the  Rev.  William  Pishbough,  In  New
York,  his  first  work,  "The  Principles  of  Nature,
her  Divine  Revelations,  and  a  Voice  to  Mankind."
This  Ixxik  presents  a  wide  range  of  subjects,  and
rejects  any  es|K><ial  authority  in  the  teachings  of
the  Bible.'  Mr.  Davis  has  been  more Bttoosssful  as
a  writer  than  as  a  lecturer,  and  has  lMen  princi-
pal!* instrumental  in  promoting  the  movement  of
"Spiritualism."  The  philosophical  and  theological
portions  of  his  remaining  works  are  regarded  n>
little  more  than  repetitions  <>f  his  fnM  Ix.ok.  inter-
s|x-rse<l  with  startling  assertions  concerning  things
in  heaven  and  earth  which  admit  of  no  \eritica-
tion.  These  works  are  "The  Great  Harmoiiia"
•Is..  (fa»  York.  1880  v,i);  u Philosophy  of
Spiritual  Intercourse"  (1851);  -The  iv
and  Inner  Life."  a  sequel  (1H.VI;  id  ed.,  Boston,


The  Approaching  Crisis."  a  rr>  ion  of  Dr
Bushn.  II  on  Spiritual  i-  rk.  1862):  -Thr

I'enetralia '*  I  it.-ton.  h  dT"an

autobiograpl  rk.  \<>~. .

of Health  Appetites  and Passlnns"

(Boston,  IMS);  "The  World'*  True  Redeemer"
(1H«W): "Princq  lure" M .-1.. 1868);

"Morning Lectures"

:  "Stellar  K.  n  lo  thi  Land"

"Arabula,  or  the  Divine  «Ju.
•'Memoranda of Porooni Places, and 1

"The  Fountain,  with  N  Mean-

iug"(lH7U);  and  "Mental  Disrasesand  Disorders
of  the  Brain"  (New  York.  H

DAVIS,  Asahel,  antiquary,  h,  in  Manwchuwtta
in  1791.  He  published  an  addn-<»  on  "The  Dis-
covery of  America  by  the  Northmen " (1840%  and
•'  Ainient  America  and  lb-searches  of  the  Rest"
(New  York.  1K47>.

DAVIS,  Benjamin  Franklin,  soldier,  h.  in
Alalwuna  in  1K12;  d.  at  Beverly  Ford.  \'a.,  !».Junc,
1N»W. He was graduated at the l'.  S. military

academy  in  1854, and  distinguished  himsnlf  in  both

the  infantrv  and  cavalry  service  in \
In 1HI>:>  be  Ix-.ame  ..,],, 'nel  of  the  *th New
cavalry. He  was  instantly  killed  while  command-
ing a  brigade  at  Beverly  Ford.  Va.

DAVIS.  Caroline  l!.,  author,  b.  in  Narthwood.
N.  H..  in  \Xi\.  Her  maiden  name  was  Kelly,  mid
under  that  name  she  first  gained  reputation.  Bhs
resided  in  Exeter,  N.  II..  until  her  marriage  in
lHfiT,  when  she  removed  to  Ando\er.  Mass.  She
has  written  a  large  Dumber  of  Ux.ks  f..r  Sundav-
scbool  libraries,  rounded  oa  ber  experience  as
er  in  a  mission-school.  Her  worn  include  "The
child's  Bible  stories"  (4  vols.) ;  M Little  Sermon

Talks";  "  No  Cross.  No  Crown":  and  many  other
attractive  l»«>ks  for  children.

DAVIS.  Charles,  lawyer.  I>.  in  Mansfield.  Conn..
1  Jan.,  17*u;  d.  in  Vermont  in  \*W.  II i»  ances-
tors were  Puritans,  who  had  emigrated  from  Kng-
Land  early  in  the  17th  century  and  settled  in  Mane-
field,  wlnre  his  father  resided  until  1T,.»*.,.  when  he
removed  to  Rockingham,  Vt.  He  was  graduated
at  Middlebury  in  1811,  studied  law  under  Daniel
Chipman.  of  Middlebury,  and  in  1HU  waa  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  During  his  residence  then-  be
became  engaged  in  the  exciting  political  subjects
connected  with  the  war  of  18m  '•"•.and  for  some
years  edited  the  "Vermont  Mirror,"  which  oppossd
that  war.  He  always  advocated  the  duty  of  de-
fending the  country,  however,  ami  often  served  in
the  militia.  In  l*i<>  Judge  Davis  removed  to  liar-
ton.  Orleans  co..  and  in  1818  to  VYatcrhurv.  Conn.
He  settled  in  Danville  in  1888,  and  was  •
state's  attorney  for  the  county  of  Caledonia,  which
office  be  held  seven  rears,  and  was  rv -elected  in
\k\h.  In  1841-8  be  was  V.  s.  district  ■fttotnei  of
Vermont,  and  in  \*4~t  was  elected  judge  of  prolate
for  the  district  of  Caledonia,  and  re  slsoted  I
A  bill  was  passed  in  thai  year  for  the  election  of
an  additional  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  the
place  was  offered  to  him.  Hi*  opinions  m  •
hahed  in  the  18th  and  Mth  volumes  of  th<
inont  Reports."  He  was  ohosen  to  l»-  s  repn
tive  in  the  state  legislature,  although  the  majority
of  the  town  wen'  oppOOOd  to  the  whig  jmrty.  of
which  he  was  a  memlier.

DAT!  S.  Charles.  A  ilgUfttna.  merchant,  b.
York  iii  1798;  d.  there,  87  .Ian.. 1W.7. P<  I
rears  be  was  m  tin-  iron  trad.-  with  Sidney  Bn*>kis
imd  ill  a  letter  to  Halloek,  written  fr-.m  Athens, he
vji\.  :  ••  1  d>>  not  know  how  I  can  go  bs
nessand  pig  iron  in  John  stre»-t." Ha  was  well
versed  in  commercial and financial affairs  and


94


DAVIS


DAVIS


wrote  brilliantly  and  intelligently  upon  those  sub-
jects. The  "  IVter  Serilxr  Letted  '  and  "Major
Jack  Downing*!  Letter*"  (New  York,  1834),  first
published  in  the  "Daily  Advertiser,"  detail  his
interviews  with  President  Jackson  and  the  plans
for  overthrowing  the  U.  S.  bank.  For  many  yean
his  house  in  New  York  was  the  resort  of  the  poet
Halleck  and  other  of  the  Knickerbocker  writers.

DAVIS,  Charles  Henry  Stanley,  physician,  b.
in  Goshen,  Conn..  4  March,  1840.  lie  received  his
medical  education  in  the  University  of  Maryland
and  at  the  medical-school  of  the  New  York  uni-
versity, where  ho  was  graduated  in  1865.  lie
studied  afterward  in  the  hospitals  of  New  York
and  Boston,  Paris  and  London,  and  settled  in  Meri-
den,  Conn.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Connecticut
state  legislature  in  1873,  1884,  and  1885.  He  has
travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  and  has  studied
hospital  practice  in  London  and  Paris.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  philological
society  in  1864,  and  was  its  first  corresponding  sec-
retary and  its  vice-president.  He  is  a  member  of
numerous  medical  and  historical  societies,  among
which  is  la  Societe  d'Anthropologie  of  Paris,  has
contributed  to  many  of  the  medical  and  scientific
periodicals  of  this  country  and  of  Europe,  and  was
the  editor  of  the  first  volume  of  the  "  Boston  Medi-
cal Register,"  1865.  He  has  published  a  "  History
of  Wallingford  and  Meriden "  (Meriden,  1870) ;
"The  Voice  as  a  Musical  Instrument"  (Boston,
1879) :  "  Education  and  Training  of  Feeble-Mind-
ed.  Imbecile,  and  Idiot  Children "  (New  York,
1883) ;  and  an  "  Index  to  Periodical  Literature "
(American  News  Company,  New  York,  1878-'81).

DAVIS,  Cushman  Kellogg,  senator,  b.  in
Henderson,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  June,  1838.  He
removed  with  his  parents,  when  a  child,  to  Wau-
kesha, Wis.,  attended  Carroll  college  in  that  town,
and  was  graduated  at  Michigan  university  in  1857.
He  then  studied  law,  and  in  1859  began  prac-
tice at  Waukesha.  He  became  a  2d  lieutenant  in
the  28th  Wisconsin  regiment  in  1861,  and  served
as  assistant  adjutant  general  during  most  of  the
civil  war  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Willis  A.  Gorman.
He  was  compelled  to  leave  the  army  in  1864  by  an
attack  of  typhoid  fever,  and  in  1865  went  to  Min-
nesota and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession
at  St.  Paul.  He  was  elected  to  the  Minnesota  leg-
islature in  1866,  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for
Minnesota  in  1867— '71,  and  in  1873  was  elected
governor  of  the  state  on  the  Republican  ticket,
serving  one  term,  and  declining  a  re-nomination.
He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  1875,  and  again  in  1881,  but  on  18  Jan.,
1887,  was  elected  to  the  office.  Michigan  univer-
sity gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1886.  He
has  delivered  many  lectures,  of  which  the  best
known  is  "  Modern  Feudalism "  (1870),  and  has
published  "  The  Law  in  Shakespeare  "  (1884).

DAVIS,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Barnstable,  .Mass.,
8  May,  1762;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  27  Oct.,
1835.  He  settled  in  Portland  ^then  called  Fal-
mouth) in  1782,  and  held  offices  in  Massachusetts,
of  which  Maine  was  then  a  part.  In  1804  he  re-
moved to  Boston,  and  in  1832  to  Cambridge.  Da
was  U.  S.  attorney  for  Maine  in  1796-1801,  and
solicitor-general  of  Massachusetts  in  1800-'32.  He
was  author  of  several  legal  works,  the  principal
ones  being  "  Criminal  Justice  "  (Boston,  2d  ed.,  1828)
and  " Precedents  of  Indictments"  (Boston,  1831).
— His  son,  Charles  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  16  Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  18  Feb.,  1877.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as
a  midshipman  in  1823,  and  was  attached  to  the
frigate  "  United  States,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,


in  1827-8.  In  March,  1829,  he  became  passed
midshipman,  and  was  ordered  to  the  "Ontario,"
at  t In-  Mediterranean  squadron,  lie  m-eived  his
commission  as  lieutenant  in  March,  ls:M,  and,
after  serving  in  1837-'8  on  the  •'  Vincennes,"of  the
Paeilic  squadron,  and  in  1840-'l  on  the  "Inde-
pendence, '  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  was  on  special
duty  from  1842  till  1856,  being  engaged  first  on
ordnance  duty  and  then  as  assistant  in  the  coast
survey.  During  1846-'9  he  was  occupied  in  a  sur-
vey of  the  waters  about  Nantucket,  in  the  course
of  which  he  discovered  the  "  new  south  shoal "  and
several  smaller  shoals  directly  in  the  track  of  vessels
sailing  between  New  York  and  Europe,  and  of  coast-
ing vessels  from  Boston.  These  discoveries  were
thought  to  account  for  several  wrecks  and  accidents
before  unexplained,  and  called  forth  the  special  ac-
knowledgments of  insurance  companies  and  mer-
chants. He  became  commander  in  June,  1854,  and
was  given  the  "  St.  Marys,"  in  the  Pacific  squadron,
during  1857-'9,  after  which  he  was  appointed  super-
intendent of  the  "American  Nautical  Almanac"
He  had  filled  this  place  in  1849-'56,  and  the  exist-
ence of  the  "Almanac"  was  largely  due  to  his
efforts.  In  November,  1861,  he  became  captain,
and  during  that
yearwasa  mem-
ber of  the  board
of  officers  con-
vened for  the
purpose  of  mak-
ing a  thorough
investigation  of
the  southern
coast  and  har-
bors, their  ac-
cess and  de-
fences. The  in-
formation thus
acquired  led  to
the  organiza-
tionof  the  expe-
dition against
Port  Royal,  S.
C,  in  which
Capt.  Davis  was
chief of staff

and  fleet-officer.  In  May,  1862,  he  was  appointed
flag-officer  of  the  Mississippi  flotilla,  succeeding
Andrew  H.  Foote  in  that  capacity.  Soon  after
his  arrival,  the  Confederate  fleet  lying  below  Fort
Pillow,  consisting  of  eight  iron-clad  steamers,
four  of  which  were  fitted  up  as  rams,  steamed
up  for  an  engagement.  The  flotilla  was  quickly
put  in  motion  to  receive  them,  and,  after  an  ac-
tion lasting  about  an  hour,  three  of  the  Confed-
erate gun-boats  were  disabled,  and  the  fleet  re-
treated under  the  guns  of  Fort  Pillow.  Subse-
quently (5  June)  the  fort  was  abandoned.  Three
days  later  the  flotilla  moved  down  the  river  near
Memphis,  and  again  engaged  the  Confederate  fleet.
A  running  fight  ensued,  in  which  all  the  Confeder-
ate vessels  were  either  captured  or  destroyed,  ex-
cept the  "Van  Horn."  After  the  engagement
Capt.  Davis  received  the  surrender  of  Memphis,
then  joined  Admiral  Farragut,  and  was  engaged
in  operations  around  Vicksburg,  and  in  expedi-
tions up  the  Yazoo  river.  He  was  commissioned
commodore  in  July,  1862,  and  became  chief  of
the  bureau  of  navigation  in  Washington,  and  was
made  rear-admiral,  to  date  from  February,  1863.
In  1865  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the
naval  observatory  in  Washington,  and  in  1867
commanded  the  bouth  Atlantic  squadron.  He  re-
turned to  Washington  in  1869,  and,  after  being


-<2^&aM,


DAVIS


DAVIS


00


made  a  mom  I  nt  <>f  the  light-house  U>ard.  U^ainc
riiiiiiiiHtiili'r  of  the  Norfolk  navy- yard.  !>ut  later  rc-
■Md  his  old  place  of  Mi|MTiiitrinli'iir  of  tin-  naval

rvetory.  In*  was  a  memltcr  of  numerous  scien-
tific ■ootetfao,  and  in  February,  |m77,  m  elected  ■
BMBbor  of  tln<  National  academy  of
Ailimral  Davis,  during  his  connection  vs  it  h  the
coast  survey,  was  led  to  investigate  tin-  law>  of
tiilal  action,  and  published  a  "Memoir  upon  the

ogloal  Action  of  the  Tidal  and  other  Currents
of  the  Ocean,"  in  the  "Memoirs  of  the  American

lemj  "  (Boston. 1848),  and  "The  Law  of De-
posit of  the  KIinmI  Tide;  its  Dynamical  Action  and

■ ."  being  vol.  iii.  of  the  ••Smithsonian  Con-
tributions'* (Washington.  188SV  Be  contributed
various  translations  and  articles  on  mathematical
astronomy  and  geodesy  to  periodicals,  and  was  the
author  of  an  Knglish  translation  of  (Jauss's  ••  Theria
Mot  us  Oocporum  Cudestium  "  (Boston,  1H.~>X). —  1 1  i-
soti.  Charles  Henry,  naval  ofloar,  l>.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  2"  Aug.  1848,  was  graduated  at  the
I  >.  naval  academy  in  1K»!4.  and  served  in  the  Med-
iterranean squadron  till  lHfii.  meanwhile  becoming
en-ign  and  master  in  186(1.  From  18(57  till  1H70
he  was  on  the  "  Guerriere  "  in  the  South  Atlantic
squadron,  and  from  1872  till  1874  on  the  Pacific.  He
received  Ins  coinmission  M  lieutenant  in  March,
I86e\  And  beejUBO  ■  lieutenant-commander  in  De-
(tiiiIkt  of  the  same  year.  From  1878  till  1MM5  he
was  engaged  principally  in  astronomical  work,  at
first  in  the  naval  obscrvatorv  in  Washington,  and
then  in  expeditions  for  the  determination  of  longi-
tude by  means  of  the  submarine  cables  from
Europe  to  the  Atlantic  islands  and  the  eastern
coast  of  South  America  during  1877-"9;  in  India,
China,  and  Japan  during  lK81-'2,  and  on  the  west-
ern coasts  of  South  and  Central  America  daring
1888-'4.  In  1885  he  was  made  commander  and
given  the  training-ship  "Saratoga."  His  investi-
gations have  been  published  by  the  government.
and  are  entitled  " Chronometer  Rates  as  affected
by  Toni|>orature  and  other  Causes  "  (1877) ;  with
Lieut. -Coin.  Francis  M.  Often, M  Telegraphic  Deter-
mination of  Longitudes,  embracing  the  Meridians
of  LislMin.  Madeira,  Porto  Grande,  Para,  IVrnam-
luieo,  Bahia,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Montevideo,  and
Buenos  Ayres,  with  the  Latitudes  of  the  Several
Stations"  (1880);  "Telegraphic  Determination  of
Longitudes  in  India,  China,  and  Japan"  (lv
and  with  Lieut.  John  A.  Norris. "Telegraphic  De-
termination of  Longitudes,  in  Mexico  and  on  the
West  Coasts  of  Central  and  South  America  "(1885).
DAVIS.  Daniel,  soldier,  d.  17  Sent..  1*14.  He
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  New  York  vol-
unteers, 2U  June.  1812,  and  brigadier-genera]  in
1814.  He  was  killed  at  the  head  of  his  brigade  in
the  sortie  from  Fort  Brie.

DAVIS, David,  jurist,  b.  in  Cecil  oonntr,  Md.,

I  March.  1K15;  d.  in  Bloomington,  111..  MJune,
1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Kcnyoii  college,  Ohio,
in  1888,  studied  law  in  Massachusetts,  and  went
through  a  course  at  the  law-school  of  New  Haven,
removed  to  Illinois  in  18"W,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  after  which  he  settled  in  Blooiningfon.
He  was  elected  to  the  Mate  legislature  in  1K44.  was
a  member  of  the  convention  that  formed  the  state
constitution  in  1S47.  elected  judge  of  the  eighth
judicial  circuit  of  the  state  in  1848,  W  elected
in  1H.VS,  and  again  in  W>1.  resigning  in  October,
\*>>'2.  He  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Aliraham
Lincoln,  and  rode  the  circuit  with  him  every  year.

II  i  delegate  at  large  to  the  Chicago  conven-
tion that  Dominated  Mr.  Lincoln  for  the  prc-i-
deoof  in  1H*M»,  accompanied  him  00  his  journey  to

nington,  and in October, 1868,  was  appoint-


rf5h&#-*4?


ed  a  justice  of  the  supreme  oourt  of  the  I
State*. After 1'n -id.  nt Lincoln'*  assess!  nollnu

Judge  Davis  was  an  administrator  of  hiaestate. In

1890  Ik-  held,  with the  minority  of  the  supreme

court,  that  the  acts  of  congrcn*  making  government

notes a legal

tender  in |

ment  of  del

were  const  it  u-

tional. In  Pob>

ruary. 1898, the

National 00s>

roatkio  of  the

labor  reform
party  nomi-
nated him  as
its  candidate
for  president,
on  a  platform
that  declared,
among  other
things,  in  fa-
vor of  a  na-
tional currency
"  Itaaed  on  the
faith  and  re-
sources of  the
uation,"and  in-
terchangeable with  .w>-jM-r-cent.  bonded  U
ernment,  and  demanded  the  establishment  of  an
eight-hour  law  throughout  the  country,  and  the
payment  of  the  national  debt  "without  mortgaging.

the  property  of  the  people  to  enrich  capitalists."
Iii  answer  to  the  letter  informing  him  of  the  nomi-
nation. Judge  Davis  said  :  "  Be  pleased  to  thank  the

convention  tor  the  unexpected  honor  which  they
have  conferred  upon  DM.  The  chief  magistracy  of
the  republic  should  neither  l»e  sought  nor  declined
1  iv  any  American •  citizen."  His  name  was  also  used
before  the  Liberal  Republican  convention  at  Cin-
cinnati the  same  year,  and  received  W24,  votes  on
the  first  ballot.  After  the  regular  nomination*
had  been  made,  be  determined  to  retire  from  the
contest,  and  s<,  announced  in  a  final  answer  to
the  labor  reformers.  He  resigned  his  net  on  the
supreme  bench  to  take  his  place  in  the  I".  S.  senate
on  4  March.  1877, having  been  elected  l>v  the  rotes:
of  independent*,  and  democrats  to  muhoI  John
A.  Logan.  He  was  rated  in  the  senate  as  an  inde-
pendent, but  noted  more  commonly  with  the  demo-
crats. After  the  death  of  i'n -ubtit  (iartield  in
1881 Judge Davis was 000080 ['resident of the

senate.  He  resigned  his  eeai  in  1888,  and  retired
to  his  home  in  Bloomington.  when-  he  resided
quietly  till  his  death.  The  degree  of  LL.D.WM
conferred  on  him  by  Williams  college.  B« •;.
lege, and  the  Wesleyeo  university  at  BlooodngtoB,
DAVIS,  Kdwin 'Hamilton,  Mohamlogiet,  b>  m
Ross  county,  Ohio,  81  Jan.,  1M1 :  d.  in  nan
citv.  1">  May.  18B8.  He  was  graduated  nt  Cincin-
nati medical  college  in  lKiM.  He  practi^-d  in
Chillicothe  till  1880,  when  he  was  called  t<>  the
chair  of  materia  medico  and  thorapeatMl  in  the
New  York  medical  college.  Dr.  Davis  wa-
th odootOiaof  the  "  American  Medical  Month-
ly." He  gave  much  attention  M  the  lOjhjBOl  of
American  antiquities, aided  Charles  Whittlesey  in
explorations  of  ancient  mounds  in  1888, and  fn>m

1845  till  1847. aaaiated  bo  Bptoata  8. Sqalor^ ha

-urveved  nearly  one  hundred  ftOfJM  of  at->nginal
earth-works,  aiid  o|Minsl  two  hundred  mounds  at

hie  own  at^es*** lie  gathered  the  largsot  ooUeo-

tioti  of  mound-relics  tliat  has  DM  made  in  this
OOUntry,  which  now  f..rm-  |wirt  of  the  collection  of
Blaekuiores  iuum'inii in  ^alisluiry.  Knglaud. A


96


DAVIS


DAVIS


second  collection  of  duplicates,  with  the  results  of
subsequent  collecting,  is  now  in  the  possession  of
the  American  museum  of  natural  history,  New
York.  The  results  of  his  extensive  explorations
arc  embodied  in  "Ancient  Monuments  of  the
.Mississippi  Valley."  which  formed  the  first  volume
of  the  Smithsonian  contributions  to  knowledge
(1848).  This  work  was  characterized  by  the  d&-
tinguished  Swiss  archaeologist,  A.  Morlot,  in  a
paper  before  the  American  philosophical  society
in  1862,  as  being  "as  glorious  a  monument  of
American  science  as  Bunker  Hill  is  of  American
bravery."  During  the  spring  of  1854  Dr.  Davis
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  archaeology  before
the  Lowell  institute in  Boston,  which  were  re-

Seated  in  Brooklyn  and  New  York. — His  son,
ohn  Woodbridge,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  19  Aug.,  1854,  after  some  experience  in  con-
nection with  railroad  surveying  parties,  was  gradu-
ated with  the  degree  of  C.  E.  at  Columbia  college
school  of  mines  in  1878.  While  an  undergraduate
he  published  "  Formulae  for  the  Calculation  of
Railroad  Earthwork  and  Average  Haul"  (New
York,  1876),  which,  within  a  year  after  its  publica-
tion, was  adopted  as  a  text-book  in  six  engineering
schools  in  the  United  States.  During  1879  he
published  in  "  Van  Nostrand's  Engineering  Maga-
zine "  a  series  of  mathematical  papers  devoted  to
original  solutions  of  engineering  calculations.  The
material  of  these  articles  has  since  been  incorpo-
rated into  the  text-books  on  engineering,  mechan-
ics, and  mathematics.  His  method  for  calculating
land  surveys  has  been  introduced  in  the  principal
treatises  on  that  subject,  and  is  now  used  in  lieu
of  older  methods  for  determining  areas  of  land.
For  several  years  after  graduation  he  was  profes-
sionally occupied,  and  then  established  and  be-
came principal  of  the  Woodbridge  school  in  New
York  city,  which  has  for  its  special  purpose  the

Sreparing  of  students  for  technical  schools. —
oseph  Slociim.  brother  of  Edwin  Hamilton,
lawyer,  b.  in  Pickaway  county,  Ohio,  21  Nov.,  1812;
d.  in  Mount  Vernon,  Ohio,  21  Dec.,  1884.  He  was
graduated  at  Ken  yon  in  1835,  and,  after  studying
at  the  Cincinnati  law  school,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1837.  Mr.  Davis  settled  in  Mount  Vernon,
and  there  practised  his  profession  in  connection
with  Columbus  Delano.  He  was  twice  elected
judge,  and  held  other  offices,  both  national  and
local.  He  was  mayor  of  Mount  Vernon  for  sev-
eral terms,  and  paymaster  in  the  U.  S.  army  dur-
ing 1864-'5. — Wefter  Renick,  another  brother,
clergyman,  b.  in  Circleville,  Ohio,  1  April,  1815,
was  educated  at  Kenyon  college,  and  received  the
degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  College  of  medicine  and
surgery  in  Cincinnati.  Subsequently  he  became
a  minister  in  the  Methodist  church,  and  entered
the  Ohio  conference  in  1835.  He  then  filled  vari-
ous pastorates  in  West  Virginia  and  Ohio  until
1853,  when  he  was  transferred  to  the  Missouri
conference  and  stationed  at  St.  Louis.  In  1854  he
became  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  McKendree
college,  where  he  remained  until  1858,  acting  as

f  resident  during  his  last  year  at  that  institution,
le  was  then  elected  president  of  Baker  university,
but  afterward  resigned,  and  for  fourteen  consecu-
tive years  was  appointed  to  a  presiding  eldership.
During  the  civil  war  he  went  to  the  front  as  chap-
lain of  the  12th  Kansas  infantry,  and  then  was
commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  to  raise  and  or-
ganize the  16th  Kansas  cavalry  in  1862,  of  which
he  became  colonel,  and  continued  in  command  of
that  regiment  until  the  close  of  the  war.  Dr.
Davis  was  a  member  of  the  first  state  legislature
of  Kansas,  and  also  held  the  office  of  superintend-


ent of  public  instruction  in  Douglas  county.  He
was  a  member  of  the  general  conferences  of  1868.
18?2,  and  1880,  and  a  delegate  to  the  CEonmenioa]
Methodist  oonfeiWIM  in  London,  and  to  the  Cen-
tennial conference  held  in  Baltimore,  lid.,  in  1884.
He  edited,  in  is,-)!).  "The  Kansas  Message,"  the
fiiNt  paper  published  in  Baldwin  City,  and  has
published  several  sermons.

DAVIS,  Emerson,  clergyman,  1>.  in  Ware,
Mass.,  15  July.  1 796 ;  d.  in  Westfield,  Mass.,  8  June,
1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1821.  i;ml
took  charge  of  the  academy  at  Westfield  until  the
following  year,  when  he  became  tutor  at  Williams.
He  returned  to  the  academy  of  Westfield,  remain-
ing there  until  1836,  and  was  then  installed  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  of  that  town.  In
1861  he  was  made  president  of  Williams  college,
which  place  he  held  until  1868.  He  published  an
"Historical  Sketch  of  Westfield"  (1826);  "The
Teacher  Taught "  (Boston.  1839);  and  "The  Half
Century"  (Boston,  1851).  a  work  of  great  labor,
which  gives,  in  a  condensed  form,  facts  relative  to
the  intellectual,  moral,  physical,  and  mechanical
progress  and  discoveries  of  the  nineteenth  century.
Phis  work  had  a  large  circulation,  and  was  re-
printed in  Great  Britain.  He  published  essays  and
sermons,  and  left  five  manuscript  volumes  of  bio-
graphical writings  upon  the  Congregational  clergy-
men of  New  England.

DAVIS,  Garrett,  senator,  b.  in  Mount  Sterling,
Ky.,  10  Sept.,  1801;  d.  in  Paris,  Ky.,  22  Sept.,
1872.  He  received  an  academic  education,  and
was  employed  as  a  writer  in  the  county  and  circuit
courts  of  his  district.  He  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1823.  He  was  elected  to
the  state  legislature  in  1833,  and  twice  re-elected.
He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention from  1839  till  1847,  when  he  became  a
representative  in  congress  from  Kentucky,  but  de-
clined a  re-election,  devoting  himself  to  agricul-
ture. He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  Kentucky
in  1861  for  the  term  ending  in  1867,  and  served  on
the  committees  on  foreign  relations,  on  territories,
claims,  and  pensions.  In  1864  he  was  appointed
a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  In  Janu-
ary, 1867,  he  was  re-elected  to  the  senate  for  the
term  ending  in  1873.  He  was  of  small  physique,
but  endowed  with  wonderful  endurance.  His
speeches  were  characterized  by  sarcasm  and  fierce
invective,  as  well  as  laborious  research.  Early  in
life  he  became  the  friend  of  Henry  Clay,  possess-
ing his  confidence  and  high  regard. — His  brother,
Amos,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mount  Sterling,  Ky. ;  d.  in
Owingsville,  Ky.,  5  June,  1835,  received  an  aca-
demic education,  and  studied  and  practised  law  at
Mount  Sterling.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky
legislature  in  1819,  1825,  1827,  and  1828,  and  a
representative  in  congress  from  1833  till  1835.

DAVIS,  George  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sand-
wich, Mass.,  12  Jan.,  1810;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  17
June,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1829,
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  at
Greenfield  in  1832.  In  that  year  he  established
the  "  Franklin  Mercury,"  which  he  conducted  with
ability  until  its  sale  in  1836.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Massachusetts  senate  from  1839  till  1840,  and
of  congress  from  1851  till  1853.  His  conversation
was  extremely  brilliant,  winning  admiration  from
Thackeray.  His  "Speeches  in  Congress"  were
published  (Washington.  1859  >.

DAVIS,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  East  Hamp-
ton, N.  Y..  15  Sept,  1 T T 1 ":  d.  in  Clinton.  X.  Y„  8
March,  1869,  His  ancestors  were  from  Kidder-
minster, England,  and  parishioners  of  Richard
Baxter. They  settled  in  New  Havin,  Conn.,  and


DAVlfl


DAvTB


09


finally  in  Kast  I Intiiptou. Hi-  father  wit-. a  farmer.

r,  and  tanner. Henry  was  prepared  f<»r

^c  iii  Clinton  academy,  mm  was  graduated  at

in  1788,  when  be  accepted  a  tutorship  in  Will-

i,  which  ho  held  till  January,  1798,  going  In  thai

war  to  Soman,  Oooil,  in  order  to  study  theology

Dr.Charlei  Backus, In  Jolji  <>f  tin-  following

year  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  t In-  Association

tUand  county,  and  shortly  afterward  appointed

tutor  in  Vale,  where  he  remained  until  I8D8. In

.  he  wo*  called  to  tin-  profcssonhlp  of  Qraah  in

Union,  and,  after  ■pending  three  years  there,  l«-
catne  president  of  Middlebury,  and  wits  ordained  at

the  mme  time. The  degr f  l>.  l>.  was  conferred

upon  him  by  Union,  and  the  Greek  professorship
again  offered  him.  which  he  declined.  He  was  ap-
pointed  president  of  Hamilton  oollege.  where  he
remained  until  his  resignation  in  lsW.  He  was
active  in  establishing  the  theological  seminary  at
Auliiirn.  ami  the  American  board  of  commissioners
for  foreign  mieriona.  After  his  resignation,  I>r.
Davis  published  a  "Narrative  of  the  Kmbarraes-
ments  and  Decline  of  Hamilton  Cottage"  (1833).
II  also  published  many  sermons  and  addresses. —
His  ion,  Thomas  T., lawyer, b.  In  Biiddlebury,  Vt..
H  Log*,  1810:  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y..  I  May.  1878,
was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  18#1.  Ib-
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Syra-
He  was  counsel  for  the  principal
manufacturing  establishments  of  that  city,  ami
took  an  active  interest  in  railroad  and  mining  en-
terprises. In  1802  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and
re-elected  in  1884  After  that  date  be  resided  in
Syracuse,  devoting  himself  to  his  law  practice.

DAVIS.  Henry  Winter,  statesman.  I.,  in  An-
napolis. M<1.,  l(t  Aug.,  1817;  d.  in  Baltimore,  :!•»
Die.  lsr.."i.  His  father.  Rev.  Henry  Lynn  Davis,  of
the  l'mtestant  Episcopal  church,  was  the  president

of  St.  Jonn's  col-
lege, at  Annapo-
lis, and  rector  of
St.  Ann's  parish.
He  lost  both  offi-
ces on  account  of
his  Federal  |K>li-
tics,  and  removed
to  Wilmington,
Del.,  leaving  his
son  with  Eliza-
beth Brown  Win-
ter, an  aunt,  who
possessed  a  noble
character,  and  was
rigid  in  her  sys-
tem of  training
children.  The  boy
afterward  went  to
Wilmington,  and
was  instructed  un-
der his  father's
supervision.  In
the  family  returned  to  Maryland  and  settled
In  Anne  Arundel  county.  Here  Henry  Winter  be-
Oame  much  attached  to  field-sports. and  gave  little
promise  of  scholarly  attainments.  He  roamed  about
the  country,  always  attended  by  one  of  his  father's
slaves,  with  an  old  fowling-piece  upon  his  shoulder,
burning  much  powder  and  returning  with  a  small
amount  of  game.  The  insight  into  slavery  that
he  thus  gained  affected  him  strongly.  He  mid,  in
after  years:  "My  familiar  association  with  tin-
slaves,  while  a  boy,  gave  me  great  insight  into  their
feelings  and  views.  They  spoke  with  freedom  In-
fore  a  boy  what  they  w.uild  have  repressed  before
a  man.  They  were  far  from  indifferent  to  their
vol.  n. — '<


condition;  they  felt  wronged,  and  sighed  for  free*
dom, They  were  attached  I  r,  »nd  loved

in.,  vet  they  habitually  »|n,1.

would  deliver  them."' Be  wis.  educated  in

andria,  and  at  KauyoUOOlleg  wu  gradu-

ated in  1*17. Hi s  father  died  in  that  year.  I-
a  few  slaves  to  be  divided  l.-t  we,  n  himself  and  hi-
sister,  I. ut he  would not sttow  them  to  I*  sold.

although  benight  have  punned  i di  studies  with

ease  and  comfort. Rather  than  do this  he  ob-
tained a tutorship, and, notwithMai
arduous  tasks,  read  the  COUTH  of  law  in  U

vanity  of  Virginia,  which  he  enftend  In  1839.

The  expanses  of his legal studies «i

with  the  proceed!  Of  •MM  land that Ins  nuiit hail

sold  for  the  purposa, He  began  |

andria, Va., I.ut first attaine<| celebrity in the

Hpi-copa!  con\eiitioii  of  Man  land  by  In*  lltftfrHI

<>f  Dr.  II.  v.  D.  Johns  against  the  aocuntiou  "f
Bishop  Whittinghan  for  having  rlolatad  the  canon

Of  the  Kpiscopal  ohurofa  in  OOfMOnting  to  officiate
in  the  Methodist  Bpfcftppal  church.  In  U
removed  to  Baltimore,  where  he  held  a  high  so-
cial and  professional  position.  He  was  n  promi-
nent whig,  and  known  as  the  brilliant  orator  and
controversialist  of  the  Scott  canvass  in  |s*rj  ||,.
was  elected  a  member  of  IMHlMien  tor  the  :U\  dis-
trict  of  Maryland  (part  of  Baltimore)  in  lxVI,  and
re-elected  in  1858,  KTving  00  the  cimm;"
ways  and  means.  After  the  dissolution  of  the  whijr
party  he  joined  the  American  or  Know-nothing
party.  He  was  re-elected  to  oongresi  in  1868.  and
in  1M.")!(  voted  for  Mr.  Pennington,  the  republican
candidate  tor  speaker,  thus  drawing  upon  hinealf
much  abuse  and  reproach.  The  legislature  of
Maryland  "  decorated  him  with  Ha  censure/*  as  he
expressed  it  on  the  Boor  of  the  house;  but  be  de-
clared to  his  constituents  that,  if  they  would  not
allow  their  representative  to  exercise  hi*  private
judgment  sa  to  what  were  the  Inst  interests  of  the
state, ■•  You may send a tlave tO OOngn  -

you  can  not  send  me.*1  Alter  the  attack  on  the
i>th  Massachusetts  regiment  in  Baltimore  in  1861,
Mr.  Davis  published  a  card  announcing  himself
as  an  "unconditional  union"  candidate  for  con-
gress, and  conducted  his  canvass  almost  alone.
amid  a  storm  of  reproach  ami  abuse,  being  defeat-
ed.  but  receiving  about  6,000  votes.  When  Mr.
Lincoln  was  nominat.il  in  \HCAI,  Mr.  Devil  was
offend  the  nomination  for  vice-president,  but  do-
(lined  it  ;  and  when  the  question  of  his  eppohlt-
inent  to  the  cabinet  was  agitated,  be  urged  the
selection  of  John  A.  (iiliner  in  his  stead.  He  was
again  In  congress  in  1868-*5,and  served  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs. Although

representing  I  slave  state.  Mr.  Davis  tM  OOnspSOU-

oiis  for  unswerving  fidelity  to  the  Union  and  ad-

of  emancipation. He heartily  nppoctod

the  administration,  but  deprecated  the  assumption

of  extraordinary  powen  by  the  exeoutive,  and  <1<-
nnunced  con  wardlv  for  not  authorizing

by  statute  what  it  sxptctfd  that  depart  nani  to  d'>.
rtj  favored  the  enlistment  of  nagron  in  the
army,  and  said.  "The  In-st  deed  of  emancipation  k
a  musket  on  the  shoulder."  In  the  summer  of
Isim  be  made  a  speech  in  Chicago  in  favor  ol
■Uffnge. Mr.  Davis  was  denounced  by  jx.lit

as  iinpnKti.al.  Heused  to  say  thai  bewhocoav
pronuaed  ■  moral  principle  was  a  nuendrai  but
that  he  who  would  not  oonnconfn  ■  political

measure  was  a  fool. Mr.  Davis  possessed  M  <m-
usuallv  fine  library,  and  was  gifted  with  ■
memory  and  a  brilliant mind,  which  WM  uint.il
with  many  (tcrsonal  advantages. Inheriting

boJarahip  from  his  father,  he  had  received


98


DAVIS


DAVIS


also  a  share  of  his  mother's  milder  qualities,  which
won  many  friends,  although,  to  the  public,  he
seemed  stern  and  dictatorial.  At  his  death  con-
gress set  apart  a  day  for  the  commemoration  of
his  public  services,  an  honor  never  before  paid  to
mi  t\-inember  of  congress.  He  published  a  book
cut  it  led  the  "  War  of  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman  in  the
Nineteenth  Century"  (Baltimore,  1858).  His  col-
lected speeches,  together  with  a  eulogy  by  his  col-
league, John  A.  J.  Cresswell,  were  published  in
New  York  in  1867.

DAVIS,  Isaac,  patriot,  b.  in  1745 ;  d.  in  Concord,
Mass.,  19  April,  if 75.  He  was  captain  of  the  Ac-
ton minute-men,  and  led  them  against  the  British
at  Concord  bridge,  saying :  "  I  have  not  a  man  that
is  afraid  to  go."  He  was  killed  by  the  first  volley.
Bancroft  describes  him  as  "  stately  in  his  person,
a  man  of  few  words ;  earnest  even  to  solemnity."
His  body,  with  those  of  two  of  his  company,  was
brought  to  his  home  and  laid  in  the  bedroom  of
his  wife,  from  whom  he  had  parted  only  a  few
hours  before.  The  three  men  "were  followed  to
the  village  graveyard  by  a  concourse  of  the  neigh-
bors from  miles  around."  Mrs.  Davis  lived  to  a
great  age.  When  she  was  over  ninety,  "  the  United
States  in  congress  bethought  themselves  to  pay
honors  to  her  husband's  martyrdom."

DAVIS,  Isaac,  lawyer,  b.  in  Northborough,
Mass.,  2  June,  1799;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  1
April,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1822,
studied  law,  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Worcester,  Mass.,  where  he  soon  rose  to
eminence.  He  was  mayor  of  Worcester  for  three
years,  and  for  eleven  years  a  member  of  the  Massa-
chusetts senate.  Mr.  Davis  was  a  zealous  promoter
of  popular  education.  He  was  chosen  a  member
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Brown  university  in
1838,  and  a  fellow  in  1851.  For  forty  years  he  was
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Worcester
academy,  and  for  some  time  was  an  active  member
of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  education.  He  has
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

DAVIS,  Jefferson,  statesman,  b.  in  that  part  of
Christian  county,  Ky.,  which  now  forms  Todd
county,  3  June,  1808 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  6  Dec.,  1889.
His  fiither,  Samuel  Davis,  had  served  in  the  Revo-
lution, and,  when  Jefferson  was  an  infant,  removed
with  his  family  to  a  place  near  Woodville,  Wilkin-
son co.,  Miss.  Young  Davis  entered  Transylvania
college,  Kentucky,  but  left  in  1824,  on  his  appoint-
ment by  President  Monroe  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy.  On  his  graduation,  in  1828,  he  was  as-
signed to  the  1st  infantry,  and  served  on  the  fron-
tier, taking  part  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  of  1831-'2.
He  was  promoted  to  first  lieutenant  of  dragoons
on  4  March,  1833,  but,  after  more  service  against
the  Indians,  abruptly  resigned  on  30  June,  1835,
and  having  married,  after  a  romantic  elopement,
the  daughter  of  Zachary  Taylor,  then  a  colonel  in
the  army,  settled  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  and  became
a  cotton-planter.  Here  he  pursued  a  life  of  study
and  retirement  till  1843,  when  he  entered  politics  in
the  midst  of  an  exciting  gubernatorial  canvass.  He
was  chosen  an  elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dallas  ticket
in  1844,  made  a  reputation  as  a  popular  speaker,
and  in  1845  was  sent  to  congress,  taking  his  seat
in  December  of  that  year.  He  at  once  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  debate,  sneaking  on  the  tariff,  the  Ore-
gon question,  and  military  matters,  especially  with
reference  to  the  preparations  for  war  with  Mexico.
On  6  Feb.,  1846,  in  a  speech  on  the  Oregon  ques-
tion, he  spoke  of  the  "  love  of  union  in  our  hearts,"
and,  speaking  of  the  battles  of  the  Revolution,
sjiid :  "  They  form  a  monument  to  the  common
glory  of  our  common  country."


In  June,  1846,  be  resigned  his  seat  in  the  hou9e
to  become  colonel  of  tin  1-t  MIwImIimiI  volunteer
rifles,  which  had  unanimously  electee!  him  to  that
office.  Having  joined  his  regiment  at  New  Orleans,
he  led  it  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Taylor  on  the  Rjo
Grande.  At  Monterey  he  charged  on  Fort  Leneril
without  bayonets,  led  his  command  through  the
streets  nearly  to  the  Grand  Plaza  through  a  sfann
of  shot,  and  afterward  served  on  the  eomuii-sion
for  arranging  the  surrender  of  the  place.  At  Bona
Vista  his  regiment  was  charged  by  a  Mexican  bri-
gade of  lancers,  greatly  its  superior  in  numbers,  in
a  last  desperate  effort  to  break  the  American  lints.
Col.  Davis  formed  his  men  in  the  shape  of  a  letter
V,  open  toward  the  enemy,  and  thus,  by  exposing
his  foes  to  a  covering  fire,  utterly  routed  them,
though  he  was  unsupported.  He  was  severely
wounded,  but  remained  in  the  saddle  till  the  close
of  the  fight,  and  was  complimented  for  coolness
and  gallantry  in  the  commander-in-chief  s  despatch
of  6  March,  i847.  His  regiment  was  ordered  home
on  the  expiration  of  its  term  of  enlistment,  and  on
17  May,  1847,  Col.  Davis  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Polk  a  brigadier-general,  but  declined  the
commission  on  the  ground  that  a  militia  appoint-
ment by  the  Federal  executive  was  unconstitutional
He  was  appoint-
ed by  the  gov-
ernor of  Missis-
sippi to  fill  a
vacancy  in  the
U.  S.  senate  in
August,  1847,
and  in  January,
1848,  the  legisla-
ture unanimous-
ly elected  him
senator,  and  re-
elected him  in
1850  for  a  full
term.  He  was
made  chairman
of  the  senate
committee  on
military  affairs,
and  here,  as  in

the  house,  was  active  in  the  discussions  on  the
various  phases  of  the  slavery  question  and  the  im-
portant work  of  the  session,  including  the  fugi-
tive-slave law,  and  the  other  compromise  measures
of  1850.  Mr.  Davis  proposed  the  extension  of
the  Missouri  compromise  line  to  the  Pacific,  and
continued  a  zealous  advocate  of  state  rights.  He
was  the  unsuccessful  state-rights  or  "  resistance  "
candidate  for  governor  of  his  state  in  1851,  though
by  his  personal  popularity  he  reduced  the  Union
majority  from  7,500  to  999.  He  had  resigned  his
seat  in  the  senate  to  take  part  in  the  canvass,  and,
after  a  year  of  retirement,  actively  supported
Franklin  Pierce  in  the  presidential  contest  of  1852.
After  the  election  of  Gen.  Pierce,  Mr.  Davis  re-
ceived the  portfolio  of  war  in  his  cabinet,  and  ad-
ministered it  with  great  credit.  Among  other
ohangee,  he  proposed  the  use  of  camels  in  the  ser-
vice on  the  western  plains,  introduced  an  improved
system  of  infantry  tactics,  iron  gun-carriages,  rifled
muskets  and  pistols,  and  the  use  of  the  Minie  ball.
Four  regiments  were  added  to  the  army,  the  de-
fences on  the  sea-coast  and  frontier  were  strength-
ened, and,  as  a  result  of  experiments,  heavy  guns
were  cast  hollow,  and  a  larger  grain  of  powder  was
adopted.  While  in  the  senate.  Mr.  Davis  had  ad-
vocated the  construction  of  a  Pacific  railway  as  a
military  necessity,  and  a  means  of  pi  vaulting  the
Pacific  coast  to  the  Union,  and  he^as  now  put  in


DAVIS


DAVIS


charge  uf  the  organization  and  equipment  of  the
surveying  jmrtit's  s*-nt  out  to  examine  the  various

routes  proposed. Ha  also  had  oherweof  tdie  enptro-

f>rmtioii  forth*  < x  ten-ion  of  the  capitol. Mr.  I »n\  i-
sfl  tin-  cabinet  at  the  dose  <»f  Irasidant  Plei
term  In  is">r,  and  in  the  snme  rear  entered  Um
senate  again. ll«'  oppoaad  the  Fiench  apoUatloa

bill,  advocated  tin-  southern  routs  for  tin-  Pacific
railroad,  and  opposed  lb*  doctrine  Of  "  |M>|>iilar
reignty,"  often  encountering  Stephen  A.  Doug-
las  in  debate  on  this  question.  A ft«r  tha  settle-
ment <>f  the  Kansas  contest  by  the  passage  of  the
Kansas  conference  hill,  in  which  he  had  taken  a
chief  part,  he  wrote  to  the  jx-oplc  of  his  state  that
it  VM  "  tin-  triumph  of  all  for  which  we  contended."
Mr.  I>:i\is  was  the  recognized  democratic  leader  in
the  .'tilth  congress,  lie  had  made  a  tour  of  the
eastern  states  in  1H.">H,  making  s|»eechcs  at  Boston,
Portland,  Me,,  New  York,  and  other  place*,  and  in
18."jl»,  in  reply  to  an  invitation  to  attend  the  Webster
hbthday  festival  in  Boston,  wrote  a  letter  denounc-
ing "  partisans  who  avow  the  purpose  of  obliterat-
ing the  landmarks  of  our  fathers, '  and  containing
strong  Union  sentiment*.  He  had  bean  frequently
mentioned  as  a  democratic  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency, and  received  many  votes  in  the  convention
of  18W),  though  his  friends  announced  that  he  did
not  desire  the  nomination.  Before  congress  met,
in  thcautumnof  1S<M>,  Mr.  Davis  was  summoned  to
Washington  by  members  of  President  Buchanan's
cabinet  to  suggest  some  modifications  of  the  forth-
coming message  to  congress.  The  suggest  ions  were
made,  and  were  adopted.  In  the  ensuing  session
Mr.  Davis  made,  on  10  Dec.,  1800,  a  speech  in  which
he  carefully  distinguished  between  independence,
which  the  states  had  achieved  at  great  cost,  and
the  Union,  which  had  cost  "  little  time,  little  money,
and  no  blood,"  taking  his  old  state-rights  position.
He  was  ap|>ointedon  the  senate  committee  of  thir-
teen to  examine  and  report  on  the  condition  of  the
country,  an<l.  although  at  first  excused  at  his  own
request,  finally  consented  to  serve,  accepting  the
aptH.intment  in  a  speech  in  which  be  avowed  his
willingness  to  make  any  sacrifice  to  avert  the  im-
pending struggle.  The  committee,  after  remain-
ing in  session  several  days,  re{>orted,  on  31  Dec,
their  inability  to  come  to  any  satisfactory  conclu-
sion. On  10  Jan.,  1801,  Mr.  Davis  made  another
speech  on  the  state  of  the  country,  asserting  the
right  of  secession,  denying  that  of  coercion,  and
urging  the  withdrawal  of  the  garrison  from  Fort
Sumter.  Mississippi  had  seceded  on  !»  Jan.,  and
on  24  .Jan.,  having  been  otBdally  informed  of  the
fact,  Mr.  Davis  withdrew  from  the  senate  and  went
to  his  home,  having  taken  leave  of  his  associates
in  a  speech  in  which  he  defended  the  cause  of  the
-out  li.  and,  in  closing,  begged  pardon  of  all  whom
he  had  ever  otTended.

Before  he  reached  home  he  had  been  appointed
by  the  convention  commander-in-chief  of  the  army
of  Bfiariaaippi,  with  the  rank  of  major-general ;  but
on  18  Feb.,  1861,  he  exchanged  this  office  for  that
of  president  of  the  Confederate  states,  to  which  the

E  Divisional  congress  at  Montgomery  had  elected
ini  on  !•  Feb.  He  selected  for  his  cabinet  Robert
Toombs,  of  Georgia,  as  secretary  of  state;  Leroy
P.  Walker,  of  Alabama,  secretary  of  war;  Charles
Ifemminger,  of  South  Carolina,  secretary  of  the
treasury;  Stephen  R.  Mallory.of  Florida,  secretary
of  the  navy;  .ludah  1'.  Benjamin,  of  Louisiana,  at-
torney-general ;  and  John  EL  Reagan,  of  T<

t master-general.  The  last  three  continued  in
the  cabinet  as  long  at  the  Confederate  L'i'vernment
maintained  its  existence.  Toombs,  Walker,  and
Memminger  were  succeeded  by  others. In  his  in-


augural address  Mr.  Darb asserted  that  "necessity.

Hot  choice."  had  led  to  the  seor«*ion  of  •  I

states;  that  the  true  policy  of  the  moth,  an  agri-
cultural country,  was  peace;  and  that  "the  con-
stituent (Hirts,  but  not  the  -
meiit  had  U-cii  changed.  The  nlt.e
Sumter,  on  \>  April,  precipitate!  the  war.  and  Mr.
Dan-,  m  In-  tir-t  message  to  tba  ainTlafcmal  Con-
federate  BOngrasij  0B  '.Ml  April,  Si  insr  of

event-  (from  the  formation  of  the  I'mt.-d  States
constitution  till  1H01).  which,  in  hi-  judgment,  had
led  to  the  contest,  cointnctided  thin  a<  t.  while  «v..»-
inga  desire  1. 1  prevent  the  shedding  of  bleed

re  also  condemned,  as  illegal  and  aUurd.
President  Lincoln',  proclamation  calling  for  •
and  that  announcing  a  blockade  of  southern  port.,
and  ended  with  the  famou-  word-.  "  All  we  a-k  i«!
to  be  let  alone."  followed  by  a  promise  to  resist
subjugation  to  the  dire-t  extremity. Short

the  change  of  tbe  Confederate  capital  from
gomery  t.»  Richmond,  which  ha  had  stiungljf  ad-

vi-ed.  Mr.  Daris  remOTed  thither,  and  was  met  on

his  way  with  many  marks  of  popular  favor
railway  station  swarming  with  men,  women,  ami

children,  who  greeted  him  with  waring  handker-
chiefs. Soon  after  his  arrival  the  fine  resfci
James  A.  Seddonwaa  bought  and  put  at  Mr.  1
disposal  bycitisensof  Richmond.  Hi-  first  days
in  the  new  capital  were  spent  in  reviewing  troops
and  in  speech-maldng.  He  exhorted  hi-  hearen  to
remember  the  dignity  of  the  contest,  and  "to  smite
the  smiter  with  manly  arms,  as  our  fathers  did  be-
fore  us."  and  i|e<  hired  his  willingness  t,,  lMy  down

his  civil  office  and  take  command  of  the  army,

should  the  extremity  of  the  causs  ever  warrant
such  action.  Before  his  arrival  in  Virginia  an
army  of  about  :><mmmi  men  had  been  raised,  and  as
fast  BS  new  troops  arrived  their  officers  wen*  as-
signed to  a  rank  in  the  Confederate  service,  regu-
lated by  that  which  they  had  formerly  held  in  the
l.  S.  army.  On  90  July,  Mr.  Daris  sent  hi-  ■
message  to  the  provisional  congress,  then  in  session
at  Richmond.  In  this  message  be  complained  of
barbarities  committed  by  National  troojw*,  and
again  asserted  the  impossibility  of  subduing  the
south.  On  the  morning  succeeding  the  deli*
this  mes-jure  he  set  out  for  Manassas,  where  a  eon*
test  was  thought  to  be  impending,  and  armed
there  in  time  to  witness  the  close  of  the  battle  of
Bull  Run,  reaching  the  field  when  rictorj  had
Inch  assured  tO  the  Confederal

The  battle  of  Bull  Run  wa>  followed  by  a  \»  liod
of  inaction, and  Mr.  Davis  was  blamed  by  many
for  this  polley,  as  well  as  for  his  ••  failure  to  organ*
ize  the  troops  of  the  several  states  into  brigades

and  divisions  formed  of  the  soldiers  of  each,"  as

the  law  directed.  In  answer  to  these  complaints,
he  has  urged  the  length  of  time  MOesssry  to  or-
ganize ••  the  terrible  machine,  a  disciplined*  army,"
and  protested  that,  as  far  as  in  him  lav.  he  favored
an  advance  and  endeavored  to  comply  with  the
legal  plan  of  army  organization.  The  rjnastfcfli
<>f  the  treatment  of  Confederals  prisoner-  by  the
National  authorities  mm.ii  demanded  his  attention.
On  IT  April  1  sid,  two  «lays  after  Mr.  Lincoln's  <all
for  troops.  Mr.  Davis  had  issued  a  proclamation
inviting  applications  for  letters  of  manpie  and  re-
prisal. 'I  lie  ••Savannah."  a  private  WUSSlJ
mi— ioiied  in  accordance  v  ith  thi*  offer,  w.

tared  off  Charleston,  and  her  offiean  and
wsre  tried  for  piracy  in  New  York  and  r*nt
to  death. letter  tM  captain  ami  0fWS  of  the  pri-
vateer **  Jefferson  Deris"  were  similar!*
in  Philadelphia. Thereupon,  in  November,

lered  retaliatory  Bjeasure*.  to  be  taken.


100


DAVIS


DAVIS


and  fourteen  Union  prisoners  were  selected  by  lot
and  held  as  hostages  for  the  safety  of  the  con-
demned men.  'Die  latter  were  ultimately  ]>ut  cm
the  footing  of  prisoners  of  war  by  Older  of  the
National  government,  and  subsequently  a  cartel
was  adopted  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  which
remained  in  force  till  its  suspension  in  lNtil,  caused
by  disagreement  as  to  the  status  of  negro  soldiers.
In  November,  1861,  a  presidential  election  was  held
in  the  Confederacy,  and  Mr.  Davis  was  chosen  presi-
dent for  six  years  without  opposition.  In  his  mes-
sage to  the  provisional  congress  at  its  last  bom ion,
is  Nov.,  18(51,  he  briefly  sketched  the  situation  at
the  close  of  the  first  year  of  the  war,  alluding  to
the  Confederate  successes,  t  he  contest  for  the  posses-
sion of  Kentucky  and  Missouri,  and  to  the  "Trent"
affair.  (See  Wii'kks,  Charles.)  He  urged  the  con-
struction of  another  railway  line  through  the  Con-
federacy, asserted  the  improvement  of  the  south  in
military  means  and  financial  condition,  and  the  in-
efficiency  of  the  blockade,  and  said :  "  If  it  were
indeed  a  rebellion  in  which  we  were  engaged,  we
might  find  ample  vindication  for  the  course  we
have  adopted  in  the  scenes  which  are  now  being  en-
acted in  the  United  States."  The  first  congress  under
the  permanent  constitution  met  in  Richmond,  on
18  lei).,  1862,  and  Mr.  Davis  was  inaugurated  on
32  Feb,  The  Confederacy  had  just  met  with  its
first  serious  reverses  in  the  fall  of  Forts  Henry
and  Donelson  ;  but  in  his  inaugural,  after  a  vindi-
cation of  the  right  of  secession,  Mr.  Davis  indulged
in  many  favorable  hopes.  "  The  final  result  in  our
favor,"  said  he,  "  is  not  doubtful.  Our  foes  must
sink  under  the  immense  load  of  debt  which  they
have  incurred.  ...  In  the  heart  of  a  people  re-
solved to  be  free,  these  disasters  tend  but  to  stimu-
late to  increased  resistance."  In  his  short  messages
of  25  Feb.  and  15  Aug.  he  suggested  various
measures  for  the  improvement  of  the  Confederate
forces.  The  result  of  the  reverses  in  the  early
months  of  the  year,  to  which  had  now  been  added
the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  began  to  show  itself
in  a  growing  opposition  to  Mr.  Davis's  admin-
istration, which  up  to  this  time  had  seemed  all
but  universally  popular,  and  this  opposition  in-
creased in  force  up  to  the  latest  days  of  the  war.
One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  congress  was  to  pass  a
sweeping  conscription  law,  to  which  Mr.  Davis  re-
luctantly assented.  This  was  stoutly  resisted  in
some  quarters,  and  led  to  a  spirited  correspondence
between  Mr.  Davis  and  Gov.  Joseph  E.  Brown,  of
Georgia,  who  disputed  the  constitutionality  of  the
measure.  Congress  also  authorized  the  suspension
of  the  habeas  corpus  act  for  ten  miles  around
Richmond,  and  the  formation  of  a  military  police,
for  the  alleged  reason  that  the  government  was
continually  in  danger  from  the  presence  in  Rich-
mond of  National  spies,  and  the  consequent  plots
and  intrigues.  Mr.  Davis  was  present  with  Gen.
Lee  at  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks  on  31  Mav,  and,
after  the  wounding  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston
in  that  engagement,  assigned  Lee  to  the  command
of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  having  previous-
ly, on  13  March,  charged  him,  "  under  the  direction
of  the  president,  with  the  conduct  of  military
operations."  During  a  visit  to  the  army  in  the
western  department,  in  December,  1862,  Mr.
Davis,  in  an  address  to  the  Mississippi  legislature,
defended  the  conscription  law  and  declared  that
"  in  all  respects,  the  Confederacy  was  better  pre-
pared for  war  than  it  was  a  year  previous."

The  proclamation  of  emancipation  by  President
Lincoln,  to  take  effect  1  Jan.,  1863,  called  out  from
Mr.  Davis  a  retaliatory  proclamation,  dated  23
Dec,  1862,  in  which,  after  reciting,  among  other


acts,  the  hanging  of  William  B.  Mumford  for  tear-
ing down  the  United  State-  Ha:,'  at  New  Orleans,
after  the  city  was  captured  by  the  National  forces,
(on.  Benjamin  F.  I  >u  t  ler  wa>  declared  a  felon,  and
it  was  ordered  that  all  commissioned  offioen  serv-
ing  under  him,  as  well  as  any  found  serving  hi
company  with  slaves,  should  be  treated  as  •* sob-
ben  and  criminals  deserving  death."  These  threats.
however,  were  not  generally  executed,  though  sup-
ported by  the  legislation  of  the  congress.  In  his
message  of  January,  lst^J.  Mr.  Davis  announced
his  intention  of  turning  over  National  prisoners  for
prosecution  in  state  courts,  as  abettors  of  servile
insurrection;  but  this  proposition  was  rejected  by
congress,  and  provision  made  for  their  trial  by
military  tribunals.  The  two  long  messages  sent
by  .Mr.  Davis  to  congress  in  1863  consist  largely  of
discussions  of  the  position  of  foreign  powers,  es-
pecially Great  Britain,  with  reference  to  the  war.
The  one  dated  7  Dec.  announces  the  fall  of  Vicks-
burg  and  Port  Hudson,  and  urges  "  the  compulsory
reduction  of  the  currency  to  the  amount  required
by  the  business  of  the  country,"  together  with  other
measures  for  improving  the  finances,  which  had
become  hopelessly  depreciated.  They  had  never
been  on  a  sound  basis,  and  the  currency  had  de-
clined in  value  till  it  was  nearly  worthless.  In
April,  1863,  in  compliance  with  a  request  of  the
Confederate  congress,  Mr.  Davis  had!  issued  an
address  to  the  people  of  the  south,  in  which  he
drew  the  happiest  conclusions  as  to  the  success  of
the  Confederacy,  from  the  way  in  which,  in  the  face
of  obstacles,  it  had  already  organized  and  disci-
plined armies.  "At  no  previous  period  of  the
war,"  said  he,  "  have  our  forces  been  so  numerous,
so  well  organized,  and  so  thoroughly  disciplined,
armed,  and  equipped  as  at  present."

The  disasters  of  July — at  Gettysburg  and  Vicks-
burg — coming  in  the  face  of  this  assertion,  and  the
state  of  the  currency  just  mentioned,  emboldened
the  opposition  party  in  all  parts  of  the  Confeder-
acy fiercely  to  assail  the  administration.  Mr.  Davis
was  held  responsible  for  the  advance  into  Pennsyl-
vania, and  accused  of  partiality  in  appointing  Pem-
berton  to  command  in  the  west.  Charles  G.  Mem-
minger,  secretary  of  the  treasury,  resigned,  and  his
place  was  filled  by  George  A.  Trenholm ;  but  the
new  secretary  was  unable  to  stop  the  depreciation
of  the  currency.  The  lack  of  coin  in  the  country,
the  inability  of  the  people  to  bear  more  taxation,
and  the  spirit  of  speculation  fostered  by  the  enor-
mous issues  of  paper  money,  hastened  the  financial
ruin  of  the  Confederacy.  Food,  too,  was  scarce.
Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  whence  had  come  most
of  the  meat  supplies,  were  lost  to  the  Confederacy,
and  the  army  was  on  half-rations.  At  this  time
there  was  a  clamor  against  the  commissary-general,
Col.  Northrop.  A  committee  of  the  Confederate
congress  investigated  the  matter  and  exonerated
him  ;  but  the  opponents  of  the  administration  have
continued  to  hold  him,  and  Mr.  Davis  through  him,
responsible  for  the  scarcity  of  food  in  the  Confed-
eracy, and  therefore,  indirectly,  for  much  of  the
sufferings  of  Union  prisoners  during  the  war.  The
exchange  of  prisoners  had  been  interrupted  for
some  time  by  the  refusal  of  the  Confederate  gov-
ernment to  recognize  negroes  as  National  soldiers,
and  after  many  futile  attempts  to  come  to  an  un-
derstanding with  the  National  government,  "  We
offered,"  says  Mr.  Davis  ("  Rise  and  Fall  of  the
Confederate  Government."  vol.  ii.,  p.  601),  "to  the
United  States  government  their  sick  and  wounded,
without  requiring  any  equivalents."

The  year  1864  opened  with  Confederate  suc-
cesses in  Florida,  the  southwest,  and  North  Caro-


DAVIS


DWls


101


linn:  Dvria,  111  his  message  of  2  May,

mid:  "Theanufcn  in  uuttberu  Virginia  and  I
neasee  still  oppose,  with  ussnaken  front,  it  formida-
ble barrier  t< .  1 1*«-  progress  of  the  invader."

ress,  however,  was  not long  to  Ik«  stayed. |t\

iUt  issued  (iii  17  July.  \*i>\.  Mr.  Daris  removed

Gen.  Joseph  K.  Johnston  from  t  In-  <•  >Miniaii<l  of  the
army  opposed  to  (Jen.  Sherman  in  (icorgia. The

anise  8Ad  alleged  injustice  of  thisranwral  have  not
aaaad  to  be  subjeoti  for  oonttoeersy,  it  being
aaaBrtod  by  Mr.  Davis's  oppooanta  that  pataoaal
reasons  influenced  him  against  mi  ofBost  with
whom  ho  hml  never  lieen  very  friendly,  while  his
aappoctara,  denying  thi-.  fully  justify  the  act  The
reasons  given  In  Adjt.  Pen.  Cooper's  brief  despatch

were,  that  (Jen.  Johnston  had  "  failed  to  arrest  the
advance  of  the  enemy  to  the  vicinity  of  Atlanta,
and  expressed  no  confidence  that  he  could  defeat  Of
rv|>cl  him."  In  answer  to  which  (ien.  Johnston
wrote: "  I assert that Sherman's army is much

stronger,  oompared  with  that  of  Tennessee,  than

Grant's  compared  with  that  of  northern  Virginia.
Vet  the  enemy  has  Uvnconi|*>lled  to  advance  muofa
more  slowly  to  the  vicinity  of  Atlanta  than  to  that
of  Richmond  and  Petersburg,  and  penetrated  much
deeper  into  Virginia  than  into  Georgia."  (ien.
John  H.  Hood,  successor  of  (Jen.  Johnston,  was
obliged  to  evacuate  Atlanta  on  1  Sept.  Mr.  Deris
then  visited  Georgia  and  endeavored  to  raise  t In-
spirits of  the  people  there,  and  to  restore  harmony
between  the  Confederate  and  state  governments.
Gov.  Brown,  who  had  opposed  the  conscription
act.  continued  to  be  hostile  to  the  administration,
notwithstanding  an  interview  with  Mr.  Davis  in
which  the  latter  tried  to  convince  him  that  his
complaints  wen-  unjust.  He  reviewed  and  ad-
dressed Hood's  army  on  IK  Sept.,  and  afterward,  in
speeches  made  in  Macon.  Augusta,  and  elsewhere,
strove  to  inspire  the  people  with  the  spirit  of  re-
newed resistance,  and  to  paisnade  them  that  an
honorable  peace  was  impossible.  As  is  evident
from  the  tone  of  theseand  other  speeches,  the  peace
jiarty  in  the  south  was  daily  training  strength.  Be-
sides thOM  who  really desired peace, there were

others  who  hoped  that  a  rejected  attempt  to  treat
with  the  National  government  might  fire  the  south
with  indignation.  As  early  as  :{()  Dec.  1888,  Got,
Eabnlon  B.  Vance,  Of  North  Carolina,  had  written

to  Mr.  Paris urging negotiation. The  hitter,  in  his

answer,  dated  N  Jan..  1*<>4.  cited  previous  unsuc-
ccssful  attempts  to  communicate  with  the  authori-
ties at  Washington,  and  concluded  that  another
would  lie  undesiraUc.  In  January.  INIm.  however,
afteran  interview  with  Francis  P.  Blair.  Sr.,  who  had
jjone  to  Richmond,  unofficially,  in  the  hope  of  bring*
in::  about  peace.  Mr.  Davis  agreed  to  send  three
commissioners  to  confer  with  the  National  govern-
ment. The  result  was  an  unsatisfactory  meeting
on  a  steamer  in  Hampton  Roads.  On  the  return
of  the  commissioners  public  meetings  wen-  held.
at  which  there  seemed  to  be  a  return  of  the  enthu-
siasm of  the  early  days  of  the  war.  Peace  with  the
Independenceof (he  south  was  now  seen  to  be  impos-
sible, and  the  horrors  of  subjugation  by  the  north

were  painted  in  spoony  colors  by  the  speakers. Mr.

Deris,  always  an  aide  and  impressive  speaker,  made
what  has  been  called  tin-  cBOSl  r.-inarknlile  ipseofa
of  his  life.  But  this  outburst  of  enthusiasm  was
only  teni|Mirarv. The  evacuation  of Atlanta  had

i  followed  by  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea,  and
Hood's  disastrous  oempaign  in  Tennessee. Gen.

•1 himself  said,  in  iphaHng  of  it.  when  taking
leave  of hi- army in  January.  1865: "  I  alone  am
responsilile  for it>  concept  ion." These n-\
however,  with Grant's  steady  advance OB Rich-


mond, and.  almve  all,  the  re-election  of  Preeidettt

I. inn -In,  had  produced  a  growing

south  thut  defeat  was  n  drrate

congress  that  met  in  Sovenibei

spoken  m  opposition  to  the  administration,  and  in

January. \*H',. the Virgmi
change  in  the  aabtaat.  111*1811118  Um
confidence in its member*. As  ,.  <  < >uxeqaenc*  of
idoii,  then  secretary  of  war,  sent
in  his  resignation.

In  his  last  me-sHire  to  congress,  dated  i:t  Man-h.
1885,  Mr.  Davis,  while  scknowledging  the  i

the  Confi  dcrai  \.  asserted  that  it  had  ample  imtim
of  meeting  the  emergency.  ( »n  Bund
IHoo,  while  seated  in  his  pew  in  St.  Paul'*  church.
Richmond,  he  was  handed  a  telegram  bus
hie,  announcing  the  hitter's  speedy  withdrawal
from  Petersburg,  and  the  consequent  BneSSSitj  for
the  evacuation  of  the  capital.  That  evening,  ac-
companied by  his  personal  staff,  meinUr*  of  the
Cabinet,  and  others,  he  left  l.v  train  for  DwiimIIc.
On  his  arrival  there  he  issued,  on  ft  April,  a  proc-

lamation  of  which  he  afterward  admitted  that.
••  viewed  by  the  light  of  suhscnucril  event*,  it  may
fairly  In-  siid  it  WBS 0V0I1  sailgUIIIQ "  In  it  hi
"Relieved  from  the  Deoeosity  of  guarding  | •articu-
lar points,  our  army  will  l»-  nee  to  dots  from  point
to  [M.int.  to  strike  the  en.  my  in  detail  far  fnnr.  hia
li.i-i."  Danville  was  abandoned  in  less  than  ..
and  after  a  conference  at Greensboro,  N.  C,  with


(Jens.  Johnston  and  Beauregard,  in  which  his  hopes
of  continuing  the  war  met  with  little  euoouraee*

ment.  In-  went  to  Charlotte,  when-  he  heard  <»f  the
a— a— iuation  of  Mr.  Lincoln.  His  wife  had  pre-
ceded him  with  a  small  escort, and  it  was  fast  «fter
he  had  overtaken  her.  while  encamped  near  lrwin«-
ville,  (ia..  that  the  wh<>ie  party  were  oeptured,ou
10  stay,  by  a  body  of  cavalry  under  Lieut. -Col.
Pritchard.  H<-  was  taken  to'  Port  Monroe,  ami
kept  in  confinement  for  two  years,

On  81  Sept..  1865,  the  IT.  s.  senate  <-»ll*tl  ou  the
president  for  information  on  the  snbiei  t  of  biatrial,
and  in  respenw  reporta  wen-  ■ubeutted  from  the
secretary  of  war  and  the  attofney-general,  their
substance  being  thai  Virginia  was  the  proper  paaes
for  the  trial,  and  that  it  was  not  yet  p
fully  to  hold  a I".  S.  court in  that state. ( »n 18

Oct..  in  reply  to  a  setter  from  President  Johnson,
chicf-Jiistice  Chase  said  that  hewasunwflUni

hold  court  in  a  district  still  under  mnrtial  law.  <  »n
10  April.  1888,  the  judiciary  committee  of  tan
boose  Of  repre-cnt.it iM-s  n-p.rt.Nl  that  th.-r.
DO  reason  whv  the  trial  should  n«.t  he  proceeded
with,  and  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  gov  riimeiit  to
investigate,  without  delay,  the  facts  connected  wiUi
Linuiln'a  anaaiafnathai On  8  '  Mr.  DavU

was  indicted  for  tr-  .-nuid  jurv  in  tl

urt  for  the  district  of  Virginia,  sittim;  at

,  folk  under  Judge  Pitdee  weed.  Use  ■**»-


102


DAVIS


DAVIS


plicity  in  the  assassination  of  the  president  baring
beta  dropped,  <>u  5  .lime,  at  a  session  of  the  eoiirl
held  in  Richmond,  James  T.  I'.rady.  one  of  Mr,
Davis's  counsel,  urged  that  the  trial  be  held  with-
out delay  :  hut  the  government  declined  to  proceed
mi  the  indictment,  urging  the  importance  of  the
trial  and  the  necessity  of  preparation  for  it.  The
court  refused  to  admit  the  prisoner  to  bail.  <>u  i:{
May,  1807,  he  was  brought  before  the  court  at  Rich-
mond on  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  and  admitted  to
bail  in  the  amount  of  $100,000,  the  first  name  on
his  bail-bond  lieing  that  of  Horace  Greeley.  Mr.
Davis's  release  gave  much  satisfaction  to  the  south-
ern people.  The  interest  taken  in  him  during  his
imprisonment,  and  their  prevalent  idea  that  he  was
to  suffer  as  a  representative  of  the  south,  rather
than  for  sins  of  his  own,  and  was  "  a  nation's  pris-
oner." had  made  him  more  popular  there  than  he
had  been  since  the  first  days  of  the  war.  After  an
enthusiastic  reception  at  Richmond  he  went  to  New
York,  then  to  Canada,  and  in  the  summer  of  1868
visited  England,  a  Liverpool  firm  having  offered  to
take  him  as  a  partner,  without  capital.  This  offer,
after  investigation,  was  declined,  and,  having  vis-
ited Prance,  he  returned  to  this  country.  He  was
never  brought  to  trial,  a  nolle  prosequi  being  en-
tered by  the  government  in  his  case  in  December,
1868,  and  he  was  also  included  in  the  general  am-
nesty of  that  month.  After  his  discharge  he  be-
came president  of  a  life  insurance  company  at
Memphis,  Tenn.  In  1879  Mrs.  Dorsey,  of  Beau-
voir,  Miss.,  bequeathed  to  him  her  estate,  where  he
ever  afterward  resided,  giving  much  of  his  time
to  literary  pursuits.  In  June,  1871,  in  a  speech  at
a  public  reception  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  he  said  that  he
stdl  adhered  to  the  principle  of  state  sovereignty,
was  confident  of  its  final  triumph, and  was  "not  of
those  who  ' accept  the  situation.'"  In  1876,  when
a  bill  was  before  the  house  of  representatives  to  re-
move all  the  political  disabilities  that  had  been  im-
Sosed  on  those  who  took  part  in  the  insurrection,
ames  G.  Blaine  offered  an  amendment  excepting
Jefferson  Davis,  and  supported  it  by  a  speech  in
which  he  accused  Mr.  Davis  of  being  "  the  author
of  t  he  gigantic  murders  and  crimes  at  Anderson-
ville."  Senator  Benjamin  H.  Hill,  of  Georgia,  spoke
in  reply,  defending  Mr.  Davis  from  this  charge.
Again,  in  1879,  Mr.  Davis  was  specially  excepted  in
a  bill  to  pension  veterans  of  the  Mexican  war,  the
adoption  of  an  amendment  to  that  effect  being
largely  the  result  of  a  speech  by  Zachariah  Chan-
dler. In  October,  1884,  at  a  meeting  of  Frank  P.
Blair  post,  of  the  Grand  Array  of  the  Republic,  in
St.  Louis,  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  asserted  that
he  had  seen  letters  and  papers  showing  that  Mr.
Davis  had  abandoned  his  state-rights  doctrines
during  the  war,  and  had  become  practically  a  dic-
tator in  the  south.  Mr.  Davis,  in  a  letter  to  a  news-
paper, denied  the  charge,  and  Gen.  Sherman  then
filed  with  the  war  department  at  Washington
papers  that,  in  his  view,  substantiated  it.  On  28
April,  1886,  Mr.  Davis  spoke  at  the  dedication  of  a
monument  to  Confederate  soldiers  at  Montgom-
ery, Ala.,  and  was  enthusiastically  received.  The
engraving  on  the  preceding  page  is  a  view  of  his
early  home  in  Mississippi.

Two  biographies  of  Mr,  Davis  have  been  written,
both  by  southern  authors,  which  illustrate  the  ex-
tremes of  southern  opinion.  That  by  Frank  II.
Alfriend  (New  York,  1868)  represents  those  who
are  friendly  to  Mr.  Davis,  while  that  by  Edward  A.
Pollard,  with  the  sub-title  "Secret  History  of  the
Confederacy  "  (Philadelphia,  1869),  holds  him  re-
sponsihle  for  all  the  disasters  of  the  war.  Mr.  Pol-
lard, who  was  an  editor  of  the  Richmond  "Ex-


aminer." a  paper  hostile  to  the  administration,  con-
cedes that  Mr.  Davis  was  thoroughly  devoted  to
the  cause  of  the  south,  and  had  indomitable  pluck,
but  accuses  him  of  vanity.  ^rro>s  favoritism,  and
incompetencv.  In  addition  to  these  works,  see  Dr,
Craven's  "Prison  Life  of  Jefferson  Davis"
York.  1866).  Mr.  Davis  himself  had  published
•■  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Confederate  Govern-
ment" (2  vols.,  New  York,  1881).— His  brother,
Joseph  Emory,  lawyer,  b.  near  Augusta,  Ga.,  LO
Dec.,  1784;  d.  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  18  Sept,  L870,
was  the  oldest  of  the  ten  children  of  Samuel  Davis,
and  in  1796  removed  with  his  father  to  Kentucky.
He  was  placed  in  a  mercantile  house  at  an  early
age,  studied  law  in  Russellville  and  in  Wilkinson
county,  whither  he  accompanied  his  father  in  1811,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,  and  practised  in
Pinckneyville,  and  afterward  in  Greenville,  rising
to  high  rank  in  the  profession.  He  was  the  dele-
gate from  Jefferson  county  in  the  convention  that
organized  the  state  government  in  1817,  and  took
a  prominent  part  in  framing  the  constitution.  In
1820  he  removed  to  Natchez,  and  formed  a  copart-
nership with  Thomas  B.  Reed,  then  the  leader  of
the  Mississippi  bar.  In  1827  he  decided  to  retire
from  the  profession  in  which  he  had  won  success
by  his  learning,  argumentative  powers,  and  oratori-
cal ability,  in  order  to  become  a  planter.  In  this
occupation  he  was  also  very  successful,  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  possessed  one  of  the
finest  plantations  on  the  Mississippi  river.  During
the  war  he  was  driven  from  his  home  with  his
family,  and  endured  many  hardships.  He  returned
to  Vicksburg  at  its  close,  and,  after  a  controversy
with  the  officers  of  the  Freedmen's  bureau,  regained
possession  of  his  estate,  but  continued  to  reside  in
the  city  of  Vicksburg.  Mr.  Davis  was  noted  for
his  benevolence,  and  many  youths  of  both  sexes
were  indebted  to  him  for  a  liberal  education.

DAVIS,  Jefferson  C,  soldier,  b.  in  Clark  coun-
ty, Ind.,  2  March,  1828 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  30  Nov.,
1879.  His  ancestors  were  noted  in  the  Indian  wars
of  Kentucky.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,  while  pur-
suing his  studies  in  the  Clark  county,  Ind.,  semi-
nary, he  heard  of  the  declaration  of  war  with
Mexico,  and  enlisted  in  Col.  Lane's  Indiana  regi-
ment. For  gallant  conduct  at  Buena  Vista  he  was
on  17  June,  1848,  made  second  lieutenant  of  the
1st  artillery.  He  became  first  lieutenant  in  1868,
took  charge  of  the  garrison  in  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C,
in  1858,  and  was  there  during  the  bombardment
in  April,  1861,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.
In  May,  1861,  he  was  promoted  to  a  captaincy  and
given  leave  of  absence  to  raise  the  22d  Indiana
volunteers,  of  which  regiment  he  became  colonel,
and  was  afterward  given  a  brigade  by  Gen.  Fremont,
with  whom  he  served  in  Missouri.  He  also  com-
manded a  brigade  under  Gens.  Hunter  and  Pope.
For  services  rendered  at  Milford,  Mo.,  on  18  Dec,
1861,  where  he  aided  in  capturing  a  superior  force
of  the  enemy,  with  a  large  quantity  of  military
supplies,  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers. At  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge  he  commanded
one  of  the  four  divisions  of  Gen.  (urtis's  army.
He  participated  in  the  siege  of  Corinth,  and,  after
the  evacuation  of  that  place  by  the  Confederate
forces,  was  assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.
t  tan  88  Sept.,  18(52,  he  chanced  to  meet  in  Louisville
lien.  William  Nelson,  from  whom  he  claimed  to
have  received  treatment  unduly  harsh  and  s<  \<  re.
An  altercation  ensued,  and  in  a  moment  of  resent*
ment  he  shot  Nelson,  ibstantly  killing  him.  He
was  arrested,  and  held  for  a  time,  but  no  trial  was
ordered,  and  he  was  released  and  assigned  to  duty
at  Covington,  Ky. He  led  his  old  division  of  the


DAVIS


DAVIS


1(0


20th  army  corps  into  the  fight  at  BtOM  n\.-r.  and
for  hi-  bravery  was  recommended  l>>  <m  n.  Itose-
cran-  for  major-gemml. In 1864  niinamli-d

tin-  14th  corps  of  Sherman's  army  Is  Um  Atlanta

campaign  mill  in  the  march  through  (ieorgia. In

revel major-generalship  was  given  him,

nii'i  Ik-  wm  made  colonel  of  the  28d  infantry,  28

.Inly.  1886, He  afterward  went  to  the  Pacific  coast.

ami  commanded  tin-  V .  S.  troops  in  Ala-kit,  ami  in

I,  after  tin-  murder  of  Gen.  Canby  by  the  Modoc

Indian-  in  northern  California,  took  coimnaml  of

tin-  forces  operating  against them,  ami  compelled

them  to  surrender.

D  v  I  In.  .loii ii.  navigator,  b.  in  Sandridga,  Eng-

liiml,  alMnit  I860;  «l.  at  see.  mar  the  coa-t  of  Ma-
lacca, in  Dsosfnbar,  I60fi  Hfl  weal  to  sea  at  an  ear Iv
age,  ami  m  1880  WM  given  coniinaml  <>f  an  cxpedi-
BOH  for  the  discovery  of  a  northwest  itassagc  to
India.  He  -ailed  from  Dartmouth  OB  7  June,  \W!i,
with  the  "  Sunshine, "  of  fifty  ton-,  and  the  "  Moon-
shine,"  of  thirty-five,  manned  by  twenty-three  and
seventeen  men  resp*-ctively.  He  saih-d  a-  far
north  as  til!"  4n .  entering  the  strait  that  ha-  since
borne  his  name,  and,  finding  no  hindrance  to  hi-
progress,  concluded  that  he  had  discovered  the
northwest  passage,  but  was  obliged  by  stress  of
weather  to  return,  arriving  at  Dartmouth  on  .10
Sept.  On  7  May,  1886.  be  tailed  again  from  Dart-
mouth with  the  "Sunshine."  the  *  Moonshine,"  the
"Mermaid,"  of  100  tons,  and  the  "  North  Star,"  a
pinna,  e  of  ten  tons.  At  the  end  of  July  the  crew  of
the  "  Mermaid"  U'came  discontented  and  put  back
for  Kngland,  after  the  '•Sunshine "and  the  pinnace
had  Uen  sent  to  explore  eastward  of  Greenland,
('apt.  Davi-  pur-ited  the  voyage  alone,  and,  after
reaching  a  point  not  as  far  north  as  in  hi*  first
voyage,  but  about  as  far  west,  returned  to  Kngland.
arriving  earlv  in  October.  On  l'.l  May.  1.X7,  he
sailed  again  from  Dartmouth  with  the  "  Kli/alM-th,"
the  "Sunshine,"  and  the  "  Helen."  a  smaller  vessel.
He  took  the  same  course  as  before,  and  was  con-
firmed in  hi-  battel  that  he  had  found  the  passage;
but,  not  having  provisions  for  a  long  voyage,  he
was  obliged  to  return  to  England.  Notwithstand-
ing his  discovery  of  the  entrance  to  Ratlin  bar,
there  was  no  new  expedition  in  quest  of  the  north-
west pa—  up-  till  that  of  Waymouth,  fifteen  year-
later.  In  1591  Davis  accompanied  Cavendish  on
his  second  and  verv  disastrous  voyage  to  the  South
sea.  He  afterward  made  five  voyages  to  the  Bast
Indies  as  a  pilot,  and  in  the  last  was  killed,  while
serving  umler  Sir  Kdinuml  Michclltournc,  in  an
engagement  with  the  JajMinese  in  the  straits  of
Malacca.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the  inventor  of
a  (piadrant  for  taking  the  sun's  altitude  at  sea,
winch  preceded  Hadley's  sextant.  He  published
"Seaman*!  Secrets."  a  treatise  on  navigation  (Lon-
don, 1864),  and  "The  World's  II ydrographieal
Descriptions"  (1868),  in  which  the  arguments  of  Sir
Humphrey  GilUrt,  showing  the  probability  off  a
north  wot  pas-age  to  China,  are  in  |>art  repeated.
See  "Voyages  and  Works  of  John  Davis,  the  Navi-
gator," l»v  ('apt.  Albert  A.  Markham,  published  l>v

the  Hakiuyt  MOiety  i  London.  1M80).

DAVIS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  IVnncpck.  Pa..
16  Sept..  17'JI  ;  ,1.  in  Harford  county.  M.I..  in  1806.
He  wa-  ordained  a  Bapti-t  minister  in  1786*  went
to  Maryland  the  same  year,  and  U'came  pSStOf  of
Winter  Hun  church  in  Harford  county,  the  first
permanently  nstahllshod  church  of  his  denomina-
tion in  tin-  StatS.  His  lal*>r-  extended  into  Balti-
more  and  Frederick  counties,  and  into  the  city
of  Baltimore.  Notwithstanding  the  constitutional
guarantees  and  the  tradition  of  religious  freedom
in  Maryland,  hi-  zeal  in  -preading  a  form  of  faith


that  was  new  in  the  corniniinitv  .ml.j.,  t.-d  him  to
intimidation  and  violence,  bt  ,i»  <|.«th  he

had  established  flourishing  churches  in  Bali
Frederick  City,  and  clsswEi

I»  \  \  In.  .I.'Iiii.  .  lergMiian.  1..  in  N.  wca»tleeoan-
ty.  Del.,  in I7:G:  d.  in  <<h;  (l  .

father  came  from  Wall  -  in  loli.niiil  vwmalrjw.

tor  of  the Baptist  church  n  welsh  Trx-t,  S*w.

•  a-tle co. The -.n was  grailualiti at Pwflsdsl

phia  college,  and.  while  -upplyin.

ml  after  the  death  of  the  latter. attract.

i>\ hi-  eliKjuence,  and  WSSOSilsd  to  the  DSSt"i

thstd Baptist  .I'hiin  h  in BostOI

appointed  agent  of tin- Bapti-t-  of t|,.

rspessani  their  grievance-  under  the  exctaatvelawi
then  in  force  InMssascbosetta,  and  took  the  gi

that the charter Ranted religion,  aqualil

iigregatiotiali-m  WSJ  m>t  UU ajJahthisd rs-
ligion  of  the  commonwealth.  When,  after  •
ing  the  representation-  of  the  grievance  OOBSSBattSS,
in  nil  court  ttassed  a  new  ivrtificate  law,  re-
ipiiring  that  certificates  issued  to  Bapti-t-  should
state  that  they  were  "coiiscieiit  ioii-ly  "of  that  faith,
the  committee,  of  which  he  was  the  band,  de.  i.l.-d
not  to  accept  the  act  in  that  form.  In  17?-'  lu-
hesitfa  failed,  and  he  returned  in  July  to  Ih'lawarv.
then  undertook  a  journey  for  his  health  down  tin-
Ohio,  and  died  in  the  wilderness  below  the  present
site  of  the  < -it v  of  Wheeling,  W.  Va.

DAVIS,  John,  jurist,  1..  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  25
Jan.,  17ol  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mas-..  1-4  Jan..  1M7.  Ha
wits  graduated  at  Harvard  in  17*1. and  for  a  time  was
a  tutor  in  the  family  of  Gen.  Joseph  otisat  Barn-
stable, studied  law.  and  began  practice  at  Plymouth

in  17^»J. At  thei ventioii  oi  1786,  which  adopted

the  Federal  constitution,  be  was  the  youngest  dele-
gate, and  be  survived  all  tin- others. He  ■

several  years  a  memlier  of  the  Massachusetts  legisla-
ture, and  in  1796"  was  elected  to  the  state  semr
88  June  <>f  the  same  rear  be  entered  on  the  oflcsof
comptroller  of  the  V.  S.  treasury,  and  Barred  till  1
July.  17!«».  He  was  then  appointed  district  attor-
ney for  Massachusetts,  and  in  lNii  r.  s.  district
judge  in  the  same  state,  in  which  office  he  re-
mained to  the  end  of  bis  life.  He  Was  H  ■
in  various  department-  of  knowlcdp-.  and  especial-
ly eminent  for  his  aopiaiutam -e  with  the  history
and  antiquities  of  New  Kngland.  In  1818  he  de-
livered an  addre-s  <>n  the  "Landing  of  the  Pil-
grims" before  the  Massachusetts  historical  sodetr,
of  which  be  was  president  from  Ms  till  \*w.  He
published  an  edition  of  Morton's  "New  Kngland
Memorial,"  with  copious  ami  valuable  nob  -
ton.  lM'jti):  a  "Eulogy  I'll  George  Washington";
ami  "An  Attempt  to  Explain  the  Inscription  on
Dighton  Bock."  Sssa  memoir  by  Thocnss  Kinui-
cutt  in  " Arclusologia  Americana."

DAVIS.  John,  -tate-man.  I>.  in Noit!d)0!0«gk

Ma—..  18  Jan..  1 7>? :  <l.  in  Worcester,  Ma-.  18

April.  1864  He  wa«  graduated  at  Vale  with  honor
in  1819,  studied  law,  was  admitt.il  to  ths  l«r  in
1818,  ami  practised  with  ineosaj  In  Woraastsc.  Bs
wa-  elected  to  congress  as  a  whig  in  1*24.  and  n-
aleoted  for  the  f<>ur  succeeding  terms,  sitting  from
December,  1886,  till  Jannai  ad  taking  a

leading  part  a-  a  protectionist ill  opiioMiig  Henry
BOmpromise  tariff 1  •>  1 1 Of 1*M.  and in  all
transactions relating to finance  and oofl

rignsd  In-  seal  on  being  el
Massachii-ett-. At  the  conclusion  of  his  u
governor  he  was  sent  t..  the  1 -
from  7  Deo,  I***),  till  January,  1MI.  when  he  re-
-igiied to  an  -ept the  MIS  SUIUC  ship  • SSSOOd time.
Ill  the  senate  he  was  a  Strong  op|»oiient  of  I
ministrations  of  Jackson  and  Van  Buren.  and  tOfli


104


DAVIS


DAVIS


a  conspicuous  part  in  the  debates  as  an  advocate
of  protection  for  American  industry,  replying  to
the  tree-trade  arguments  of  southern  statesmen  in
speeches  t  hat  wore  considered  extremely  clear  ex-
positions of  the  pro-
tective theories.  A
declaration  in  one
of  his  speeches,  that
James  Buchanan  was
in  favor  of  reducing
the  wages  of  Ameri-
can workingraen  to
ten  cents  a  day,  was
the  origin  of  the  epi-
thet ''ten-cent  Jim-
my," which  was  ap-
plied to  that  states-
man by  his  political
opponents  for  sev-
eral years.  A  short
speech  against  the
sub-treasury,  deliv-
ered in  1840,  was
printed  during  the
presidential  canvass  of  that  year  as  an  electioneer-
ing pamphlet,  of  which  more  than  a  million  copies
were  distributed.  He  was  again  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor, and  served  from  24  March,  1845,  till  3  March,
1853,  but  declined  a  re-election,  and  died  suddenly
at  his  home.  He  protested  vigorously  against  the
war  with  Mexico.  In  the  controversy  that  followed,
over  the  introduction  of  slavery  into  the  U.  S.  ter-
ritories, he  earnestly  advocated  its  exclusion.  The
Wilmot  proviso  received  his  support,  but  the  com-
promise acts  of  1850  encountered  his  decided  op-
position. He  enjoyed  the  respect  and  confidence
of  his  constituents  in  an  unusual  degree,  and  es-
tablished a  reputation  for  high  principles  that
gained  for  him  the  popular  appellation  of  "  hon-
est John  Davis." — His  wife,  who  was  a  sister  of
George  Bancroft,  the  historian,  died  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  24  Jan.,  1872,  at  the  age  of  eighty  years. —
His  son,  John  Chandler  Bancroft,  diplomatist,
b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  29  Dec.,  1822,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1840,  studied  law,  and  began
f>ractice.  On  31  Aug.,  1849,  when  Mr.  Bancroft
eft  the  English  court,  he  succeeded  John  R.  Brod-
head  as  secretary  of  legation,  and  acted  as  charge
d'affaires  during  the  absence  of  the  minister,  Ab-
bott Lawrence,  for  several  months  in  that  and  the
two  succeeding  years.  He  resigned  on  30  Nov.,
1852,  was  American  correspondent  of  the  London
"  Times  "  from  1854  till  1861,  and  during  that  time
practised  law  in  New  York  city.  In  1868  he  was
elected  to  the  New  York  legislature,  and  on  25
March,  1869,  appointed  assistant  secretary  of  state,
which  post  he  resigned  in  1871  to  act  as  agent  of
the  U.  S.  government  before  the  Geneva  court  of
arbitration  on  the  Alabama  claims.  On  24  Jan.,
1873,  he  was  reappointed  assistant  secretary  of
state.  While  in  the  department  of  state  he  acted
as  arbitrator  in  a  dispute  between  Great  Britain
and  Portugal.  In  1871  he  was  a  member,  and  the
secretary,  of  the  high  commission  that  concluded
the  treaty  of  Washington.  He  resigned  his  place
on  receiving  the  appointment  of  minister  to  the
German  empire.  After  his  return  from  Berlin,  in
1877,  he  was  made  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  of
claims  in  Washington,  I).  C,  and  served  from  Janu-
ary, 1878,  till  December,  1881.  In  November,  1882,
ho  was  again  appointed  to  the  same  post,  and  on  5
Nov.,  1883.  became  reporter  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  He  has  published  "  The  Massachusetts
Justice"  (Worcester,  18471 ;  "The  Case  of  the
United  States  laid  before  the  Tribunal  of  Arbitra-


tion at  Geneva  "  (Washington,  1871) ;  "  Treaties  of
the  United  States,  with  Notes  "(revised  <  ,i..  1878);
and  vols.  108-118  of  "United  States  Reports."—
Another  son,  Hnshrouck,  soldier,  l>.  in  Worces-
ter, Irfiuw,  1!)  April,  1887;  drowned  at  sea,  19
Oct.,  1870,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1845*,
and  afterward  studied  in  Germany.  He  taught
in  the  Worcester  high-school  for  a  year,  and  was
settled  as  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  society  in  Wa-
tertown,  Mass.,  in  1849.  He  afterward  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  Massachusetts  bar  in  1854,
and  went  to  Chicago  in  1855.  He  was  mustered
into  the  United  States  service  in  1862  as  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  11th  Illinois  cavalry.  He  served
with  conspicuous  gallantry  in  Stoneman's  pursuit
of  the  Confederates  after  their  retreat  from  York-
town  in  April,  1862,  and  in  the  autumn  distin-
guished himself  at  Martinsburg  and  Harper's  Petty,
where  he  was  in  command  of  the  Union  cavalry,
and  led  them,  on  the  night  of  14  Sept.,  1862,  through
the  enemy's  lines  to  Greencastle,  Pa.,  capturing  an
ammunition-train  on  the  way.  He  was  promoted
colonel,  5  Jan.,  1864,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  After  returning
to  Chicago,  he  was  elected  city  attorney.  He  was
lost  on  the  steamer  "  Cambria "  in  the  voyage  to
Europe. — John,  son  of  Hasbrouck,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  16  Sept.,  1851,  studied  in  the  universities  of
Heidelberg,  Berlin,  and  Paris.  After  holding  va-
rious posts  in  the  department  of  state  and  the
diplomatic  service,  he  was  appointed  clerk  to  the
court  of  Alabama  claims  in  1874.  He  practised
law  in  Washington  and  New  York,  and  was  assist-
ant counsel  for  the  United  States  before  the  Franco-
American  claims  commission  in  1881.  On  7  July,
1882,  he  became  assistant  secretary  of  state,  and
while  holding  that  office  was  several  times  acting
secretary.  On  20  Jan.,  1885,  he  was  appointed
judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims. — Another  son,
Horace,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  16
March,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1849,  and,  after  beginning  the  study  of  law,  went  to
California  in  1852,  and  engaged  in  manufacturing.
He  represented  the  San  Francisco  district  in  con-
gress from  1877  to  1881.  He  contributed  a  paper
to  the  American  antiquarian  society  on  the  "Like-
lihood of  an  Admixture  of  Japanese  Blood  on
the  Northwest,"  which  was  afterward  published
separately.  He  also  published  "  Dolor  Davis,  a
Sketch  of  his  Life  "  (1881),  and  "  American  Consti-
tutions," in  the  Johns  Hopkins  series  (Baltimore,
1885). — Another  son,  Andrew  McFarland,  anti-
quarian and  author,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  30  Dec.,
1833.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Lawrence  scientific
school  of  Harvard  university  in  1854,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859.  After  practis-
ing a  short  time  in  Massachusetts  he  went  to  Cali-
fornia, and  was  for  several  years  a  partner  of  his
brother  in  the  manufacturing  business.  He  pub-
lished articles  in  the  "Overland"  and  "Atlantic
Monthly"  magazines,  presented  a  paper  on  the
"  Journey  of  Moncacht-Ape  "  to  the  American  an-
tiquarian society,  afterward  printed  separately
(Worcester,  1883),  published  a  paper  on  "Indian
Games"  in  the  "Bulletin"  of  the  Essex  institute,
which  was  also  printed  separately  (Salem,  1886),
and  contributed  to  Justin  Winsor's  "Narrative
and  Critical  History  of  America"  the  chapter  on
"  Louisiana  and  Canada  "  and  that  on  "  Border
Warfare  during  the  Revolution."

DAVIS,  John  A.  G„  jurist,  b.  in  Middlesex
county,  Va.,  in  1801;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  14
Nov.,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary
college,  practised  law  in  Albemarle  county,  edited
a  weekly  journal  at  Charlottesville!  and  in  1830


DAVIS


DAVIS


100


was  chosen  professor  of  law  at the  I'ni v<-r>it v  of

nia. He  'ii"l from a pistol-«ho4 woiiml  at

i refractory  -linl.nt,  whom he  was

avoring  t"  arrest  ander  the  university  laws.

ng  his  publications  an- a  treat

Tail,  Executory  Dorises,  and  Contingent  Rirmstn-

dsra  under  the  Virginia  statutes  modifying  tli«'

Common  Law";  "Treatise  on  Criminal  Law,  and

•  t..  Justioes  <>f  the Peace*1  (1888);  and  a

tractate "Agates! the Constitutional Bight  of

Congress  to  pass  Laws  expressly  and  es|H*- ially  for

taction  «>f  Domestic  Manufacturers.*1

D  V  \  IS.  .1  oli ii Lse,  naval  officer,  h.  in  Carlisle,

Sullivan  m..  I n< i..  :i  Sept.,  1885;  d.  in  Washington,

12 March. lss''. Be entered tin- l'.  S.  sen  ice  as  |

sjitisilpmsn  fin  ft  Tun  1841,l>ecanie  passed  midship-
inan  00  1<>  Aug..  1847,  and,  while  acting  lieutenant,

nffmmanding  a  boat  of  the  "  Preble."  of  the  Bast

India  squadron,  boarded  a  piratical  Chinese  junk
otT  Macao  in  November,  1*41',  with  another  officer
and  sixteen  men.  and  captured  the  vessel  and  crew.
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant  on  L">  Sept.,  1*.V>,
was  attached  to  the  (iulf  squadron  in  1881,  and,  as
executive  officer  of  the  "Water  Witch,"  took  part
in  engagements  with  the  Confederate  nun  ••  Manas-
sas" at  the  head  of  the  Mississippi  passes  and  the
squadron  near  Pilot  Town  on  the  same  day,  12  Oct.,
1861.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-commander
on  16  July,  18<J2.  and  attacked  Fort  McAllister  <»n
1!>  Nov.,  when  his  vessel  was  pierced  by  a  solid
shot  below  water.  The  leak  was  stopped  tempo-
rarily, and  after  the  action  the  vessel  was  taken  on
shore  and  jwitched  at  the  falling  of  the  tide.  He
again  engaged  the  fort  on  27  .Ian.  and  1  Feb.,  1863,
and  on  28  Feb.,  when  the  privateer  "Nashville"
was  destroyed.  On  19  March  he  sank  the  blockade-
running  steamer  "Georgmna"  when  she  attempted
to  enter  Charleston  harbor.  He  was  transferred
to  the  command  of  the  iron-clad  "Montauk."  and
took  part  in  the  engagements  with  Forts  Sumter.
Gregg,  Moultrie,  and  Batterv  Bee.  in  the  beginning
of  September,  1863,  and  in  the  attacks  on  Fort
Sumter  on  5,  9,  and  10  Nov.,  and  that  on  Fort
Moultrie  .»n  16  Nov..  1888.  In  lSStVS  be  com-
manded the  steamer  "  Sassacus,"  of  the  North  At-
lantic blockading  squadron,  which  towed  the  |h>w-
derhoaJ  "  Louisiana"  from  Norfolk  to  Fort  Fisher
in  Deccmlier,  and  engaged  thai  fort  on  24  and  2."»
Dec.,  1k«u,  13  and  14  Jan.,  1865;  Fort  Anderson,
In  Oaae  Fear  river,  on  18  Feb:  and  Fort  Strong
on  20  and  21  Felt.,  on  which  last  day  the  vessel  was
struck  under  the  water-line,  !>ut  the  leak  was  kept
under  till  dark,  and  then  effectually  stopped.  He
was  commissioned  commander  on  25  July,  1866,  (

Emmotcd  captain  on  14  Feb.,  1878, and  was  a  mein-
pr  of  the  light-house  board  in  1878, and  of  the
board  of  inspection  in  1882.  He  was  promoted
commodore on4  Feb.,  1882, commanded  the  Asiatic
station  in  lK^i-'fi.  and  0B  80  Oct..  iss.-,.  received
his  commission  as  rear-admiral,  and  was  in  Novem-
ber, 1*86,  relieved  of  his  command  of  the  Asiatic
squadron  and  placed  on  the  retired  list.

DAVIS,  John  PT** statesman, b.  m  Cumberland
county.  Pa.,  17  July.  17!M»:  d.  in  Carlisle.  Ind..  22
Au>;..  1859.  He  received  a  classical  education,
studied  medicine,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Balti-
more medical  college  in  1881,  removing  in  1888  to
Carlisle,  Ind.  He  was  for  several  years  a  member
of the Indiana house of representatives. lieing

shown  spanker  m  1M32.  In  1884  he  was  appointed  a

cominissionerto  negotiated  treaty  with  the  Indians.
He  was  elected  t<>  congress  bv  the  democrats,  and

Barred  from  ?  Deo,  1888, till  8  March.  i*:i7.  was

re-elected  and  again  served  from  1"0.»  till  1K41.
and  from 1K43  till 1K47. During  his  last term


he  was  speaker  of the  hou«<  of bbbbjSjbI

•or issiorier  to  China  in IMM  '.Vi,  and  f

of  Oregon  ii  He  presided  ore*  the  con-

vention held  at  Baltimore  in  1H."»2  that  Dominated
Franklin  Pierce  for  the  pr-

D  V  VIS,  lb  Clark,  journalist,  b.  near  Sandu-kv,
Ohio,  85  Sept,  1885.  He  was  edooatsd  in  the
common  schools,  and  early  turned  hi«  attention  to
journalism,  becoming  an  "editorial  writer  for  vari-
ous Philadelphia  pajpetB,  In  1mi;9  he  assumed  the
management  of  the  Philadelphia"  Inquirer."  which
he  has  held  ever  since.  To  his  efforts  are  due  the
first  passage  of  laws  for  regulating  the  admission
of  the  insane  into  asyhmui  m  Pennsylvania, and  the

amelioration  of  their  condition.  Mr.  DsTSI  has
ban  a  contributor  to  magazine  literature  nince
1W7,  has  written  manv  short  stories  and  essays
on  the  dramatic  art.  and  has  al*»  published  "The
Stranded  Ship"  (New  York.  lWJtf).— His  wife,
Kehecca  Harding,  author,  l>.  in  Washington,
Pa.,  21  .June.  is.'il,  passed  her  early  life  :
Virginia,  and  first  attracted  attention  as  a  writer
by  her  "  Life  in  the  Iron  Mills/* pnhlishnil  in  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly  "  in  1881.  TO  the  BsSBS  |hti-
Odioal  she  OOntribnted.  S  few  months  later.  "A
Story  of  TinDav,"  published  in  book-form,  under
the  title  of  "Margaret  Howth"  (1881).  In  IHW
she  was  married  ami  went  to  reside  in  Philadel-
phia. In  lNlii)  she  became  an  <-<Iit«>rial  writer  on
the  stalT  of  the  New  York  "Tribune."  In  addi-
tion to  sketches,  stories,  and  editorial  work,  she
has  published  "Waiting  for  the  Verdict  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1887) ;  -  Dallas  Qalbtaith  "  (1888  :  -John
Andmss"  (1878);  "Berry town"  (1878);  and  "A
I^aw  unto  Herself''  (1878).

DAVIS,  Matthew  I..,  author,  b.  in  1706:  d.  in
Manhattanville,  N.  Y..  21  June,  1880.  lb-  was  by
tnwle  a  printer,  became  a  skilful  writer,  and  at-
tached himself  to  the  political  fortunes  of  Aaron
Burr,  whom  be  supported  in  his  candidacy  for  the
presidency.  For  many  years  be  wrote  letters  fp'in
the  national  capital  to  the  New  York  "Courier
and  Enquirer "  under  the  pen-name  of  "The  spy
in  Washington."  He  also  corresponded  with  the
London  "Times,'' signing  his  letters  "Tin
rose  Traveller."  He  was  associated  with  Philip
Freneau  in  the  publication  of  the  "  Timepiece  ami
Literary  Companion"  in  New  York  city,  which
was  begun  on  18  Sept.,  171*7.  and  ceased  on  ■'>»
Aug.  of  the  following  rear.  For  many  yean  be-
fore Burrs  death  Davis  was  his  only  intimate
friend  and  associate.  He  published  "Memoirs of
Aaron  Burr,  with  Miscellaneous  Cof IVSpondenoo "
(New  York.  1888-*7\  and  edited  Burr's  ••  Private
Journal  during  his  Residence  in  Europe "(U

DAVIS,  Nathan  Smith,  physsrisjLU,  taQrssaa,
Chenango  «•«»..  N.  Y..  t»  Jan..  1M7.  He  wa^  gradu-
ated at the  medical  college  in Fairfield.  N.  Y..  in

lablished  bimeelf  in  practice  at  ranghanv
ton,  contributed  notable  papers  on  »!>••  •

system  to  medical  journals,  and  was  instrumental
in  establishing  the  National  medical  association. of
which he  was  president in  lie  removed

to  New  York  in  1847,  asausnsd  the  sdllorshlu  of

\nnalist  " in 1*4*. and in 1881 SJI
Chicago. 111.,  to  take  the  chair  of  physiology  and
pathology in  the Push  medical school. 1
lie assumed charge also of the dc|«artmeiit of
practice  of  medicine. He  assisted  in  organising S>
state  and  a  citv  medical  association,  and  was  one
Of  the  principal  founders  of  Mercy  istsspHa
conniption with the medical SOllegC eontinnsd

until  be  sssiimod  the  editorship  of  the  Chicago
•  Medical  Examiner"  in  1*60. lie  also  conducted


106


DAVIS


DAVIS


for  more  than  twenty  years  the  "Northwestern
Journal,"  of  which  he  took  charge  in  1868.  H<
was  one  of  the  founders  of  Northwestern  uni-
versity, the  Chicago  academy  of  sciences,  and  the
Washingtonian  home  for  the  reformation  of  in-
ebriates, of  which  he  was  chosen  president.  This
office  lie  resigned,  and  also  gave  up  the  editorship
«>f  tlie  '■  Medical  Examiner." In  1883  he  was  ap-

S fated  editor  of  the  "Journal  of  the  American
edical  Association."  In  May,  1880.  he  was  elect-
ed president  of  the  International  medical  congress.
In  the  Chicago  medical  college,  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  Northwestern  university,  he  assumed
the  professorship  of  the  principles  and  practice  of
medicine  and  of  clinical  medicine,  and  is  also  dean
of  the  faculty.  His  principal  published  writings
are  an  "  Essay  on  the  Philosophy  of  Medicine  ' ;
"  Medical  Education  and  Reform  " ;  "  Remedial
Value  and  Proper  Use  of  Alcoholic  Drinks":
"History  of  Medical  Education  in  the  United
States";  "An  Experimental  Inquiry  concerning
the  Functions  of  Assimilation,  Nutrition,  and  Ani-
mal Heat";  "  Clinical  Lectures"  (1873);  the  chap-
ter on  "  Bronchitis  "  in  the  "  American  System  of
Practice  of  Medicine  " ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Princi-
ples and  Practice  of  Medicine"  (Chicago,  1884);
and  an  article  on  "  Insanity  from  Acute  and
Chronic  Alcoholism  "  in  the  "  Hand-Book  of  Medi-
cine "(New  York,  188G).

DAVIS,  Nelson  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Oxford,
Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1821 ;  d.  on  Govern-
or's Island,  15  May,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U,  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  and  served  in
the  war  with  Mexico,  received  the  brevet  of  1st  lieu-
tenant for  gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,
and  was  also  at  t  he  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  the  battle  of
Cerro  Gordo,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexi-
co. He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  8  June,  1849,
and  then  served  on  the  frontier,  being  engaged  in
several  actions  while  on  the  Sierra  Nevada  expedi-
tion of  1849-'50,  and  taking  part  in  the  Rogue
river  expedition  of  1853.  He  was  made  captain
on  3  March,  1855,  was  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,
and  from  4  Sept.  to  12  Nov.,  1861,  was  colonel  of
the  7th  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  then  be-
came major  and  assistant  inspector-general,  and
served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  till  the  au-
tumn of  1863,  receiving  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-
colonel  for  gallantry  at  Gettysburg.  He  was  then
transferred  to  New  Mexico,  was  brevetted  colonel
27  June,  1865,  for  his  services  against  the  Apache
Indians,  and  also  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  for  his  services  in  the  civil  war.  He  was
inspector-general  of  the  district  of  New  Mexico  in
1868,  of  the  department  of  Missouri  in  1868-72,
was  on  a  tour  of  inspection  till  1876,  and  then
became  inspector-general  of  the  division  of  the
Atlantic.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
on  1 1  March,  1885,  and  retired  on  20  Sept.

DAVIS,  Noah,  jurist,  b.  in  Haverhill,  N.  H.,
10  Sept.,  1818.  He  was  educated  at  Albion,  N.  Y.,
whither  his  parents  removed  in  1825,  and  in  the
seminary  at  Lima,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1841,  and  practised  in  Gaines,  and  then
in  Buffalo.  In  1844  ne  formed  a  partnership  with
Sanford  E.  Church,  with  whom  he  practised  in
Albion  for  fourteen  years,  until  he  was  appointed,
in  .March,  1857,  a  justice  of  the  New  York  supreme
court,  to  which  office  he  was  subsequently  twice
elected.  After  serving  for  two  years  as  judge,  he
resigned  in  November,  1868,  having  been  elected  as
a  Republican  to  the  National  house  of  representa-
tives. He  served  in  congress  from  4  March,  1869,
till  20  July,  1870,  when  he  resigned,  having  been
appointed*  by  President  Grant  U.  S.  attorney  for


the  southern  district  of  New  York.  He  resigned
that  office  on  31  Dec.,  1872,  being  elected  a  justice
OJ  the  New  York  state  supreme  court  for  the  term
expiring  in  December;  1887.  The  trial  of  the  case
of  Bd  ward  Stokes
for  the  murder  of
Fisk.  and  that  of
William  M.Tweed
for  malfeasance  in
office, were  held  be-
fore him  soon  after
he  took  his  place
on  the  bench.  He
sentenced  Tweed
to  a  year's  impris-
onment for  each  of
the  twelve  counts
of  the  indictment;
but,  two  years  lat-
er, the  court,  of  ap-
peals decided  that
this  cumulative
sentence  was  con-
trary to  law.  In
1874 he became

f  residing  justice,
n  January,  1887,  he  was  retired  from  the  bench,
and  resumed  practice.  On  his  retirement,  he
said:  "It  is  my  nature  to  form  strong  convic-
tions, and  sometimes  I  express  them  too  strongly,
but  neither  by  speech  nor  silence  have  I  ever  de-
signed to  injure  any  suitor  or  his  counsel.  In
searching  the  record  of  my  iudicial  life  I  can  find
no  entry  that  I  ever  decided  any  cause  or  matter
contrary  to  my  then  convictions  of  right."  A  com-
mittee of  lawyers  presented  Judge  Davis's  portrait
by  Daniel  Huntington  to  the  supreme  court.

DAVIS,  Noah  Knowles,  educator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  15  May,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Mercer  university,  Ga.,  in  1849,  and  then  spent
several  years  in  Philadelphia,  chiefly  in  the  study
of  chemistry.  While  here  he  edited  the  "  Model
Architect "  and  the  "  Carpenter's  Guide."  In  1852
he  became  professor  of  natural  science  in  Howard
college,  Marion,  Ala.,  and  in  1859  principal  of  the
Judson  female  institute  at  the  same  place.  In  1868
he  was  elected  president  of  Bethel  college,  Russell-
ville,  Ky.  In  1873  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
moral  science  in  the  University  of  Virginia.  Dr.
Davis  is  the  author  of  "  The  Theory  of  Thought,  a
Treatise  on  Deductive  Logic"  (New  York,  1880);
and  has  contributed  to  various  reviews.  He  has
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  In  religious  profes-
sion Dr.  Davis  is  a  Baptist,  and  is  prominent  and
active  in  the  councils  of  that  denomination.

DAVIS,  Paulina  (Wkight),  reformer,  b.  in
Bloomfield,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  24  Aug.,  1876.  She  married  Francis  Wright,
of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1833,  and  after  his  death  became
in  1849  the  wife  of  Thomas  Davis,  of  Providence,
R.  I.,  who  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1853-'5.
For  thirty-five  years  she  labored  zealously  to  pro-
mote the  rights  of  women,  established  "  The  Una,"
the  first  woman-suffrage  paper,  wrote  a  history  of
woman-suffrage  reform,  and  gave  lectures  in  the
principal  cities  of  the  United  States.

DAVIS,  Reuben,  lawyer,  b.  in  Tullahoma,
Tenn.,  18  Jan.,  1813,  and  was  educated  there.  He
studied  medicine,  and  after  a  few  years'  practice
abandoned  that  profession  for  the  study  of  law.
He  removed  to  Al)erdeen,  Miss.,  and  was  prosecut-
ing attorney  for  the  6th  judicial  district  from  1835
till  1839.  He  was  appointed  judge  of  the  high
court  of  appeals  in  1*4:2.  but  resigned  after  four
months'  service. He  served,  in  the  w^r  with  Mexico,


DAVIS


dawks


lot


as  colonel  of  the  Id  regiment  of  MiMsi»sippi  volun-
teers. He  was  a  member  of tin- state  MM  of

n  Mississippi,  serving  from  1h.*i7  till
i  be  retired  mm  entered  we  Confederate

annv  M  brigadier-general.  mmifftmUng  a  bn.
of Mississippi militia in Kentucky. After the
dose  of  the  civil  war  Mr.  Davis  reeumed  his  Ira
practice. He  baa  publiabed  M  Reoolleotiona of  Mis-
sissippi and  Mississippians"  (Boston,  1kh1»).

I»V\  Is.  Itichurd  Bingham,  poet,  b,  in  New
York  city,  21  Aug..  1771  ;  d.  in  Efoa  Brunswick.
N.  .1..  in  I7!''.».  II'  smo  edlWted  at  Columbia,  but
was  not  graduated.  He  pursued  ilie  business  of
his  father,  wood-carving,  until  171M5,  when  he  be-
came editor  of  the  "Diary."  a  daily  gazette  pub-
lished 111  New  York,  for  which  he  wrote  about  one
fear.  He  then  engaged  in  mercantile  business,
n  appearance  he  is  said  to  have  Ix-en  somewhat
like  Oliver  (ioldsmith— awkward  in  mannerand  |xr-
son,  as  well  as  in  s[>eech.  His  poems  are  expres-
sions of  personal  sentiment,  tinned  with  melan-
choly. They  were  collected  and  published  DJ  the
"Cailio|H-an  Sx'iety,"  of  which  he  was  a  member
(New  York,  1807).  An  •'  Ode  to  Imagination  "  shows
Ins  eariie-tne-s.  and  an  "Elegy  on  an  Old  Wig,
found  in  the  Street,"  his  humor.  He  was  also  a
contriliutor  to  the  "Drone  Pa|>ers,"  published  in
the  "  New  York  Magazine,"  for  which  he  wrote  a
well-drawn  character-sketch  of  himself,  under  the
name  of  "  Martlctt."

DA  VIS.  S>  hun  us,  pioneer,  d.  in  Boston  in  1704.
In  .lime.  1  •'►.">'.*,  he  bought  a  tract  of  land  of  the
Indians  in  Dainariscotta.  Maine.  He  resided  for
some  time  at  Sheepscott,  was  severely  wounded
while  making  his  MOHM  from  Fort  Arowsic,  and
captured  by  Indians  in  August,  1076.  He  accom-
panied Mai.  Waldron's  expedition  early  in  in 7 7,
and  resided  in  Falmouth,  where  he  owned  land,  in
1680.  He  commanded  Fort  Loyal,  Falmouth,  and
after  a  five  days'  defence  was  obliged  to  surrender
it  to  the  French  and  Indians  in  May,  10SH).  He
was  carried  to  Quebec,  and  exchanged  four  months
later.  He  was  a  counsellor  in  1691-'2.  His  ac-
count of  the  conduct  of  the  war  is  preserved  in
the  Massachusetts  historical  collections.

DAVIS,  Thomas  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in
Wilmington.  N.  ('.,  6  Feb.,  1804;  d.  in  Camden.
S.  ('..  |  Dec.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Fni-
\er>ity  of  North  Carolina,  Chapel  1 1  ill.  in  1898,
studied  law,  and  practised,  but  subsequently  stud-
ied theology,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  Wilming-
ton by  Bishop  Ives,  27  Nov..  1KB,  and  priest  by
the  same  bishop in  I'ittsl>oro\  16  Dec.,  1832.  He
officiated  in  Pittaboro'  while  in  deacon's  orders,  be-
came  rector  of  St.  James's  church.  Wilmington,
and  St.  Luke's  church.  Salisbury,  N.C.  In  Novem-
ber, 1846,  he  removed  to  South  Carolina,  and  be-
came rector  of  Grace  church,  Camden.  He  was
fleeted  bishop  of  the  diocese,  and  consecrated  in  St.
John's  chapel  New  York,  17  Oct..  1N-V1.  Bishop
Davis  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Colombia
college  In  1858,  and  the  same  year  from  tin'  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina.

DAVIS.  William  Bramwell,  physician,  b,  in
Cincinnati.  22  July.  1n:52.  His  parents  emigrated
to  the  United  States  from  Wales.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesl.van  university  in  1S">2.  ami  in  1806
at  Miami  medical  college,  where  since  W-l  he  btJ
1m  en  professor  of  therapeutics.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  surgeon  of  the  187th  regiment  of  Ofajo
volunteers,  and  Burgeon  at  the  West  Kml  military
.  in  Cincinnati.  He  has  been  identified  with
many  of  the  public  offiOM  of  that  city,  as  well  as
the  medical  and  educational  associations. In  1879


he  travelled in ■uofta. Some  of hie  principal

publications  are  **  Kepor

medical  mill

Life Insiira " i  vim«  man

cinnati  medical  «*

and Animal Vaccine"  Intestinal

•.miction  "  (I860)] -I'ro-r.ss  of Therapeutic*"

(1KH1):  and  "The  Alcohol  Uuestioi

DAVIs.  \\ Ibury,  jurist,  b

2.*»  Julv.  1H1M;  ,|.  i„  Portland.  L*.  Aug.,  1*71.  At
an  early  age  he  removed  with  his  parent*  to  Brooks,
Waldo  co..  where  he  was  edw  at. -d.  lb
law  in  Belfast,  began  to  pjnotaaj  his  profession  in
Portland,  and  was  elected  a  Jodgl
court.  In  lHUi  he  was  appointed  | ->st master  of
Portland,  and  relinquished  law  practice.  Judge
Davis  took  an  active  interest  in  the  temperance
reform,  and  was  instrumental  in  shaping  the  legis-
lation  of  the  state  u|«>n  that  question,  lb- was  an
anti-slavery  man,  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the
republican  party.  He  contributed  many  articles
on  politioaj  and  legal  subjects  to  the  newspapers  of
his  native  state,  to  the  New  York  "  Indein udent."
and  to  various  periodicals  ami  published  ••  The
Beautiful  City."  a  religious  book  (New  York,  1809).

DAWKS. Benin l.aii  t  tn-. MMMn,  b. in
Cuinmington,  Mass.,  80  Oct.,  lsl'». Be  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1880,  bffWHIW  I  teacher,  and  edited
the  Greenfield "Gazette." and suWquently  the
Adams  "Transcript." He  was  admitted to  the
Imr  in  1848, and  ■erred  in  the  legislature  fn  i
till  1850,  when  he  Ijccame  a  member  of  tl  •
senate. He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
convention  in 1N.W,  ami  attorney  for  the  ■
dist riit of Massachusetts,  continuing until 1K"»7.
when  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  served  as  a
memberof  the  committee  on  Revolutionary  claim*.
He remained in congress by  successive re-elec-
tions until  ih7:i. In  1886  be  was  a  delegate  to
the Loyalists' (.invention  in Philadelphia,  and  in
lH7.r)  be  succeeded  Charles  Sumner  in  the  senate,
and  was  re-elected  in  1**1  and  1887. He  has  bat  ii
chairman  of  the  committee  on  ways  and means,
has  served  on  committee  on  public  buildii  .
grounds,  and  inaugurated  the  measure  by  which
the  completion
of the Wash-
ington monu-
ment  was  un-
dertaken. Ib-
is the author
of  many  tariff
measures,  end
assisted  in  the
construct  ioiiof
the wool and
woollen tarilT
of  1H<5N,  which
was the basis
of  all  wool  and
woollens  from
that  time  until
\sxi. He is

also  a  member
of  the  commit-
tees on  appro-
bations, civil  service,  fisheries.  Re volutionaiyolatma.
and  Indian  and  naval  affairs,  lb  was  appointed
on  a  sjiecial  committee  (..  investigate  the  Indian
disturbances  in  the  Indian  territory,  upon  which
he  made  a  valuable  report  The  entire  system  of
Indian  education  due  to  legislation  wa<
bv  Mr.  Dawes.  Among  the  ini|«>rtant  bills  of  hi*
authorship  passed  an  •  dty  bill,  the  Sioux

bill  and  the  bill  making  Indians  subject  to  and


jx&*Z&


108


DAWES


DAWSON


Erotected  by  our  criminal  laws.  One  of  his  most
nportant  measures  was  the  introduction  of  the
••  Weather  Hulk-tin,"  in  1869,  at  the  suggestion  of
Prof.  Cleveland  Ahm,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting
and  comparing  weather  reports  from  all  parts  of
the  country. —  Bia  daughter.  Anna  Laikens,  is
known  as  a  writer  on  political  topics.

DAWES,  James  W.,  senator,  b.  in  McConnels-
ville,  Ohio,  8  Jan.,  1845.  In  1850  he  removed  with
his  parents  to  Ncwj>ort,  Wis.,  where  he  recti  veil  a
common-school  education.  After  studying  law  at
Fox  Lake,  Wis.,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1871.
He  was  engaged  in  mercantile  business  until  1877,
and  since  that  time  has  practised  his  profession.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Nebraska  constitutional
convention  in  1875,  and  was  chosen  a  U.S.  senator
from  that  state  in  1876.  He  was  chairman  of  the
Republican  state  central  committee  of  Nebraska
from  1876  till  1882.  In  1880  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  Republican  national  convention  at  Chicago,
and  was  a  member  of  the  National  republican  com-
mittee for  Nebraska  for  a  terra  of  four  years.  Since
1875  he  has  been  trustee  and  secretary  of  Doane
college  at  Crete,  Neb.  He  was  elected  governor  of
Nebraska  in  1882,  and  re-elected  in  1884.

DAWES,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  Boston,  5  Aug.,
1731 ;  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1809.  He  was  a  mechanic,
and  had  received  a  common-school  education.  Dur-
ing the  controversy  with  Great  Britain  he  was  made
colonel  of  the  Boston  regiment  in  1773,  serving
until  1778.  He  often  presided  at  the  town-meet-
ings of  Boston.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house
and  of  the  senate,  as  well  as  state  councillor,  and
also  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences.
— His  son,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  8  July,
1757;  d.  there,  22  July,  1825,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1777.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  conventions  of  1780  and  1820,  and
of  that  which  adopted  the  Federal  constitution  in
1789.  He  was  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Mas-
sachusetts from  1792  till  1803,  judge  of  the  mu-
nicipal court  from  1803  till  1823,  and  judge  of
probate  until  his  death.  His  literary  productions
were  popular,  and  his  witticisms  proverbial.  He
published  an  "Oration"  (July,  1787),  an  "Oration
on  the  Boston  Massacre,"  and  the  *•  Law  Given  on
Mount  Sinai"  (1777).  He  was  a  member  of  the
Academy  of  arts  and  sciences. — His  son,  Rufus,
poet,  b.  in  Boston,  26  Jan.,  1803;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  30  Nov.,  1859,  entered  Harvard  in  1820,  but
was  refused  a  degree,  owing  to  his  supposed  partici-
pation in  a  breach  of  discipline.  He  resented  this
accusation,  which  was  afterward  proved  to  be  un-
just, by  publishing  a  satirical  poem  on  the  faculty.
He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but
never  practised.  He  contributed  poems  to  the
"  United  States  Literary  Gazette,"  published  in
Cambridge,  and  conducted  for  a  time  a  weekly
paper  in Baltimore,  called  the  "  Emerald." He

gublished  "  The  Valley  of  the  Nashaway,  and  other
oeras  "  (1830) ;  "  Geraldine,"  a  composition  resem-
bling "  Don  Juan  "  in  form  and  treatment  (1839) ;
"  Athena  of  Damascus,"  a  tragedy  founded  on  the
siege  of  Damascus  by  the  Turks,  A.  D.  634  (1839) ;
"  Nix's  Mate,"  a  spirited  and  successful  romance
(1840);  an  "  Ode  on  the  Death  of  Walter  Scott"-;
also  several  songs  and  poems,  some  of  which  were
sung  at  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  Bunker
Hill  monument.  Mr.  Dawes  held  a  government
office  in  one  of  the  departments  in  Washington
during  the  latter  years  of  his  life.  He  was  a  Swe-
denborgian,  and  frequently  preached.

DAWES,  William,  patriot,  of  Lexington.  He
was  despatched  to  Lexington,  with  Paul  Revere,
on  18  April,  1775,  and  rode  through  Roxbury,  Re-


vere going  by  way  of  Charlestown.  In  the  morning
of  19  April  the  message  from  Warren  reached
Adams  and  Hancock.  Revere  and  Dawes,  joined
by  Samuel  Prescott,  from  Concord,  rode  forward,
calling  the  inhabitants. At  Lincoln  they  were  but*

E rifled  by  a  party of  British  officers,  and both
•awes  and  Revere  were  seized  and  taken  to  Lex-
ington. Prescott  made  his  escape  to  Concord.

DAWSON,  Benjamin  Frederick,  physician,
b,  in  New  York  city,  28  June,  1847;  u.  there,  3
April,  1888.  He  studied  at  Columbia,  served  in
1864-'5  as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,
and  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1866.  He  then  settled  in  New
York,  making  a  specialty  of  obstetrics  and  di
of  women  and  children.  He  invented  a  new  gal-
vanic battery  for  galvano-caustic  surgery  in  1876,
the  superior  qualities  of  which  have  done  much
to  advance  that  branch  of  surgery.  In  1868  he
founded  the  "  American  Journal  of  Obstetrics  and
Diseases  of  Women  and  Children,"  which  he  edited
until  1874  Among  his  publications  are  a  trans-
lation, in  conjunction  with  Prof.  Joseph  Karaerer,
of  Klob's  "  Pathological  Anatomy  of  the  Female
Sexual  Organs"  (1868);  an  American  edition  of
Barnes's  "  Obstetric  Operations,"  with  additions
(1870) ;  and  several  monographs  entitled  "  The  Use
and  Comparative  Merits  of  the  Bichloride  of  Me-
thyline  as  an  Anaesthetic  (1874);  and  "Relations
between  Alimentation  and  the  Gastro-intcstinal
Disorders  of  Infants  and  Young  Children  "  (1875).
DAWSON,  George,  journalist,  b.  in  Falkirk,
Scotland.  14  March,  1813 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  17
Feb.,  1883.  Though  without  the  advantages  of
early  schooling,  he  obtained  an  education  through
his  own  exertions.  At  five  years  of  age  he  was
brought  to  this  country  by  his  parents,  and  at
eleven  was  placed  in  a  printing-office  in  Niagara
county,  N.  Y.  In  1826  he  removed  to  Rochester
and  found  employment  in  the  office  of  the  "  Anti-
Masonic  Inquirer,"  edited  by  Thurlow  Weed.  In
1830  he  accompanied  Mr.  Weed  to  Albany,  and  be-
came foreman  in  the  office  of  the  "  Evening  Jour-
nal." From  1836  till  1839  he  was  editor  of  the
Rochester  daily  "Democrat,"  and  from  1839  till
1842  of  the  Detroit  daily  "Advertiser,"  when  he
returned  to  Rochester  and  resumed  the  editorial
charge  of  the  "  Democrat."  In  1846  he  became  as-
sociate editor  of  the  Albany  "  Evening  Journal,"
and,  on  Mr.  Weed's  retirement  in  1862,  assumed
control  of  the  paper  as  senior  editor  and  proprie-
tor, remaining  m  that  relation  until  1877.  He  was
postmaster  of  Albany  from  1861  till  1867.  In  1850
lie  travelled  in  Europe.  Though  ardently  devoted
to  the  republican  party,  Mr.  Dawson  was  far  above
the  narrow  partisan.  He  was  an  able  and  zealous
advocate  of  all  patriotic  and  philanthropic  enter-

S rises,  and  especially  of  free  schools.  He  was  a
evout  Christian,  especially  active  in  the  benevolent
works  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  to  which  he
belonged.  He  gave  much  time  and  attention  to
the  subject  of  Sunday-school  missions,  in  connec-
tion with  which  he  was  teacher,  superintendent,
and  lay  preacher.  He  was  the  author  of  "The
Pleasures  of  Angling  "  (New  York,  1876).

DAWSON,  Henry  Barton,  historian,  b.  in  Gos-
herton.  Lincolnshire,  England,  8  June,  1821 ;  d.  in
Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  23  May,  1889.  He  came  to  Now
York  in  1834.  In  1840  he  contributed  to  the  daily
press,  and  in  1845-'6  undertook  the  editorship  of
the  "  Crystal  Fount,"  a  temperance  newspaper.  1 1  is
first  historical  composition  was  a  "  History  of  the
Park"  and  its  vicinity,  which  was  published  in  the
"  Corporation  Manual  "  (1855).  In  1&58  he
the  publication,  in  serial  form,  of  his  "Battles


daw

the United State- by Bai and Land." and

mm  Involved  in  ■  oontroversi  ooncercing  t hi-
merits  of  Gen.  Israel  Putnam. The  «•■  «nt  t

was  carried  "ii  bj  OOCVMBOOMBOa  in  the  Hurt-
ford  "Post,"  itml  attracted  mm-h  attention,  and
tin-  legislature  <<f  Connecticut  took  >.|MM-ial  action
on the  subject. The  letters  wen-  subsequently

[•uNi-hed in book-form,  and  copii  Id  a-

ligh  a-'*  ♦•"»<>. In 1868 .Mr.  DaWBOU made  a  OOOfe-

plete  transcript  of  the  receipts  and  disbursements
of  moneys  for  the  municipal  purposes  of  New
fork  during  the  occupation  of  that  city  by  the

British annv, l??»t to K^t, from the original

vouchors,  fn  1868  bo  edited  the  M Fosdemuet,"
the  distinguishing  feature  of  hie  work  being  toe

restoration  of  the  original  text  and  the  rejection
<<f  unauthorised  mutilations. Its  publioatiou  culled

forth  an  attack  by  John  Jay  ami  James  A.  Ham-
ilton, and  a  long  OOntrOVefSV  en-ued.  which  wits
afterward  reprinted  in  a  volume  entitled  "Cur-
rent Fictions  tested  by  Fncurrent  Pacta M  1 186 L.
In  1805  he  lH'camee<litorof  the  " Qaastte,"  a  demo-
cratic newspaper  published  in  Yonkers.  The  flrst
page  of  the  paper  WSJ  OOSUpied  bj  historical  and
biuiogtaphioa]  material.  Judge  neleocvof  the  U.
pspramo  court,  once  ordered  a  case  to  1*-  re-
argued, in  order  that  articles  bearing  on  it  which
had  appeared  in  the  "Gazette"  after  the  oase  had
Ix-cii  argued,  might  1h-  judicially  admitted  as  au-
thorities. In  1886  Mr.  Dawson  became  editor  of
the  "  Historical  Magazine,"  which  in  1N77  he  en-
larged to  double  its  previous  size.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  many  learned  societies,  and  read  I>efore
them  a  large  number  of  papers.  He  published  in
book-form  "  Matties  of  the  United  States  by  Sea
and  Land"  (New  York.  IKoSi;  ••  The  Fu-dcralist  "
<lsi^t;  :{d  ed..  1864);  "Current  Fictions"  (1804):
"  Recollections  of  the  Jersev  Prison-Ship,  by  Capt.
Thomas  Dring,  one  of  the  Prisoners."  edited  from
the  original  manuscript  (1805);  "  Kutgers  against
Waddington  "(lN»Wj);  and  "Westchester  Count  v  in
the  Revolution"  (1880).

DAWSON.  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1702:  d.  in  Washington,  I>.  c..  BO  March.  1814.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  17*2.  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  a  presiden-
tial elector  on  the  Washington  ticket  in  1786,  ■
niemlier  of  the  Virginia  legislature,  and  a  repre-
sentative of  congress  from  Virginia  for  nine  con-
secutive terms,  serving  from  15  May.  17!»7,  till  30

March,  1814. He  was  boarer  of  deapatohee  n i

I'tv-id.-nt  Adams  to  France  in  1801,  and  in  tin-
war  of  1812— '5  was  one  of  (Jen.  Jackson's  aides.

DAWSON.  John  Littleton,  lawyer,  b.  in
Fniontown.  I'a..  7  Feb..  I8l6j  d.  there.  18  Se|.t..
1870.  He  was  educated  at  Washington  college,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  practic-
ing first  in  Brownsville,  Pa.  In  1845  he  was  ap-
pointed  V.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  western
district  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  a  member  of
mes  from  1851  till  1865,  and  was  elected  again
in  lsii7.  He  was  the  author  of  tie-  Iloine-t.ad
bill  of  1854.  In  1858  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Kansas,  but  declined  the  office.  He  was  a  dele-
to  the  Democratic  national  conventions  of
[844,  1H4M.  I860,  and

DAWSON,  Sir  John  William,  Canadian  geolo-
i>.  in  I'lctoii.  Nova  Scotia,  18  Oct,  1890.  His
father  came  from  the  north  of  Sot  land  early  in
the  century  and  settled  at  Piotou.  The  son'  re-
ceived his  early  training  at  the  OoUege  of  Plctou,
and,  baring  finished  his  oouree  there,  entered  Bdin-
burgh  university,  returning  to  Nova  S-otia  after
passing  a  winter  in  studv. So  early as his  tenth

he  manifeated  that  love  of  eoienoe  which  sub-


DAWSON


108


jT/fa&u**^


I  eequeiitlv  hassans hi- •  hiaf characteristic,  end
while  proHeeuting  the  n  .nm  of  study  at

I'icton  college  he  made  exteosiTe - •;i.-etJons  in
the  natural histor
IK42  he  accompanied  Sir  Charies
scientific  tour  in  Nova  Seotia,  mad  rigi-

Dal  discoveries  m  paleontology,  and  followed  up
hi-  investigations  b)  -tudi.-  ..f  the  i  u

on  whi.l, |,i-
tWO  iui|M.rtant panon  to  the  Geological  em
London. In 1846  he  returned  to  Edinburgh  uni-
versity,  studying practical chemistry ami other
subjects In  I860
he  was  appointed
superintendent  <»i

education  for  Nova
Scotia, an office

which he  held for  ^k  Stfr

three  nam  He
also  aided  materi-
ally in  establishing
a  normal  school  in
Nova  Scotia,  and
in regulating the

■flairs  of  the  Cni-

ver-itv Of New

Brunswick,  as  a
member  of  the
commission  ap-
pointed f,,r  that
purpose.  In  con-
nection with  these

labors  be  published  elaborate  reports  <>n  the  -
of  Nova  Scotia,  and  a  hand-book  entitled
entitle  Contribution!  toward  the  Improvesaonf  of
Agriculture."  In  I860  he  became  principal  and
profceeor  of  natural  history  in  Mctiill  oollege,
Montreal.  Winn  Prof.  Dawson  was  appointed,
the  medical  department  of  the  college  alone  wee  la

a  flourishing  condition,  but soon  after  he  assumed

the  management  all  the  other  department!  became
prosperous. In  1857  be  secured  the  establishment

of  .Mctiill  normal  schi>ol  for  the  training  of  Prot-
estant teachers,  hfamt  it-  principal. and  lectured
in  it  on  natural  science  until  1*70.  In  1 v
established  a  school  of  civil  engineering,  which
was  discontinued  in  1W1  by  an  act  of  the  l<
ture,  but  which  he  revived  In  is?l  as  the  de|iart-
ment  of  practical  and  applied  science  in  oonnoc-
tion  with  the  college  over  which  he  presided.  Dr.
Dawson  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Qeologlnal
society  of  London  in  1854. and  <>f  the  Royal  tot  i«-t  v
in  lsii2:  was  elected  president  of  tte  American  aa-
sodetkmsnd  of  the  Soya]  societyefCanada  in  1886,
and  of  the  Uriti-h  assneistion  in  1886.  Be  was
created  a  companion  of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and
8t  George  in  1888,  and  knighted  in  is^v la  1861

he  discovered the  I>>  iuii rr/»  tun  tirmlinnum,  ASM

utsiisfii,  end  other  fossil  reptile*,  and  in  \**'*  the
eonatieaes,  the  moat  imiMirtant  of  his  geo-
logical discoveries. This  f<>--i]  had  l«ccii  before

noticed  by  Sir  William  Logan  ;  but  Dr.  Dawson.
to  whom  he  submitted  his  specimens,  was  the  firM
to  deinoiistrate  it-  foniiiiiniferous  chanu  ter  mid
to  flcSMlHwi  it-  -tiuctun'. Hitherto  the  I^turentiati

r.H  k-  had  been  regarded  a>  deroid  of  life,  and
were  known  as  the  a/oie.  but  Dr.  Daw -.n  now
substituted  the  name  sosssn. Whan  lbs  theory  of

evolution was piini.ii; ground among men of

ssienoe,  Dr.  Dawson  strongly  opposed  the  extreme

view,  and  he  has  always  shown  an  avavakm  to  thoee
gcientiflc  hypotheees  which  s»t-in  to  threaten  the
foundatione  of  religious  faith. In  a  coum

lure- il.liver.il ll  ^ in ls?» '' he  con-

tended that  the  discoveries  of  modern  science,  so


110


DAWSON


DAY


far  as  they  are  facts,  harmonize  completely  with
the  sacred  record.  In  1hs;{  Dr.  Dawson  travelled
in  Egypt  and  Syria.  His  numerous  scientific
papers  include  "  The  Formation  of  Gypsum."
••  Boulder  Formation,"  "The  Renewal  of  Forests
destroyed  by  Fire,"  "  Mode  of  Accumulation  of
Coal,"  and  "On  the  Triassic  Red  Sandstone  of
Nova  Scotia  and  Prince  Edward  Island."  He  has
published  in  hook-form  "  Hand-Book  of  Geography
and  Natural  History  of  Nova  Scotia";  "Acadian
Geology  "  (1855) ;  "  Archaia,  or  Studies  of  Creation
in  Genesis "  (1859) ;  "  Air-Breathers  of  the  Coal
Period  " ;  "  Notes  on  the  Post-Pliocene  of  Canada  "
(is?.!);  "The  Story  of  the  Earth  and  Man  "  (New
York,  1873);  "Science  and  the  Bible"  (1875);
"The  Dawn  of  Life"  (1875) ;  "The  Origin  of  the
World  "  (1877) ;  "  Fossil  Men  and  their  Modern
Representatives"  (1878);  "  The  Change  of  Life  in
Geological  Time  "  (1880) ;  "  Chain  of  Life  "  (1884) ;
anil  "  Egypt  and  Syria"  (1885).— His  son,  George
Mercer,  Canadian  geologist,  b.  in  Pictou,  Nova
Scotia,  1  Aug.,  1849,  was  educated  at  McGill  col-
lege and  at  the  Royal  school  of  mines,  London,
gaining  at  the  latter  the  Edward  Forbes  medal  in
paleontology  and  the  Murchison  medal  in  geology,
and  being  graduated  as  R.  S.  M.  in  1872.  In
1873-'4  he  was  geologist  and  naturalist  in  connec-
tion with  Her  Majesty's  North  American  boundary
commission,  and  since  then  has  been  assistant
director  of  the  geological  survey  of  Canada.  He
has  travelled  extensively  in  British  Columbia,  the
Canadian  northwest,  and  in  Europe,  in  connec-
tion with  the  investigation  of  mining  industries.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Geology  and  Resources  of
the  Forty-ninth  Parallel,"  reports  in  connection
with  geological  survey,  and  numerous  papers  on
geology,  natural  history,  and  ethnology.

DAWSON,  Samuel  Kennedy,  soldier,  b.  in
Fayette  county,  Pa.,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  17
April,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1839,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artil-
lery. He  served  on  the  frontier  at  Plattsburg  dur-
ing the  Canada  border  disturbances  of  1839,  and
on  the  Maine  frontier,  pending  the  "  disputed  terri-
tory "  controversy  in  1840.  During  the  war  with
Mexico  he  was  at  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto,  Resaca
de  la  Palma,  and  Cerro  Gordo,  and  took  part  in  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  promoted  to  be  first
lieutenant,  18  June,  1846,  brevet  captain,  18  April,
1847,  captain,  31  March,  1853,  and  major  of  the  19th
infantry,  14  May,  1861.  Capt.  Dawson  took  part  in
the  campaigns  against  the  Seminoles,  1851-  6,  and
was  attached  to  the  party  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of
Cortinas's  Mexican  marauders  in  1859.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  present  at  the  bombardment  of
Fort  Pickens,  in  1861,  and  served  in  the  Tennessee
campaign  of  1863,  being  severely  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Chickamauga,  for  which  he  was  promoted
to  be  brevet  colonel,  and  subsequently  brevet  briga-
dier-general, for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
during  the  war.  He  was  commissioned  colonel  of
the  19th  infantry,  28  July,  1866.  In  1865  and  1866
he  commanded  a  detachment  of  the  15th  infantry
at  Mobile,  and  the  entire  regiment  at  Macon,  Ga.
He  was  retired  11  May,  1870.

DAWSON,  Simon  James,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Scotland  about  1820.  He  came  to  Canada  when  a
boy.  In  1851  he  was  appointed  to  plan  and  super-
intend the  construction  of  extensive  works  then
contemplated  on  the  St.  Maurice,  to  open  up  the
vast  pine  regions  of  that  river  and  its  tributaries
(previously  almost  inaccessible  to  the  lumber  trade),
which  works  he  performed  successfully.  He  was
appointed  in  1857  to  explore  the  country  from
Lake  Superior  to  the Saskatchewan,  completed


the  work,  and  reported  upon  its  adaptability  for
settlement.  For  some  years  afterward  he  carried
on  business  as  a  timber-merchant  on  the  St.  Maur-
ice. In  1868  he  was  coinniissioned  to  begin  the
construction  of  the  route  to  Red  River,  now  known.
as  the  "  Dawson  route  " ;  and  in  1870  h'j  conducted
the  Red  river  expeditionary  force  under  Col.  (now
Lord)  Wolseley,  to  suppress  the  half-breed  insur-
rection in  the  northwest.  In  1873  he  was  joint
commissioner  with  the  lieutenant-governor  of
Manitoba  and  the  Indian  commissioner  of  the
northwest  in  concluding  a  treaty  with  the  Saul-
teux  tribe  of  the  Oiibway  Indians.  Ho  resigned
the  charge  of  the  Dawson  route  on  becoming  a
candidate  for  Algoma,  for  which  he  was  returned
at  the  general  election  for  Ontario  in  1875.  He
resigned  his  seat  in  the  local  legislature,  and  was
elected  for  Algoma  for  the  Canadian  parliament
in  1878,  and  again  in  1882.  Mr.  Dawson  has  done
much  to  improve  his  constituency  and  to  ameli-
orate the  condition  of  the  Indians,  and  in  parlia-
ment has  advocated  the  formation  into  a  separate
province  of  the  great  region  between  the  81st  to
the  95th  meridian — »".  e.,  from  French  river  to  the
Lake  of  the  Woods.

DAWSON,  William  C,  senator,  b.  in  Greene
county,  Ga.,  4  Jan.,  1798;  d.  in  Greensborough,
Ga..  5  May,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Franklin
college  in  1816,  and  completed  his  law  studies  in
Litchfield,  Conn.  In  1818  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  settled  in  Greensborough,  where  he  was
successful  as  a  jury  lawyer.  He  was  clerk  of  the
house  of  representatives  of  the  general  assembly  of
the  state  for  twelve  years,  and  several  times  sena-
tor and  representative  in  the  legislature.  He  was
a  member  of  congress  from  1836  till  1842,  being
chairman  of  the  military  committee  and  of  the
committee  on  claims.  He  was  appointed  judge  of
the  Ocmulgee  circuit  in  1845,  and  U.  S.  senator
from  1849  till  1855,  serving  on  important  commit-
tees, and  speaking  on  many  questions  of  national
interest. He  published  "  Laws  of  Georgia"  (1831).

DAY,  George  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Pittsfield,
Mass.,  19  March,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1833,  and  at  Yale  theological  seminarv  in  1838,
when  he  became  assistant  instructor  there  until
1840.  From  1840  till  1851  he  was  settled  as  a  pas-
tor in  Marlboro  and  Northampton,  Mass.  He  was
professor  of  biblical  literature  in  Lane  theological
seminary  from  1851  till  1866,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  the  Hebrew  language,  litera-
ture, and  biblical  theology  in  the  theological  de-
partment of  Yale.  He  edited  the  "Theological
Eclectic  "  from  186$  till  1871,  when  it  was  united
with  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."  He  has  translated
Van  Oostersee's  "Titus,"  in  Lange's  "Commen-
tary," and  also  Van  Oostersee's  "  Biblical  Theology
of  the  New  Testament."  He  was  a  contributor  to
Smith's  "  Bible  Dictionary,"  and  has  published  ar-
ticles in  periodicals  and  "  Reports  on  the  Instruc-
tion of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb"  (1845  and  1861).

DAY,  George  Tiffany,  clergvraan,  b.  in  Concord
(now  Day),  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  Dec.,  1822 ;  d.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  21  May,  1875.  At  five  years  of
age  he  was  set  to  work  in  a  cotton-mill  in  Hope,
R.  I.,  and  for  several  years  his  time  was  occupied
alternately  in  the  cotton-mill  and  at  school.  He
studied  theology,  and  in  1846  was  ordained  and
entered  ujh)!i  Ids  first  pastorate  in  Grafton.  Mass.,
where  he  remained  till  1850.  While  serving  in
various  other  places  he  became  connected  in  1849
with  the  "  Morning  Star  "  as  assistant  editor.  He
was  also  one  of  the  editorial  council  of  the  "  Free-
will Baptist  Quarterlv,"  begun  in  1853.  He  vi»ited
Europe  in  1857  and  1866. In  December,  1866,  he


DAY


DAY


111


resigned  pastoral  duties  end  became  editor-in-chief
of  the  •* Moral off  St. i  will  Bsntisft  weekly

paper,  pubUehed  in  - EL,  mm  afterward

removed  In  this  editorship  be

tinned  until  his  death. See  his  "  Memoirin  by  the
William  II.  Bowen,  I».  I>.  (Dover,  N.  II..  1878).
i>  v  \.  Il.intiiii.il. oldier.  »..  in  Vermonl

<l.  in MorrietOWn,  N.  .1..  'J"> March,  l^iH. Ilcwu

the  son  of  Dr.  8ylvester  Day. He was graduated ai

the  V.  s.  military  academy  In  1888,  and  made  sec-
ond lieutenant  IntheSd  infantry.  On  t  April,  is:i2,
he  waa  oommiaalooed  Brat  lieutenant,  and  in  the

same  year  took  part  in  the  Black  Hawk  cx|>edition,
tint  was  not  on  dutv  at tin-  seat  of  war. lie  also

■  I  in  the  Florida  wan  In  1888  "'.»  and  lH41-'2,
ami  ill  t lit-  war  with  Mexico  in  1848-*?.  Re  was
commissioned  captain.  7  July,  1h;{h.  major,  18  Feb..

..  lieutenant-colonel.  89  Feb.,  1881,  and  col I,

7  Jan.,  1862.  He  commanded  a  brigade  of  the  5th
corps  in  the  Pennsylvania  campaign  in  lK«tt,  taking
part  in  the  battle  of  Qetiiabmg. Be  was  retired

from  active  duty,  "on  his  own  application  after
forty  consecutive  years  of  service.'  1  A.1U&,  ls<>:{,
and  emploved  on  militarv  OOmmlSBJOIIS  aiMIIKMIlla
martial  from  '-'•">  July.  1864  On  i;{  March.  IniT,,  he
was  brovotted  brigadier-general  for  long  service.

D  \  \ .  Henry,  lawyer,  i>.  in  South  Haclley,  If  ass.
89  Deo,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Vale'in  lH4r>.
He  took  oharge  of  the  osandonl  academy  at  Pair-
Bald,  Conn.,  until  1847,  studied  in  the  Harvard
law-school,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  autumn
of  1S48,  ami  Bottled  in  New  York  city. He  was  a

Boaaber  of  the  rVeabyterian  (old  school)  general

assembly  that  convened  in  St.  Louis  in  lHli?,  and
of  the  assembly  that  met  in  Albany  in  \h(\h.  He
strongly  advocated  the  union  of  the  old  and  new
schools,  and  was  one  of  the  committee  that  visited
the  new-school  assembly,  then  in  session  in  Harris-
burg,  and  laid  before  it  the  views  of  the  old-school
assembly  on  the  subject  of  union.  He  afterward
drafted  the  articles  for  the  basis  of  union,  which
were  ratified  in  lNfi!>  at  Pittsburg  by  the  joint
meeting  of  the  two  assemblies.  lie  became  a  di-
rector in  the  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1885,  and  a  trustee  and  director  in  the  Union  theo-
logical seminary  in  1H70.  He  has  published  "The
Lawyer  Abroad,  or  Observations  on  the  Social  and
Political  Condition  of  Various  Countries"  (New-
York.  1N74):  and  "  From  the  Pyrenees  to  the  Pil-
lars of  Hercules"  (1883).

DAT,  Henry  Wright,  Canadian  physician,  b.
in  the  township  of  Kingston,  6  Sept,  1881.  He
was  educated  at  Newburg  academv,  and  at  (Queen's
university,  Kingston,  Iieing  graduated  M.  I),  in
1808.  He  began  practice  in  Trenton,  and  in  1888
was  elected  a  member  of  the  council  of  physicians
and  surgeons  of  Ontario  for  the  Quints'  ami  Cata-
raxjui  districts.  He  has  also  been  president  of  the
council  of  the  College  <>f  physicians  and  mrgeona
of  Ontario.  When  the  first  Fenian  raid  occurred,
in  1KM.  he  organized  a  battery  of  garrieOO  artillery.
He  was  the  first  mayor  of  Trenton,  and has been

f iresident  of  the  provisional  lx>ard  of  directors  of
he  Central  Ontario  railway.

DAY,  Horace  IL,  manufacturer,  b.  in  1818;  d.
in  Manchester,  N.  II..  88  An:..  1878.  He  was  a
licensee  under  Charles  Goodvear's  rubl»er  patents,
which  were  granted  in  1848,  and  identified  with
the India-rubber trade from its inception. He

Was the exclusive licensee under tile patents for

the  manufacture  of  shirred  goods,  which  wen-  -

sequently  found  to  Im>  objectionable.  Charles Good-
year, owner  of  the  patents,  broughl  suits  against
Mr.  Day  for  Infringement  of  the  woven-goods  rigbl

of  the  patent. Mr.  Day  instituted  cross-suits,  and


m  »»« the  rwealt. The  moat  oale-
nf  all  the  suits  was  triad  »t  Trenton,  n  J  .
Daniel  Wclmter  appcarinc*-  eounxrl  f
vi-ar.  and  RnfUS  i  \|r.  I»N% . M, \\ .  ,....  r

left  his  vat  in  the  I'.  S.  ejufta  totff}  the  aaai

I  <15.000  as  a  retainer,  and  bia  argument
at  the  trial  was  regarded  as  one  of  his  beat.  Ha
won  the  ease,  and  Mr.  Day  suirsudorad  hi*  licenaa,
transferred  his  factory  and  mnchim-rv  to  \YQlbua
Judaon, a representative  of Mr  ir.  nnd

agreed  ti>  retire  from  the  I,  .,,„,  „{

*:{."•( l.<NM»,  and  OOnneet-fseS amounting  to 881  '
ditional.  all  of  which  amounts  vera  Mid  to  him  in
)W2. Previous  to  this  time  Mr.  I»ay  had  <  •-nceired
the  idea  of  utilizing  tin-  aalai  UOWSI  of  Niagara
falls. Asearlvas  1K*»«1  he  had  disc ii**ed  the  »ub-


ject  in  pamphlets  and BBwananaCB,  and  had  organ-

i/e.| a company,  with  himself ej \  i.  ••-■■residJant»

tnaenrar,  and  leading  dlreotur. a  canal  wa


Rtrneted  at  gnat  pos^  the  estate  of  \Vait.-r  Bmint

alone  ex|H>nding  $2t«MHH».  The  canal  began  about
half  a  mile  above  the  falls,  and  ti-rmiunt'-d  0M
fourth  of  a  mile  below  them. It  was  l«M»  |pj|  «

|  with  a  depth  of  ten  feet  along  its  whole  length.

When  Mr.  Day  bougfal the  property  the  OBnal
not finished,  and  the Bryant estate  had  I-

hanoted  in  the  enterprise. Mr.  Day  oompieted  the

canal,  lioiight  Grass  island  for  a  burin. r.  and  ii-
ponded  $700,000.  Hut  the  work  was  paid  out  t..
sat isfv  mortgages  in  1N77.  Mr.  Da\-  n«\t  venture
was  the  e-tablishinetit  of  a  mammoth  rubber  sntsr*
|irise  in  New  Jersey,  but  he  received  S-Jo.ooo  to
withdraw  from  it.  His  later  speculations  wen-  un-
fortunate, his  large  fortune  was  gone, and  he  be-
came comparatively  |>oor.

DAY,  Jeremiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Colchester,
Conn..  2«;  Jan..  17:{m:  <1.  iti  Connecticut,  18  Sept..

1808. He  was  descended  from KoUrt Day.  who

emigrated  from  England  in  1884,  and  whom  aaaaa

is  recorded  upon  a  iiionuinent  erected  t<>  the  mem-
ory of  the  first  settlers  of  Hartford  by  the  1st
Congregational  church  of  thai  city.  His  father,
Thomas,  great-grandaon  of  Boberi  Day,  sx-t  t  l«-«l
upon  a  farm,  and,  00  discovering  the  boyafOnd-
ness for  study,  sent him to  Yale,  where he  was

graduated  in 1758. After  leaving  epilogs, be

taught  in  Sharon  until  he  began  his  clerical  aradiss,
in  1757,  with  the  Iwv.  Joseph  Bellamy,  of  Bethle-
hem. Having  a  valuable  farm  on  Sharon  mountain

left  to  him  by  his  brother's  will,  he  occupied  it.
and  devoted  his  life  to  mathematical  and  ethical
studies,  aa  well  aa  to  agricultural  l«l>or.  In  refer-
ence to  this  period  he  afterward  wrote  a  "  Poem  on
the  Pleasure-  of  a  Country  Life." After  the  death

of his  wife  be  resolved  Bgahl  tO devote his life to

the  ministry,  ami  resumed  his  theological  Studies,
under the direction  of  the Rev.  DottOO Mather

Smith.  In  September,  1788,  he  was  licensed  to
preach,  and  ordained  pa-tor  of  the  rjongragntional

okureh  in  Kew  Pie-ton.  Conn.  He  was  one  of  the
first  missionaries  from  Connecticut  to  the  new  set-
tlements in  the  country,  making  his  first  tour  in
17MM. At  the  Commencement  Of  Yale  in  IT'.M h.-

oreacheci  the  "Oonaoio  ad  Oerusa,"  his  snMeet
being  the  eternal  preazistenos  of  the  world.  Mr.
Day  pubUahed  a  aermoo  delivered  before  the  Litch-
field county  assot  buioa  on  the  ■  Wisdom  of  <i>«l  u
the  Permission  of  Sin "fl 774).  There  is  a  volume
of his  discourses  entitled "Sermons  Colli

lb-  also  planned  a  longpoeSB,  "The  Vision
of  St.  John."  which  was  not  pubUahed.  He  was
one  of  the  editors  of  the  ••Connecticut  K\ angelical
M  :„•"  from  its  establishment  until  his

n.  Jeremiah,  wlu<  ator.  U  in  New  Preston.
c.inu.. :»  Au-.  177:«:  d.  in  New  Batrm,  Coma,  22


112


DAY


DAY


Aug.,  1867. He  was  graduated  at  Yale  with  high
honor  in  1795. When  Dr.  Dwight  was  appointed

E  resident  of  that  college,  Mr.  Day  was  invited  to
e  his  successor  as  head-master  in  Greenfield  school,
where  he  remained  one  fear.  The  following  year
he  became  a  tutor  at  Williams,  where  he  remained
until  1798,  when  he  was  offered  a  similar  place  at
Yale.  He  began  to  preach  as  a  candidate  for  the
ministry,  but  before  taking  charge  of  any  parish
was  elected  to  the  professorship  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy  at  Yale,  in  1801,  but  was
not  able  to  enter  upon  these  new  duties  until  1803.
He  was  made  president  of  Yale  in  1817,  which
office  he  held  until  his  resignation  in  1846.  Having
previously  studied  theology,  Dr.  Day  was  ordained
the  same  day  that  ho  was  inaugurated  president.
In  1817  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Middlebury,  in  1818  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Union,  and  the  latter  also  from  Harvard  in  1831.
His  learning  and  talents,  united  with  kindness  of
heart  and  soundness  of  iudgment,  secured  the
respect  of  his  pupils  as  well  as  their  affection.  He
published  an  "Algebra"  in  1814,  which  passed
through  numerous  editions,  the  latest  of  which
was  issued  in  1852,  by  the  joint  labors  of  himself
and  Prof.  Stanley.  He  wrote  also  "  Mensuration
of  Superficies  and  Solids"  (1814);  "An  Examina-
tion of  President  Edwards's  Inquiry  as  to  the  Free-
dom of  the  Will"  (1814);  "Plane  Trigonometry"
(1815) ;  "  Navigation  and  Surveying  "  (1817);  "  An
Inquiry  on  the  Self-determining  Power  of  the  Will,
or  Contingent  Volition  "(1838;  2d  ed.,  1849);  and
occasional  sermons.  He  contributed  papers  to  the
"American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,  the  "  New
Englander,"  and  other  periodicals.  An  address  com-
memorative of  his  life  and  services  was  delivered
by  President  Woolsey  (1867).— His  daughter,  Mar-
tha, poet,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  13  Feb.,  1813  ;
d.  there,  2  Dec,  1833,  attained  great  proficiency
in  mathematics  and  languages.  A  collection  of
her "  Literary  Remains,  with  Memorials  of  her
Life  and  Character,"  was  published  by  her  friend
and  relative,  Prof.  Kingsley  (New  Haven,  1834). —
Henry  Noble,  clergyman  and  author,  nephew  of
the  second  Jeremiah,  b.  in  New  Preston,  Conn.,  4
Aug.,  1808,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1828,  and  was
tutor  there  from  1831  till  1834.  He  then  travelled
for  fifteen  months  in  Europe,  and  in  1836  was  ap-
pointed pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  in
Waterbury,  Conn.,  where  he  remained  until  1840.
He  was  professor  of  rhetoric  and  homiletics  in
Western  reserve  college,  Ohio,  from  1840  till  1858.
During  that  time  he  was  engaged  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  Cleveland  and  Pittsburg  railroad,  and
for  ten  years,  that,  with  three  important  connecting
radroads  (of  two  of  which  he  was  president)  occu-
pied his  time.  In  1858  he  became  president  of
Ohio  female  college,  where  he  remained  until  his
resignation  in  1864.  Prof.  Day  has  published
"  The  Art  of  Elocution  "  (New  Haven,  1844 ;  re-
vised ed.,  Cincinnati,  1860) ;  "  Fundamental  Phi-
losophy from  Krug  "  (Hudson,  Ohio,  1848);  "The
Art  of  Rhetoric  "  (Hudson,  1850 ;  revised  under  the
name  of  the  "  Art  of  Discourse,"  New  York.  1867) :
"  Rhetorical  Praxis  "  (Cincinnati,  1860) ;  "  The  Art
of  Book-keeping "(1861);  "The  Logic  of  Sir  Will-
iam Hamilton  "  (1863) ;  "  Elements  of  Logic  "
(New  York,  1867);  "The  Art  of  Composition"
(1867) ;  "  The  American  Speller  "  (1869) ;  "  Intro-
duction to  the  Study  of  English  Literature  "  (1869) ;
"  The  Young  Composer  "  (1870) ;  "  Logical  Praxis  "
(New  Haven,  1872);  "The  Science  of  Esthetics "
(1872) ;  "  The  Elements  of  Psychology  "  (New  York,
1876) ;  "  The  Science  of  Ethics  "  (1876) ;  "  Outlines
of  Ontological  Science,  or  a  Philosophy  of  Knowl-


edge and  of  Being"  (1878);  "The  Science  of
Thought "  (1886) ;  and  -Tin-  Elements  of  Mental
Science"  (1886).  He  has  received  the  dc:;
I).  1).  from  Farmer's  college.  Cincinnati,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  Ingham  university  of  New  York,
and  also  from  the  State  university  of  Iowa,.—
Another  son,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Preston,
Conn.,  6  July,  1777;  d.  in  Hartford,  1  March,  1855,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1797.  studied  law  at
Litchfield,  and  from  September.  1798,  till  Septem-
ber, 1799,  was  a  tutor  in  Williams  college.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  December,  1799,  and
began  practice  in  Hartford.  In  1809  he  Wll  ap-
pointed assistant  secretary  of  the  state  of  Connecti-
cut, and  in  1810  secretary,  an  office  which  he  re-
tained until  1835.  In  May,  1815,  he  became  asso-
ciate judge  of  the  county  court  of  Hartford,  acting
in  this  capacity,  with  the  exception  of  one  year,  till
May,  1825,  when  he  was  made  chief  judge  of  that
court,  and  so  continued  until  June.  1833.  He  was
a  judge  of  the  city  court  of  Hartford  from  1818
till  1831,  and  one  of  the  committee  to  prepare  the
statutes  of  1808,  and  also  of  1821  and  1824.  He  re-
ported the  decisions  of  the  court  of  errors  from
1805  till  1853,  which  were  published  in  twenty  vol-
umes. He  also  edited  several  English  law-works,
amounting  altogether  to  forty  volumes,  in  which
he  introduced  notices  of  American  decisions,  and
also  of  later  English  cases.  He  was  an  original
member  of  the  Connecticut  historical  society,  of
which  he  was  president  from  1839  until  his  death.

DAY,  .Mali ton.  publisher,  b.  in  Morristown,  N.
J.,  27  Aug.,  1790;  d.  at  sea,  27  Sept.,  1854.  He
acquired  a  competence  as  a  bookseller  in  New  York
city,  and  for  fifteen  years  before  his  death  devoted
his  life  to  charitable  and  educational  objects.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  He  was
lost  in  the  wreck  of  the  steamship  "Arctic"  off
Cape  Race,  Newfoundland.

DAY,  Samuel  Stearns,  missionary,  b.  in  Leeds
county,  Canada,  in  1808 ;  d.  in  Cortlandville,  N.  Y.,
in  October,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Hamil-
ton literary  and  theological  institution  (now  Madi-
son university)  in  1835,  was  ordained,  and  sailed
for  India,  landing  at  Calcutta  in  February,  1836.
He  went  to  Vizigapatam,  and  in  1837  to  Madras,
in  order  to  qualify  himself  for  his  work.  He  was
appointed  to  the  Telugus,  a  large  and  intelligent
race  of  Hindoos,  numbering  about  14,000,000,  and
occupying  the  country  between  Orissa  and  Madras,
removed  to  Nellore,  the  centre  of  his  field,  in  1840,
and  labored  zealously  among  the  Telugus  for  eigh-
teen years  He  made  a  short  visit  to  the  United
States  in  1845,  and  returned  to  India.  He  could
not  endure  the  climate  of  the  Madras  coast,  and
was  compelled  to  return  to  his  native  country  in
1863.  Where  he  toiled  alone  in  the  east  and  with-
out apparent  results,  several  churches  and  schools
are  now  established  for  the  education  and  training
of  native  missionaries.

DAY,  Thomas,  English  author,  b.  in  London,
22  June,  1748;  d.  28  Sept.,  1789.  He  studied  law,
but  never  practised,  having  inherited  a  large  for-
tune. He  sympathized  with  the  American  patriots,
and  advocated  their  cause  at  public  meetings.
Having  adopted  the  peculiar  social  views  of  Rous-
seau, he  selected  two  girls  from  a  foundling  hos-
pital, with  the  intention  of  educating  them  and
making  one  of  them  his  wife,  but  the  experiment
did  not  succeed.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Dying
Negro,"  written  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Bicknell
(1773);  "The  Devoted  Legions,"  a  poem  against
the  war  with  America  (1776) ;  "  The  Desolation  of
America,"  a  poem  (1777);  "Reflections  on  the
Present  State  of  England  and  the  Independence


PAY  AN


DAVTnN


113


Mariu»w{l"
udfordand  Morton,"  his  liest  known
book  ( l  .  md  other  works.

I>\\  V\.  (  h.nli  v  lawyer,  l».  in  Amsterdam,  X.
8  July,  1798:  d.  in  bowville,  N.  Y

His  early  life  wus  stx-nt <'ii  a  fanii.  and  In-

ved  a  public-school  education  and  liecaine  a

teacher. Hi'  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  tin-  Utr,

and  pt >0t bod  at LoWViUe. He  was  a  member  of

the  state  senate  in 1887-"8,  being  prsoidsnl  1 1 »•  -
ad  jeer;  acting  Uentonant-governor  in 188)0,

end  M  such  was  president  of  the  court  of  errata,
II.  was  elected  to  congress  from  New  York  as  a
democrat, serving  from  5  Dec^  1881,  till  *-'  March,
Il«-  ra  a  member  of  the  state  boon  of  rep*
resentatives  in  ls:t">-'»;,  and  was  <li»t rit-t  attorney
for  Lewis  county  from  1H40  till  1845.

I)  V  \  B,  Stcplien,  the  first  printer  in  the  Knglish-
American  colonics,  b.  in  London  in  1611;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  22  Dec.  HWSN.  In  connectiOB
with  the  (banding of  Harvard  college  in  1888,  the
first  printing-press  was  established  in  this  country.
Through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Re*.  .Joseph
(ilover,  a  wealthy  non-oonformist  minister,  a  press
and  material  were  shipped  from  England,  accom-

fwmied  by  Mr.  (ilover  and  Thomas  Dave,  whom  be
md  engaged  n  lirnfhn.  Dave  was  supposed  to
be  a  descendant  of  John  Day,  one  of  the  most  emi-
nent and  wealthy  of  early  "English  typographers.
On  the  passage  over  Mr.  Glover  died,  bu1  Dave
dulv  entered  uj»on  the  work,  set  up  the  press,  and,
by  direction  of  the  magistrates  and  elders,  in  Janu-
ary, 16139,  printed  the  "  Freeman's  Oath,"  which
was  the  first  issue  of  the  colonial  press.  It  was
claimed  that  Dayc had  served  an  apprenticeship  in
London  :  but  his  deficiencies  as  a  compositor,  indi-
cated by  errors  of  punctuation  and  spelling,  by  the
division  of  monosyllables  by  a  hyphen  at  the  end
of  lines,  and  similar  technical  blunders,  lead  to  the
presumption  that,  though  bred  a  printer,  he  had
been  chiefly  accustomed  to  press-work,  in  which  he
was  more  successful.  The  second  work  printed
was  an  almanac,  made  by  William  Pierce,  mariner
<K»o!*);  then  the  Psalms.  "  newly  turned  into  nut  re.
for  the  edification  and  comfort  of  the  saints"  (1640).
He  also  printed  a  "Catechism,"  "  Body  of  Liber-
ties," containing  one  hundred  laws  of  the  colony
(1641 ;  2d  ed.,  1648),  which  were  ordered  to  be  sold
in  quires  at  three  shillings  each.  Dayc  was  sn-
i>erseded  in  the  management  of  the  press,  in  1649.
be  the  appointment  by  the  magistrates  and  elders,
although  no  reason  was  ever  given  for  their  action.
of  Samuel  Green  as  printer.  The  general  court  of
Massachusetts,  in  October,  1641.  showed  a  due  ap-
preciation of  Dave's  thirteen  years'  work  bv  grant-
ing him  300  acres  of  land  for  "  l>eing  the  first  that
sett  upon  printing."

DAYTON.  A  in  os  Cooper,  phvsician  and  clergy-
man. l».  in  Plainfleld,  N.  J.,  4  Sept,  1818;  d.  In
Perrvi  Ga.,  11  June,  1865.  lie  was  graduated  at
the  Medical  college  of  New  York  city  in  1834,  and
soon  removed  to  the  south  in  search  of  health.  He
was  at  first  a  Presbyterian,  hut  l>ecame  dissatisfied
with  his  church  relations,  and  in  1888,  whilfl  re-
siding in  Yicksburg,  Miss.,  having  adopted  I'.ap-
tist  views,  united  with  that  denomination.  Hence-
forth he  was  distinguished  for  his  oontrorersia]
writings.  Besides  being  associate  editor  of  the
nnessee  Baptist."  he  was  the  author  of  two  re-
us novels,  "Theodosia" and "The Infidel's

'iter." The  first  had  a  wide  circulation.
DAYTON, Ellas, Revolutionary  officer,  b,  in
Blisabethtown,  N.  •»..  m  July.  1 7:57 :  d.  then

1807. He  began  Ids  military  career  by  join-
ing the British  forces,  and  fought  in  the  "  J.
VOL. IL — 8


blues"  under  Wolfe  at  Qui  I  sjuently  he

commanded  a  company  of  militia,  with  which  he

marched  on  an  e\pe.|u

dlene, lb  wan  s  member  of  th<

at  the  beginning  of  the  1:

conjunction with William Alexander.  Lord -

ling,  commanded  a  party  whioh  ceptUTed  I  I

tran-port  ..ff  rSiaabethtown  (July,  1778
appointed  ookmel  of  the  8d  battalion.  Nee  Jer-

■utincntal  Una.  0  PeL,  1 7 7*1.  and  in  the
summer  of  177*  until  the  okas  of  the  war  had
command  of  the,  Jersey  brigade,  Deytoo  sided  In
SBjppreesing  the  mutiny  ..f  the  .V  id,-  iii

17*1. Be  was  made  brigadier-general  a
and  was  in  mt  i\ .  iurin«:  the  entire  war,

taking  a  prominent  jwirt  in  the  battles  of  Brandy-
wine,  Oermantown,  Monmouth,  nnringfield.  and

Yorktown. He  hsn  thne  h  under  him:

one  »t  Oermantown,  one  at  Crosjwiek's  Bridge,

and  one  at  Springfield.  After  tin-  war  he
several  times  in  the  legislature  of  bJi  entire  state,
and  was  made  major-general  of  militia,  ami  SJSSJ>
bar  Of  the  Continental  congress  from  17*7  ti
Upon  the  formation  of  the  New  JerSO]  S« -iet\  of
the  Cincinnati.  (Jen.  Dayton  was  sleeted  president,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  There  was  a
strong  resemblance between Biles  Dayton  and

Washington.  — His  son,  Jonathan,  statesman.  I>.  in
Blutabethtown,  N.  J..  hum..  1  7«m» :  d. there, 8 OoL
1884,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  177<<.  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  tin-  bar.  lb-  entered  the
Continental  army,  and  Wee  appointed  paymaster
of  his  father's  regiment,  88  Aug..  1 77»1 :  was  an
aide-de-camp  to  Cm.  Sullivan  in  the  expedition
against  the  Six  Nations  in  1778, and  was  discharged
at  the  close  of  the  war  as  a  captain  of  the  1st
inent  in  the  New  Jersey  Continental  line.  In  1T9H
be  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  P.  S.  army.
He  was  for  a  few  years  a  member  of  the  New
house  of  representatives,  end  its  speaker  in  1790.
lie  wee  a  delegate  from  New  Jersey  to  the  conven-
tion that  framed  the  Federal  constitution  in  17H7.

He was elected to  congress  from New .b  :

17'.M,  and  re-elected  for  three  eouseentive  terms.
being  speaker  during  the  two  last  congKSOi
■erring  till  :$  March,  17W. He  was  elected  U,  s.
senator  from  New  Jersey,  and  •erred  from  I
1788,  till  8 March. 1888. He  was  arrested for
alleged  conspiracy  with  Aaron  Burr,  but  was  not

tried. He  received  the  degn f  LL.  D.  from  the

College  of  New  Jersey  in  1  o,s.

DAYTON, William Lewis,  statesman,  b.  in
Baskingridge.  N.  J..  17  Pebw,  1*«>7:  d. in Paris,
Prance,  1  Deo,  1864 He  wee  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1888,  and
received  the  de-
gree Of Id  '■  D.
from that col-
lege in  1867. He
studied law in
Litchfield.  Conn.,
and was admit*
bid  to  tin*  liar  in
isao, beginning

his  practice  in
Trenton.  N.  J,
In lXf7 he was

elected to the

slate  council  (SJ
the senate was

then  Belled),  be-
ing  made  chair-
man  of the ju-
diciarv  column
the  supreme  OOUl  of  the  state  in  1838,  and  in  HHJI


He  became  associate  judge  of


114


DAZA


DEAN


was  appointed  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
His  appointment  was  confirmed  by  the  legislature
in  184S,  and  he  wasaNo  eleoted  for  the  whole  term.
In  the  senate  debates  on  the  Oregon  question,  the
tariff,  annexation  of  Texas,  and  the  Mexican  war.
he  took  the  position  of  a  free-soil  whig.  He  was
the  friend  and  adviser  of  President  Taylor,  and
opposed  the  fugitive-slave  bill,  but  advocated  the
admission  of  California  as  a  free  state,  and  the  abo-
lition of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia.  In
I860  lie  was  nominated  by  the  newly  formed  repub-
lican party  for  vice-president.  In  March,  1857,  he
was  made  attorney-general  for  the  state  of  New
Jersev,  and  held  that  office  until  1861,  when  Presi-
dent Lincoln  appointed  him  minister  to  France,
where  he  remained  until  his  death. — His  son,  Will-
iam Lewis,  who  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1858,  and  practised  law  in  Trenton,  was  appointed
by  President  Arthur  minister  to  the  Netherlands.

DAZA,  Hilarion  (dah'-thah),  Bolivian  states-
man, b.  at  Sucre,  in  1840,  of  humble  parentage,
partly  Indian.  The  name  of  his  father,  a  Spaniard,
was  Grosoli,  but  the  son  adopted  his  maternal
family  name,  Daza.  When  eighteen  years  of  age
he  volunteered  in  the  army  of  the  liberals.  Subse-
quent successful  revolutions  brought  him  into  no-
tice, and  won  him  the  patronage  and  confidence  of
Melgarejo.  To  explore  the  courses  of  the  rivers
Pilcomayo  and  Bcrmejo,  flowing  into  the  Para-
guay, numerous  fruitless  expeditions  have  been  or-
ganized ;  and  in  one  of  these,  during  the  brief  lull
in  political  strife  that  marked  the  dictatorship  of
Melgarejo,  the  vear  1867  found  voung  Daza  sec-
ond in  command,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel. He  was  conspicuous  in  January,  1871,  in
league  with  his  colonel,  Juan  Granier,  against  his
former  friend  and  patron.  On  the  deposition  of
Melgarejo,  Daza,  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  of
cuirassiers,  held  in  check  the  turbulent  factions  at
La  Paz,  for  which  services  he  was  rewarded  by
President  Morales  with  further  promotion  and
the  portfolio  of  war.  As  minister  and  general  he
succeeded  in  maintaining  order  after  the  death  of
Morales  in  1872,  and  insured  the  peaceful  accession
of  the  constitutional  successor.  In  the  same  year
he  supported  the  candidature  of  Ballivian,  and  on
the  death  of  the  latter  became  himself  a  candidate
for  the  presidency  against  Salinas  (the  civil  candi-
date), Oblitas,  and  Vasquez  (the  representative  of
the  Corral  party).  When  the  elections  were  over  a
dispute  ensued  as  to  the  majority,  and  Daza,  it  is
contended,  seized  the  office  as  his  right,  and  was  in-
augurated on  4  May,  1876.  His  government  was
popular,  and  troubled  with  as  few  revolutions  as
that  of  any  of  his  predecessors.  At  the  beginning
of  the  war  with  Chili,  1  March,  1879,  he  set  out
at  the  head  of  his  troops,  leaving  the  government
in  charge  of  Sefior  Guerre,  minister  of  foreign  af-
fairs. Of  Daza's  part  in  this  war  Markham  says :
"The  Bolivian  army  under  his  command,  4,000
strong,  arrived  at  Tacna,  in  Peru,  on  30  April,  but
in  the  short  duration  of  his  command  Daza  proved
himself  as  incapable  as*  cowardly.  Two  battalions
were  detached  under  Col.  Villamil's  command  to
garrison  Pisagua  on  25  May,  and  when,  on  2  Nov.,
the  Chilian  army  invaded  the  province  of  Tarapaca,
Daza's  army,  according  to  arrangements  made  with
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  allied  forces,  was  to
advance  from  Arica  to  take  the  invaders  in  the
rear  while  they  were  engaged  with  the  army  of
Tarapaca.  Daza  began  his  march  from  Tacna  with
3,000  men,  loitered  three  days  at  Ark'a,  started
again  on  11  Nov.,  and  on  the  12th  marched  over
fifteen  miles  of  sandy  desert  to  the  little  river  Vi-
tor. He  advanced  one  more  march  to  the  defile  of


the  river  Camaronos,  but  then-  stopped  again,  and
on  16  Nov.  abandoned  the  work  he  had  undertaken,
leaving  the  army  of  Tarapaca  to  its  fate,  and  re-
turned to  Tacna.  his  own  soldiers  threatening  to
shoot  him  as  a  coward."  On  27  Dec.,  having  been
called  to  Arica  for  a  consultation  by  Admiral  Moh-
tero,  Daza  received  the  news  that  during  his  ab-
sence his  army  had  rebelled  and  deposed  him,  and
on  his  return  voyage  to  La  Paz  he  heard  at  Aiv-
quipa,  in  January,  1880,  of  a  revolution  at  the
capital,  which  proclaimed  Gen.  Narciso  Campero  as
his  successor. He  then  went  to  Paris.

DEALY,  Patrick  Francis,  clergyman,  be  in
New  York,  of  Irish  parentage,  in  1836.  He  was
educated  in  thegrammar-schoolsof  New  York  city,
and  afterward  entered  St.  John's  college,  Fordham.
After  teaching  in  Fordham  and  in  the  Jesuit  col-
lege of  Montreal,  he  was  sent  to  Europe  to  finish
his  theological  studies.  He  continued  his  ecclesi-
astical course  in  France,  and  afterward  in  Rome,
but,  owing  to  the  danger  of  disturbances  there  in
1859,  he  was  sent  by  his  superiors  to  the  University
of  Innspruck.  He  returned  to  the  United  States
in  1863,  and  was  appointed  professor  of  rhetoric  in
St.  John's  college,  Fordham.  He  was  afterward
rector  of  the  church  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  New
York.  During  his  pastorate  the  new  church  was
completed,  principally  through  his  instrumentality.
He  was  selected  bv  Cardinal  McCloskey  to  take
charge  of  the  first  pilgrimage  that  ever  left  America
for  Rome,  and  was  treated  with  great  distinction  by
the  pope  and  cardinals.  He  founded  the  Xavier
Union  in  1871,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
formation  of  the  Catholic  union,  a  body  consisting
of  the  leading  Catholics  of  the  state,  which  watches
over  Catholic  interests.  He  was  appointed  their
spiritual  director  by  Cardinal  McCloskey,  and  was
the  medium  of  communication  between  them  and
the  cardinal.  On  his  appointment  as  rector  of
Fordham  college  in  1880,  tne  representative  Catho-
lics of  New  York  petitioned  the  general  of  the  order
to  allow  him  to  remain  in  the  city,  as  the  numerous
societies  with  which  he  was  connected  would  suffer
by  his  absence.  Thi3  was  refused,  but  he  was  al-
lowed to  continue  his  connection  with  the  Xavier
and  Catholic  unions.  Father  Dealy  did  much  for
the  development  of  St.  John's  college,  Fordham.
He  founded  four  scholarships  of  the  yearly  value
of  $400,  open  to  competitors  without  distinction  of
creed,  and  established  a  special  scientific  course.  He
is  a  member  of  Convocation,  and  has  lectured  before
the  historical  societies  of  New  York  and  Brooklyn,
principally  on  the  early  history  of  New  York.

DEAN," Amos,  lawyer,  b.  in  Barnard,  Vt.,  16  Feb.,
1803 ;  d.  26  Jan.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1822,  studied  law,  and  on  his  admission  to  the
bar  formed  a  partnership  of  long  continuance  with
Azor  Tabor,  and  soon  attained  a  high  reputation
for  his  legal  attainments.  In  1833  he  projected  the
Young  men's  association  of  Albany,  of  which  he
was  a  lifelong  friend  and  supporter,  and  in  1834
delivered  before  it  a  course  of  lectures,  subsequently
published.  He  prepared  numerous  treatises  on  law
subjects,  which  have  been  recognized  as  standard
works.  In  1851,  on  the  organization  of  the  law-
school,  he  was  appointed  a  professor,  and  he  had
also  filled  the  chair  of  medical  jurisprudence  in  the
Albany  medical  school  from  its  organization  in
1839.  He  is  the  author  of  "Lectures  on  Phre-
nology" (1835);  "  Manual  of  Law  "  (1838);  "Phi-
losophy of  Human  Life  "  (Boston,  1839) ;  "  Medi-
cal Jurisprudence  "  (1854) ;  and  "  Bryant  and  Strat-
ton's  Commercial  Law  "  (New  York,  1861V,  He  left
unfinished  an  elaborate  work  on  the  "History  of
Civilization  "  (7  vols.,  Albany,  1869-70).


115


DEAN.  Gilbert,  jurist,  b.  in  Pleasant  Valley.
Dntoh—  1 «  Aiiu'..  1810;  d.  in  Po

keei  -  mdiuted  at  \

in  [841. Afterward hastodisd  Taw,  was  admit  t.-d
to  thf  bar  in  Connecticut,  and  in  May,  1844,  in
fork. He  practised  iti  Poughkeepsie  in  1844
hikI  then  removed  1* i  —  <>!Vi  York  city. 1  It-

was  chosen  to  congress  from  the  districts  com  |M>s,d
of  Dutches  and  Putnam  counties,  and  served  from
1861  till  1858;  was  rv-clcctc<l  for  a  second  term,
but  resigned  t<>  accept  the  office  of  justice  of  the
supreme  court of  New  York,  to  which lie  was  nj»-

potnted  by  the  goTernor,  in  Jane,  1854)  to  till  the
unexpired  term  of  Seward  Barculo,  deceased,  lie
served  <>n  the  U-nch  almost  eighteen  months,  god
was  during  the  last  Vear  (1855)  one  of  the  judges
of  the  court  of  ap|M-aN.

IM  V.\,  James,  educator,  !>.  in  Windsor,  Vt.,
M  Mov.,  L776;  «1.  in  Burlington.  Vt,  90  .Ian..  1840.
ile  was  descended  from  .lames  Dean,  of  Stoning-
ton.  lie  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1800, WSJ
a  tutor  in  the  I'niversity  of  Vermont  in  l807-*9,
and  a  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  phi-
losophy then-  Iron  1809  till  1814.  He  was  sJso
professor  in  Dartmouth  till  the  supreme  court  .1.-
cided  in  favor  of  the  old  college,  and  the  new
ceased  to  exist,  when  he  resumed  his  place  in  the
University  of  Vermont,  holding  it  from  1821  till
1884.  He  published  a  "(iazettc-r  of  Vermont"
ilsos),  and  an  address  delivered  on  his  induction
as  professor  (1810).

DEAN,  John  Ward,  author,  b.  in  Wisea>set,
M. ..  U  March,  lNir>.  His  routh  was  spent  in  Port-
land. Me.  From  1*39  till  1843  he  resided  in  Provi-
dence, 11.  I.,  and  since  then  in  and  near  Boston.
He  has  tilled  for  many  years  several  offices  in  the
New  England  genealogical  society,  to  whose  "  Reg-
ister" he  has  contributed  valuable  papers.  Among
the  paper*  edited  by  him  for  the  society  is  a  curi-
ous piece  of  ancient  writing,  "A  Declaration  of
Remarkable  Providences  in  the  Course  of  My
Life,  by  John  Dane,  of  Ipswick.  1882."  In  May.
1870.  Mr.  Dean  was  chosen  president  of  the  Prince
society,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  founders;  and
he  has  also  been  recording  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can statistical  association.  He  has  accumulated  an
amount  of  historical  knowledge  such  as  few  men
possc>s.  Ile  has  edited  the  first  and  a  portion  of
the  SBOOnd  volumes  of  the  first  series,  and  one  Dum-
ber of  the  fourth  volume  of  the  second  scries,  of
the  "Historical  Magazine."  He  is  the  author  of
"Memoir  of  Kev.  Nathaniel  Ward."  with  notices
of  his  familv  (Albany,  18(58):  and  M  Memoir  of  Kev.
Michael  Wigglesworth"  (Albany,  1871);  has  i.tib-
lished  pamphlets,  and  has  also  edited  the  "New
England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register."

DEAN,  Julia,  actress,  l>.  in  Pleasant  Vallev,
V  Y..  ^  July,  1830;  d.  in  New  York  city.  (5  March.
180N.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Julia  Drake,  an
actress,  who  married  Thomas  Posdiok  for  her  first
husband,  and  later  Edmund  Dean,  a  well-known
manager  of  Buffalo  and  Rochester  theatres.  Her
education  for  the  stage  was  accomplished  under
his  direction.  She  appeared  first  as  Lady  Ellen
in  "The  Lady  of  the  Lake," during  1848,  in  Lools-
ville.  Ky.  loiter  in  the  same  year  she  filled  an
engagement  at  the  Bowery  theatre.  New  York, and
a p| .eared  as  Julia  in  "The  Hunchback."  Her  suc-
cess was  flattering,  and  in  Noveml>ei,  1K4»!,  she
played  the  same  part  at  the  Arch  street  theatre,
Philadelphia.  In  1K.">  she  married  Dr.  Arthur
i.e.  of  Charleston.  8.  C.  In  May,  lK-Vi,  she
sailed  for  San  Francisco,  and  after  an  al.senec  of
nearly  two  years  returned  to  the  east  with  the
proceeds  of  a  very  successful  tour. She  was  di-


\orvcd from her  Ini-Und.  BBJ the  ground  of  his
(allure  to  support  her.  and  iii  Inm;  iiMrricd  James
per,  of  S,  w v.,rk. Bar  last  np|-
York  was  in  OctoU

juvenile  tragedy  and  huh  eoenadi  p

di  v  Y  p. mi. Milan,  i..  in  Barnard,  Vt  ;

d. in Fraiuinghaiii, Ma**.,  1 (J  In  Imm

ha  was  ordained  neater  of  has  Urnvsrsehel  »"<*iety

in  Birr.-.  Vt.  He  was  |«aM..r  of  the  Hanover
street  church,  Boston,  Mn«..  from  1hi:|  till  1H8S,
and  of  the  Bultin.-h  street  <  hutch  from  May,  1881,

till  May,  1840.  Tin-  oongrasjatioa  «u<  known  as
"  Restoration ists,"  and  >"  ixi*  .hang.il  it-  name,
and  has  since  bean  I'nitarian. 11. «..»  afterward

settled  over  a  Unitarian  congregation  at  Ka

Mass.  Ile  published  "Lectures  OB  Final  Reato-
nition  "  (IXJ'J).  and  sarmons  and  a-Mrewea.

DEAN,  William,  misakmary,  I.,  in  Fjit..n.
N.  V..  81  June.  im<»7.  He  was  graduated  Ht  lb*
Hamilton  literary  and  theological  msdtutioi

Madison university )  in  1888,  and  In  the  BUB

was  ordained  to  toe Baptist  ministry,  and sailed

from  Boston  for  Siam t<>  engage  in  misakmary

work  with  the  Chinese  living  at  Bangkok.  In
1848  he  transferred  his  labor*  to  Bong-Kong,
where  he  remained  uiit il  1845,  when  h>-  returned  to
spend  a  v.ar  in  this  country.  He  nil  mid  his
work  in  Hong-Kong  in  1K47,  and  continued  it  mi-
ni 1885,  when  he  one-  more  took  up  his  residence
In  Bangkok.  He  returned  in  1884  to  spend  his
closing  days  in  this  country.  Bis  long,  honorable,
and  fruitful  service  as  a  miattonary  has  few  |>nr-
allels.  He  has  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  His
publications,  mainly  translations,  are  all  in  the
Chinese  language.  They  embrace  " The  N-
lament  "  (Canton,  1*4? ;  follow. si  by  other  editions,
the  first  jssii,.  being  printed  by  Chinamen  from
wooden  blocks):  *•  Revision  of  the  Pentateuch"
(1858);  "Commentary  on  Matthew "(1858);  "Com-
mentary on  Genesis"  iis''>s>:  "Commentary  on
Mark "  (1870) ;  " Commentary  on  Exodus"
Stow's  "  Daily  Manna,"  and  smaller  tra<  ts.

DRANK.  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Biddeford.
Me..  10  Nov..  18P1;  d.  at  (aml.ri.lp-.  Mass.,  18
Nov.. 1SSS>. He was descended from  one  of  the

first  settlers  <>f  Taunton,  Mass. He  was  educated

at  Thornton  academy,  Saeo.  Me.  When  nineteen
years  of  age  he  went  t<>  Boston,  where  for  twenty-
five  years  he  was  a  merchant.  Hs  retired  from
business  in  iww.  and  became  s  residenl  of  Cam-
bridge. Mr.  Deane  acquired  a  taste  for  the  stud y
of  American  history  many  years  ago,  mid  fa
lection  ol  books  was  among  the  most  valuable  in
N.-w  England  relating  t<>  its  early  history.  In  1856
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  1>.  from  Bowdoin,
He  was  a  member  of  the  Phi  Beta  Kap|>a  society,
and  of  the  chief  historical  and  kindred  S
ti.s  ,,f  the  country. Among  bis  publications  are

-  .in.-  Notices  of  Samuel  Gorton  '  (1888);  ••  I
Plymouth  Patent  "(1854);  "BiUiographi  of  G
Hutchinson's  Publications''  1 1  *<"•  T > : -  \N  ingfiVld's
Discourse  of  Virginia "(U  ttaraof  Phfllis

Wheat  h-v" (lso4): Smith's "True BslsHon"

01888); "Remarks  >-n  Bihastian  Cabotfi  Kappa

Monde"  iisi;7):  "Memoir  .-f  I  rsrmoro*

(I860);  ;,ii,l  "The  Forms  in  issuing  Letters- Patent
l.v the  Crown  of Kngland  "  BavSjnl of

th.se  land  others  not hen-  enumerated)  originally
ap|»ar.d  iii  the  publications  of  the  MaSBBQM
historical society, others in the ■  An-ha*dogia
Vniericana." Mr.  IWne  had  edited  <?•>*.  Bradf-
•'•  Histors Of Plymouth Plantation" tl*.V,| and
Bradford's  "  Dialogue,  <>r  Third  «
tw e.n  old men  and  \oung  men  ilv:  ^<Tal

volumes  of  the  Collections  and  Proceedings  of  the


116


DEANE


DEANE


M.i--;icliuMtls  historical  society,  of  which  body  he
wai  the  recording  secretary.

DEANE,  James,  Indian  mtafoaary,  1».  in  Qro-
ton,  Ootnx,  20  Aug.,  i?is;  ,1.  in  Westmoreland,
Oneida  <•«>..  N.  Y.,  10  Sept.  1888.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  ml.  In  1773-4  he  was  a
missionary  to  the  Canadian  Indians,  and  he  was
afterward  employed  by  congress  to  pacify  the
northern  Indians*  a  work  for  which  he  was  pecul-
iarly  fitted,  being  familiar with their  language,

having  1 ii,  when  twelve  years  of  age,  associated

with  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mosely,  a  missionary  to  the  Six
Nations.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was
commissioned  as  a  major,  and  served  as  an  Indian
agent  and  interpreter  at  Fort  Stanwix.  He  was
taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  and  would  have
been  killed  but  for  the  pleadings  of  their  women.
At  the  close  of  the  war  the  Oneulas  granted  him  a
tract  of  land  two  miles  square,  near  Rome,  Oneida
co.,  which  he  afterward  exchanged  for  a  tract  in
Westmoreland,  whither  he  removed  in  1786.  He
was  for  a  long  time  a  judge  in  Oneida  county,  and
held  other  offices  of  trust.  Deansville  was  named
in  his  honor.  He  wrote  an  essay  on  Indian  my-
thology, which  is  lost.

DEANE,  James,  naturalist,  b.  in  Coleraine,
Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Greenfield,  8  June,  1858.
He  passed  his  early  life  on  his  father's  farm,  and
in  1822  removed  to  Greenfield,  where,  after  writing
for  four  years  in  a  lawyer's  office,  he  studied  medi-
cine. He  was  graduated  as  M.  D.  in  1831,  and
practised  from  that  date  until  his  death.  In  the
spring  of  1835  he  discovered  fossil  footprints  in
the  red  sandstone  of  the  Connecticut  valley,  and,
having  called  the  attention  of  scientific  men  to  the
fact,  his  investigations  were  afterward  extended
by  Prof.  Edward  Hitchcock  and  others.  American
geologists  were  soon  convinced  of  the  genuineness
of  the  footprints;  but  those  in  England  were
skeptical  until  a  box  of  impressions,  with  a  com-
munication, had  been  sent  by  Dr.  Deane  to  Dr.  G.
A.  Mantell,  by  whom  they  were  placed  before  the
Geological  society  of  London.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  about  publishing  an  illustrated
work  embodying  the  results  of  twenty-four  years
of  geological  study  and  labor,  which  has  since  been
issued  by  the  Smithsonian  institution.  He  con-
tributed frequently  to  Silliman's  "Journal"  and
the  Boston  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  and
was  the  author  of  a  paper  on  the  "  Hygienic  Con-
dition of  the  Survivors  of  Ovariotomy,"  in  which
he  favored  the  morality  of  the  operation.

DEANE,  John  H.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Canada.  He
removed  to  the  United  States  at  an  early  age.  He
entered  Rochester  university,  but  in  1862  left  col-
lege and  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  defence  of
the  Union.  He  was  captured  at  the  battle  of
Gettysburg,  and  was  for  some  time  confined  in  a
Confederate  prison.  After  being  exchanged,  he
entered  the  navy  and  served  until  the  close  of  the
war.  He  then  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice  in  the  city  of  New  York.
Mr.  Deane  has  been  especially  distinguished  for  his
gifts  to  benevolent  institutions  under  the  control
of  Baptists.  To  Rochester  university  he  has  given
$100,000,  besides  considerable  sums  to  the  Roches-
ter theological  seminary  and  to  Vassar  college.

DEANE,  Samnel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mansfield,
Mass.,  30  March,  1784;  d.  !*»  An-.  1884  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1805,  and  in  1810  lieeame
pastor  of  the  second  church  at  Scituate,  Mass.,  a
charge  which  he  retained  for  twenty-four  years.
He  published  "The  Populous  Village,"  a  poem
(1826);  a  "  History  of  Scituate"  (1831);  and  a  num-
ber of  sermons  and  short  poems. — His  nephew,


William  Reed,  antiquarv,  b.  in  Mansfield.  Mass.,
21  Aug.,  1809;  d.  then,  16  June,  1871,  waa  en-
gaged many  yean  In  mercantile  life  in  Boston,  and
also  contributed  largely  to  the  Unitarian  and  the

secular  press.  He  wrote  valuable  articles  f,,r  the
"New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical  BeguV
ter"  and  "The  Historical  Magazine."  and  was
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  early  history  of
New  England.  He  published  genealogical  his-
tories of  the  Deane  (in  1849),  Leonard  (1851k  and
Watson  (1864)  families,  and  also  edited  "Madam
Knight's  Journal,"  reprinted  in  "Littell's  Living
Age,"  26  June,  1858.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest
members  of  and  held  various  offices  in  the  New
England  historic-genealogical  society.

DEANE.  Silas,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Groton, Conn.,
24  Dec,  1737;  d.  in  Deal,  England,  23  Aug..  17801
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1758,  and,  engaging
in  mercantile  pursuits  at  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  took
a  leading  part  in  the  movements  that  led  to  the
outbreak  of  the  Revolution.  He  was  sent  as  a
delegate  from  Connecticut  to  the  Continental  con-
gress, 1774-'6.  In  1776  he  was  ordered  to  France
as  a  secret  political  and  financial  agent,  where  he
made  arrangements  for  securing  substantial  aid
from  that,  country,  and,  with  Dr.  Franklin  and
Arthur  Lee.  negotiated  treaties  of  amity  and  com-
merce between  France  and  the  United  States
that  were  signed  in  Paris,  6  Feb.,  1778.  He  also
personally  obtained  the  services  of  Lafayette,  De
Kalb,  and  other  foreign  officers.  These  contracts
were  subsequently  made  the  basis  Of  charges
against  him  by  congress  on  the  ground  of  ex-
travagance, and  he  was  recalled  in  consequence
by  resolution  passed  21  Nov.,  1777.  Reaching
Philadelphia  in  1778,  he  found  that  manv  re-
ports had  been  circulated  to  his  discredit.  These
seem  to  have  originated  with  his  late  colleague,
Arthur  Lee,  who  had  quarrelled  with  him  in
Paris,  but  Deane  had  warm  friends  in  Jay  and
Adams,  the  latter  having  succeeded  him  in  his
mission  to  France.  After  a  heated  controversy
with  influential  members  of  congress,  and  being
required  by  that  body  to  make  a  full  statement  of
his  financial  transactions  in  France,  he  was  com-
pelled to  return  to  that  country  to  procure  the
requisite  papers.  There  he  found  that  the  publi-
cation of  certain  of  his  private  despatches  had  em-
bittered the  French  government  against  him,  and
he  was  thus  forced  to  retire  to  Holland,  whence  he
passed  over  to  England,  where  he  died  in  great
poverty,  estranged
from  his  native  land
and  feeling  that  he
had  been  unjustly
dealt  with.  In  1842
congress  vindicated
his  memory  by  de-
ciding that  a  consid-
erable sum  of  money
was  due  him,  and
directed  its  payment
to  his  heirs. Deane

Sublished.  in  his  own
efence,  "  Letters  to
Hon.  Robert  Mor-
ris" (New  London,
1784);  "An  Address
to  the  Free  and  In-
dependent Citizens
of  the  United  States
of  North  America"  (Hartford  and  London,  1784);
and  "Paris  Papers,  or  Mr.  Silas  Deane's  late  In-
tercepted Letters  to  his  Brother  and  other  Friends"
(New  York,  1781).  •


^1/  <*^%«^>^«—


DEARBORN


DEA1


117


</%&d*z^£*<x<


DEARBORN,  Beajamla,  inventor, b.  In  Ports.

mouth.  N.  II..  in  IT.">"»;  .1.  in  Boston,  88  I'M'..  I
II. served  an apprenticeship  an  a print «r.  ami
afterward  opened  an  academy  for  bm, About
i  In-  removed  his  school  to  Boston. In  1784
under  the  signature  of  ••  a  Priend  <>f  [ndnet

In-  Wrote  an  article  for  "  The Sew Ham:

."  iii  which  In-  first  suggested  the  employment
«>f  oonviet  labor  f«»r  profit.  Re  vm  the  Inventor
<>f  the  spring  ball

Dl  IRBORN,  deary,  soldier,  b.  in  North
Hampton,  N.  II..  98  Feb.,  1751;  d.  in  Roxbury,
Mass..  t\  Jane,  1896.  After  ftadving  medicine.
he  liegan  its  practice  at  N«>tt in^hum Sjiiaiv in

1??'.'.  Having  em-
ployed his  leisure
in  the  >t  u«lv  nf  I  lie
art  of  war,  he  set
out  <>n  the  <lay  after

the  battle  of  Lexmg-

■fj %J£  A  '  *°n  f«»i"  Cambridge.

at  the  head  nf  sixty
minute-iueii,  reach-
ing thai  place  carls
the  next  i lay.  <>n
his  return  he  vm
appointed captain

iii  Stark's  regiment,
and subsequently

took  |  tart  ill  the  I  tat-
tle ,,f  Hunker  Hill,
where  he  covered
the  retreat  of  the
American  forces.  In  September  he  accompanied
Arnold's  expedition  to  Canada,  but  was  for  some
time asriously  UL  Be  recovered  in  time  to  assist
in  the  attack  on  Quebec,  31  Dec,  where  he  was
made  prisoner.  He  was  released  mi  parole  in  May,
17?<>,  and  exchanged  in  March,  1777,  when  he
was  appointed  major  in  ScamnieH's  regiment  He
fought  in  the  battles  of  Stillwater,  Saratoga,  Mon-
mouth, and  Newtown,  distinguishing  himself  at
Monmouth  by  a  successful  charge.  In  17N1  be
Joined  Washington's  staff  as  deputy  quartermaster-
general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  ami  served  lit  the
of  Vorktown.  In  June,  17K-I.  he  took  up  his
residence  at  Monmouth,  Me.  He  was  chosen  briga-
dier-general of  militia  in  1787,  and  major-gem  nil
in  1  <!>•").  In  1789  he  was  appointed  l\  S.  marshal
for  Maine.  He  was  elected  to  the  :id  congress  ^  I
democrat,  and  re-elected  to  the  4th,  serving  from
1999  till  17S>7.  President  Jefferson  appointed  him
secretary  of  war,  which  office  he  occupied  from
1801  tilf  1809.  In  the  latter  year  President  Madi-
son gave  him  the  collectorship  of  the  port  of  Bos-
toii.  which  place  he  filled  until  appointed  senior
major-general  in  the  V.  S.  army,  27  .Ian..  1812, and
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Northern  Depart-
ment. He  succeeded  in  capturing  York  (now  To-
ronto) on  27  April.  1818.  and  Fort  Qeorge  on  27
May  following.  <>n  «i  July  he  was  recalled,  on
the  ostensible  ground  of  impaired  health,  but  really

in  consequence  of  being  charged  with  poUticaJ  in-
trigue, and  placed  in  command  of  the  city  of  New
York.  His  request  for  a  court  of  Inquiry  was  not
Banted.  Be  served  from  7  May,  189$  till  80  June,
1824,  as  minister  to  Portugal,  when  he  offered  his
resignation,  which  was  accepted.  Be  then  settled
at  Roxbury,  Ban,  where  be  spent  the  remainder
of  his  life,  paying annnal  visits  to  his  farm  in  Maine.
In  person  lie  was  large  end  commanding,  frank  in
his  manners,  ami  remarkable  for  his  integrity.  He
published  an  account  of  the  battle  Of  Bunker  Hill,
and  wrote  a  journal  of  his  expedition  to  Canada,
imprisonment in  (Jucln-c,  and  other  adventures. —


Henry  Alexander  Srainmell,  lawyer,  b.
in  Exeter.  N.  If.,  :j  March.  1 7*1 ;  d.  in  I'
19  July,  1861. lb  »u-  graduated  at  Wiih
oUege  in  1809.  and  studied  law  »ni
BfeOfl  in  .Nilein,  Mass.,  \Unrc  for  a  »hort  time  ne
practised. He  ■nocseoed  his  father  in -
betor  of  the  |H.rt  of  Boston,  flilm.

IH2U. He  sU|H-rilltel|.l.

was  appointed brigadier-general  t.f  militia,
mending  the  defences  of  Huston  harbor,  h

He  was  a  ineinlxr  of  the  State  constitution
veiition  of  1890,  of  the  state  bouse  <>f  npreaenta-
ti\.s  m 1899,  and  of  the  state  MaatS  in  \K'M. He

served  in  rmngi—  from  ■*>  I1  n  2  March,

1KW,  and  acted  as  adjutant-piieral  of  MaiMacliu-

setts  from  1884  till  1h4:j,  when  be  was  removed  f->r
loaning  the  state  arms to  the  stj,i,-  of |;|,

laml.  to  in-  Dead  in  suppressing  the  Iiorr  rebellion.

He  also served as mayor  of Roxbury, Mam.,  in

1847  "ti.  being  re  elected  annually.  '  lie  wa«  a

strenuous  advocate  "f  internal improvement*,  the

construction  of  the  Qreal  Western  railroad
eachnsetts  and  the  tunnelling  of  Booaafl  mountain
being  largely  due  to  Ins  labors. Be  was  Coed  of

horticulture  ami  landscape  gardening,  and  the
cemeteries  of  Roxbun  and  Mount  Auburn  owe
much  t't  his  taste,  industry,  and  skill.  II
stantly  led  a  busy  public  life,  and  his  literary
activity  was  very  great,  although  but  few  of  his
works have In-en published. Anions tlies*. are

"Memoir  on  the  Black  Sea,  Turkey,  and  Egypt,"

with  charts  (8  vols..  Boston,  1819);  ••  Letters  on  the
Internal  Improvements  and  Commerce  of  the
West"  (Boston,  1889);  and  "History  of  Naviga-
tion and  Naval  Architecture "(9  rols.).  Bil  manu-
script remains  include  a  "  Diary":  a  "  Life  of  Mai.-
Gen.  Dearborn'*;  "Life  <>f  Com.  Bainbridge  ;
"Life  of  Jesus  Christ " ;  and  **  Writings  on  Horti-
culture." See  "Address  on  Henry  Dearborn,'' by
Daniel  Goodwin  (Chicago.  1884).

DEARBORN.  Nathaniel. engraver,  b.  in  1789;
d.  in  South  Reading,  Mass..  j  Nov..  1889.  Be  *w
one  of  the  earliest  engravers  on  wood  in  Boston,
and  published  -The  American  Text-Book  for  Mak-
ing Letters'' (Boston);  "Boston  Notions;  IIM  Ac-
count of '  That  Village '  from  1880  to  1847"
••  Reminisoences  of  Boston,  and  Guide  through  the
city  and  Environs"  (1881);  and  "Guide  through
Mount  Auburn  "  (1887).

HEARING,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Campbell  coun-
ty, Va..  98  April.  1840;  d.  in  Lynchburg  in  April,
1866. He  «as  a  great-grandson  of  CoL  Charles
Lynch,  of  Revolutionary  fame,  who  gave  his  name
to  the  summary  method  of  administering  justioe
OOW  known  as '"Lynch  law."  through  his  rough-
and-rea<lv  wavof  treating  the  tories.  Hcwaagradu-
ated  at  Hanover,  Va..  academy,  and  was  app
a  cadet  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  but  r.
in 1661,  to  join  the  Confederate  army  when Vir-
ginia passed  the  ordinance  "f  ssceeffoe Be  »«
lively  lieutenant  of  the  Washington  artillery
oi  Nee  Orleans,  captain  of  Latham's  Isitt.  n
ami  commander  of  Denny's  artiUerv  batta&svana

colonel  of  a  cavalry  regiment  from  North  Carolina.
and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general
for  gallant  rv  at  the  battle  <>f  Plymouth.  Be  i»r-
Lieipeted  in  the  principal  engagasassjti  between  the

Army  Of  Northern  Virginia  and  the  Army  of  the

Potomac  On  the  retreat  of  the  Confederal

from Petersburg  to  AppOSaattOX  Curt-ll-usc.  he

was  mortally  aoundad  near  ParmviUs  m  » singular

encounter  with  Hrig.-Uen.  TIuxkIom  Ib-ad.  "f  the
National  arm  v.  The  two  generals  met.  «»n  •'»  April,
at  the  bead  oi  their  forces,  on  opposite  side*  of  the

Appomattox,  at High  Bridge,  and  u  duel  With


118


DEAS


DE  BHAQl'IKKK


pi-tols  ensued.  Gen.  Read  was  shot  dead,  but
&ml  Dealing  lingered  until  ■  lew  days  after  the
Bartender  ox  Lee,  when  he  died  in  tin-  old  city

hotel  at  Lynchburg,  Va.

DEAS,  "Charles,  painter,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1818;  died  insane.  His  maternal  grandfather
was  Ralph  Izard,  the  South  Carolina  patriot.  He
showed  an  early  taste  for  art,  and  studied  under
John  Sanderson  in  his  native  city,  and  in  the
schools  of  the  National  academy  of  design,  New
York.  In  1840  he  visited  the  "far  west"  of  that
day,  and  spent  several  years  at  St.  Louis  in  the
successful  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was  a
man  of  decided  ability;  hut  mental  derangement
cut  short  his  career  many  years  before  his  death.
Among  his  more  important  pictures  that  have  be-
come widely  known  through  engravings  are  "  The
Turkey  Shoot,"  "  Walking  the  Chalk,"  "  Long
Jake,"  "  The  Wounded  Pawnee,"  "  Indian  Guide,
"  A  Group  of  Sioux,"  "  Hunters  on  the  Prairie,"
and  "  The  Last  Shot."  His  "  Council  of  the  Shaw-
nees  at  North  Bend  "  portrays  an  incident  in  the
life  of  Gen.  George  Rogers  Clarke.

DE  AYOLAS,  Juan. See  Ayolas.

DE  BAR,  Benedict,  actor,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 5  Nov.,  1812;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  14  Aug.,
1877.  He  made  his  debut  at  the  Theatre  Roval,
Margate,  England,  in  1832,  and  came  to  the  United
States  in  1834,  appearing  the  following  year  at  the
St.  Charles  theatre.  New  Orleans,  as  Sir  Benjamin
Backbite  in  the  "  School  for  Scandal."  In  1837  he
opened  the  old  National  theatre  in  New  York  city,
and  in  1838  played  at  the  old  St.  Louis  theatre,
afterward  appearing  in  various  cities  of  the  west.
In  1840  he  played  successively  in  New  York  and  Lon-
don, and  in  the  same  year  returned  to  New  York,
where  he  played  at  the  Bowery  theatre,  In  1842  he
became  stage-manager  for  Hamblin  at  the  Bowery,
in  1849  purchased  the  Chatham  theatre,  New  York,
retaining  it  for  three  years,  and  afterward  went  on  a
four  years'  starring  tour,  playing  in  the  principal
cities  of  the  United  States.  In  1853  he  became  pro-
prietor of  the  St.  Charles  theatre,  New  Orleans,  and
in  1855  of  the  St.  Louis  theatre,  leasing  it  in  1873,
when  he  bought  a  large  interest  in  the  Grand  opera
house  of  that  city.  After  the  death  of  Hackett
the  dramatic  stage  lacked  a  great  Falstaff  until
Mr.  De  Bar  undertook  its  representation,  making  a
specialty  of  this  character,  which  others  had
adopted  and  soon  relinquished.  His  appearance
in  Brooklyn  in  this  character,  after  his  success  in
the  west  and  south,  was  a  dramatic  event  of  note.
He  acquired  a  large  fortune,  being  successful  both
as  an  actor  and  manager. — His  wife,  Florence,  b.
in  Philadelphia  in  1828,  made  her  debut  in  1839  as
a  danseuse  at  the  Walnut  street  theatre,  Philadel-
phia. Her  maiden  name  was  Vallee.  She  travelled
with  Fanny  Ellsler,  and  at  the  old  Park  theatre  in
1848  played  the  "  French  Spy."  She  retired  from
the  stage  in  New  Orleans  in  December,  1857.

DE  BEGNIS,  Giuseppe,  opera-singer,  b.  in  Lu-

fo,  Italv,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  August,
849.  He  began  his  musical  studies  at  the  age
of  seven  years,  and  sang  soprano  till  he  was  nearly
fifteen,  when  his  voice  broke.  He  then  studied  for
a  comedian,  and  later  resumed  lessons  as  a  baritone
vocalist.  He  made  his  first  appearance  as  an  opera-
tie  buffo  singer  at  Modena,  in  1813,  with  sufficient
success  to  decide  his  continuance  as  a  performer  on
the  lyric  stage.  In  1816  he  married  the  noted
prima-donna  and  famous  beauty,  Signorina  Bond
They  sang  throughout  Italy  with  great  BuooesB,  and
in  1819  made  their  first  appearance  at  the  Italian
opera  in  Paris,  remaining  three  seasons.  In  1821
they  performed  in  London,  and  thereafter  in  the


various  capital  cities  of  Europe,  in  concerts  and
operas.  About  1845  De  Begnia  came  to  the  United
Nates,  appearing  frequently  fa  New  Fork  city  in
ooneerts  and  operas  with  only  moderate  success.
His  voice  had  lost  its  freshness,  and  his  style  seemed*
antiquated. Be was  still  notable  as  one  of  the

Eared  and  most  natural  of  Italian  buffo  Bfagen;
ut  that  kind  of  vocalist  was  not  appreciated  in
this  country.  In  the  old  Rossinian  comic  operas
the  flexibility  of  his  voice  and  his  rapid  pronuncia-
tion were  altogether  remarkable.  His  countenance
was  severely  marked  by  small-pox ;  but  in  his
make-up  for  performance  he  gave  no  evidence  of
facial  disfigurement.  Disappointed  in  his  recep-
tion by  the  American  public,  he  longed  to  return
to  the  scenes  of  his  earl  v  success  ;  but  the  horrors  of
sea-sickness  and  hazards  of  the  voyage  prevented.
He  died  of  cholera,  not  without  means,  but  neg-
lected and  almost  forgotten.

DE  BERDT,  Dennis,  colonial  agent,  b.  early
in  the  18th  century;  d.  in  England,  about  1771.
He  was  a  London  merchant,  with  extensive  com-
mercial connections  in  this  country.  About  No-
vember, 1766,  when  the  colonial  legislature  of
Massachusetts  dismissed  Richard  Jackson  from  its
service,  the  house  elected  the  honest  and  aged
Dennis  de  Berdt  as  its  own  particular  agent.  From
this  time  Hutchinson,  who  had  made  pretence  of
being  a  friend  to  colonial  liberty,  dated  the  revolt
of  the  American  colonies,  and  his  correspondence
and  advice  conformed  to  the  opinion.  •Samuel
Adams  divined  the  evil  designs,  now  so  near  their
execution,  and  instructed  De  Berdt  to  oppose  the
establishment  of  a  military  force  in  America,  as
needless  for  protection  and  dangerous  to  liberty.
"  Certainly,"  said  he,  "  the  test  way  for  Great  Brit-
ain to  make  her  colonies  a  real  ana  lasting  benefit
is  to  give  them  all  consistent  indulgence  in  trade,
and  to  remove  any  occasion  of  their  suspecting  that
their  liberties  are  in  danger.  While  any  act  of
parliament  is  in  force  which  has  the  least  appear-
ance of  a  design  to  raise  a  revenue  out  of  them,
their  jealousy  will  be  awake."  The  closing  of  the
affairs  of  Mr.  De  Berdt's  firm  in  England,  which
was  found  to  be  irretrievably  bankrupt,  was  under-
taken by  Joseph  Reed,  a  young  colonial  visitor  to
England,  who  had  practised  law  in  the  New  Jersey
courts,  and  later  had  held,  as  his  first  political
appointment,  the  office  of  deputy  secretary"  for  the
province  of  New  Jersey.  He  had  visited  England
in  1763-'o,  and  had  met  the  family  of  Mr.  De  Berdt.
In  May,  1770,  he  married  Esther  de  Berdt.  Dr.
Franklin  was  chosen  to  succeed  Dennis  de  Berdt  as
colonial  agent  at  the  time  of  his  death.

DE  BERRY,  Edinnnd,  politician,  b.  in  Mount
Gilead,  N.  C,  14  Aug.,  1787;  d.  there,  12  Dec.,  1859.
He  received  a  public-school  education  and  engaged
in  agricultural  pursuits.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  legislature,  with  occasional  intermissions,  from
1806  till  1828,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  whig,
serving  from  1829  till  1831.  He  was  defeated
when  a  candidate  for  re-election,  but  was  elected
again  in  1833,  and  for  each  succeeding  term  till
1845,  and  was  again  in  congress  from  1849  till  1851.

DE  BHAQtIERE,  Peter  Boyle,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Dublin,  27  April,  1784  :  d.  in  York-
ville  (now  a  part  of  Toronto),  23  Oct ..  1 861  >.  He  was
the  youngest  son  of  John,  Lord  de  Bhaj  ra  ieiv.  <  >f  A  rd-
kill,  county  Londonderry,  Ireland.  He  entered  the
navy  when  quite  young,  and  served  as  a  midship-
man at  the  battle  of  Camperdown.  Be  lett  the
navy  after  a  brief  period  of  service,  and  in  1837
emigrated  to  Canada.  From  1838  till  his  death  he
was  a  member  of  the  legislative  coupcil.  On  the
remodelling  of  Toronto  university,  he  was  appointed


DE BOLT


\MI*


111)


hanccllor,  Itut  sul>sequcntly  resigned.  Bl  WU
also  a  niiMiiiN-r  "i  thf  Anglioan  synod.

1 » I BOLT.Reiln  \.,  jurist, b. in  Fairfield ooun-
ObJO,  -'<»  •'mi.. IN28. Ho received  a  eomtnon-
■  I  education  and  worked  on  a  farm  till  his
nteenth  year,  when  In-  was  apprenticed  t«»  a
taiiix  r. After  swing  hi*  time  lie  followed  In-
trude for  a  few  wars,  ImiI  in  the  mean  lime  studied
law.  ami  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  February,  is">u.
He  removed  to  Trenton,  Grundy  <■>>.,  Missouri,  in
!i  tin-  practice  of  law. lie  was  ap-

?  dinted  school  commissioner  of  Grundy  county  In
l,  ami  re-elected  to  t  In-  saint'  office  in  1H00,  serv-
ing until  tin'  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  lie  entered

tli.-  National  service  in  1M(11  as  captain  in  the  ttd
Missouri  infantry,  was  captured  at  the  hat  tie  of
Shiloh.  8  April.  1868,  and  held  as  prisoner  until  the
following  October.  In  1863  he  resigned  his  eom-
mi— ion  on  account  of  impaired  health,  and  re-
sumed his  profession.  I>ut  m  1M(>4  re-entered  the
army  as  major  in  the  44th  Missouri  infantry,  and
was  "mustered  out  of  service  in  August,  1885.  He
was  elected  judge  of  the  circuit  court  for  the
11th  district  of  Missouri  in  November,  1863,  which
office  he  held  until  his  election  as  a  representative
from  Missouri  in  the  44th  congress,  closing  his  con-
gressional career  in  l^'.',.

DE  BONNE,  P.  A.,  Canadian  jurist,  1>.  about
1780.  He  was  a  nephew  of  the  French  governor
of  Canada,  Marquis  de  la  Jonquiere.  He  was  a
member  of  the  executive  council  in  17i)4,  and  also
of  the  legislative  assembly,  in  which  he  opposed
Mr.  (Jtithbert's  motion  to  abolish  slavery.  He
eventually  became  leader  of  the  Canadian  iMirty  in
the  house,  and  displayed  great  ability  as  a  debater ;
but,  as  his  expressions  were  objectionable  to  the  as-
sembly, he  was  dismissed  from  the  house  by  a  sim-
ple vote  of  its  members.  He  was  also  a  judge  in
Lower  Canada,  and  was  the  only  member  of  the
judiciary  who  held  a  seat  in  the  house.

IH IBOBBE,  l'rudhomme,  soldier.  He  was  a
French  officer,  who  had  seen  thirty-five  years  of
European  service,  and  was  given  a  commission  in
the  American  army  about  1777.  On  22  Aug.  of
that  rear  he  commanded  a  brigade  in  Sullivan's
attack  on  Stat  en  Island.  At  the  battle  of  the
Brandy  wine,  on  11  Sept.,  Gen.  Deborre  claimed
the  post  of  honor  on  the  right  wing  of  the  army  ;
lnit  Sullivan  would  not  yield  this  to  him,  and  when
Deborre  pertinaciously  insisted  on  taking  it,  the
former  made  a  long  and  circuitous  march  for  the
purj)ose  of  outreaching  him,  which  did  not  ac-
complish its  object,  and  in  consequence  of  which
his  hrigade  was  not  formed  for  action  when  the
battle  l>egan. Deborre's  brigade  was  the  first  to

five  way  lie  fore  the  British  attack.  His  insubor-
ination  was  made  the  subject  of  a  congressional
inquiry,  and  he  resigned  his  commission.  He  was
unpopular  in  the  army,  and  totally  unfit  to  com-
mand American  troops.

DE  BOW,  James  Dun  woody  Brownson  (de-
Ix.  i.  statistician,  b. in  Charleston.  S.  ('., 10  July,

1890;  d.  in  Elisabeth,  N.  J..  27  IY1...  is<;7.  He
was  employed  in a  commercial DOOM for -

■8,  was  graduated  at  Charleston  college  in  1S43,
and  in  the  following  year  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  had  a  predilection  for  statistical  science  and
literature,  and  In-fore  adopting  the  legal  profession
was  a  contrihutor  to  the  ■•.Southern  Quarterly  Be-
view,"  of which he became  editor  in 1*44. Hll

elaborate  article  on  ■'  •  toegou  and  the  <  toegon  Qm  i-

tion"  attracted  wide  attention  in  the  United  S
and  Europe,  appeared in Fivmh,  and  was  tic
oasion  of  a  debate  in  the  French  chami<er  of  depu-
ties. In  1840  Mr.  De  Bow  withdrew  from  itseditor-


ship and NOBOfUd  \ where

Bow's « bmmercial  Rei  lew  "  was  ratal  >li  did  \,\  him,
and  attained  immediate  success. In IM-

oame  professor  of  pontics!  economy  and  commer-
oial  statistics  in  the  L'nl

Was  <Mle  of  (hi  founders  of  t  It,-  l/olliSMtin

society,  -nice  merged  into  tin

He  left  the  university  abonl  1890  to  atSttOM  '  I  large

of  the  census  bureau  of  Louisiana,  hold  inc.

three  years,  during  which  tune  In-  eoUti  ted  a  vast

mass  of  statistical matter  relating  to  the  DBJJbJb>

tion  and  prodootaof  the  state,  end  the  oomns

of  New  Orleans. PlMldant Fierce  WPTHrfated  him

superintendent  of  the  census  in  I&'m,  and  he  per-
fonned  the  duties  of  this  ..flier  two  years,  continu-
ing to  edit  his  --Review."  He  devoted  himself
almost  wholly  to  poUtioal  economy,  writing  BZtl  n-
siselv  on  commercial  statistics  and  finance,  and
OOntribttting  articles  on  American  lop!
eighth  edition  of  tin-  "  BuoycJopSsdia  Britatmica."
He  delivered  various  addresses  l*forc  literary,  agri-
cultural, and  commercial associat ions. Aj>art  from

'  his  literan  pursuits  he  was  one  of  tin-  most  indus-
trious men  of  his  time.  and.  notwithstanding  hi-

J  delicate  organization  and  frequent  ill  health,  hi-
public  lecturing  and  executive  duties  were  apfiar-
ently  unahated.  He  was  active  in  enterprises  for
the  material  and  intellectual  interests  of  the  south.
and  was  a  memlier  of  every  southern  commercial
convention  sutiscqucnt  t"  that  of  Memphis  in
1845,  and  was  president  of  the  Knoxville  conven-
tion of  1M.17.  During  the  civil  war  hi-  I.'
was  necessarily  susj»cnded,  though  his  voice  and
pen  ware  employed  a  advocacy  of  the  Confederacy,
previous  to  which  be  had  Uttered  hitter  denuncia-
tions against  the  northern  states  and  their  institu-
tions. After  the  overthrow  of  the  Confederacy  his

views  changed,  he  admitted  the  superiority  Of  the

tree  labor  system  of  the  northwest  to  the  slave-
labor  system  of  the  south,  and  urged  the  legisla-
ture- of  the  southern  states  to  encourage  immigra-
tion. His  "Review"  was  first  riswimofl  b
York  city,  and  subsequently  in  Nashville.  T<  nn.
He  was  author  of  an  "Encyclopssdia  of  the  Trade
ami  Commerce  of  the  United  Stab  .1858),

and  -  The  Industrial  Resources  and  Statistics  ox
the  Southwest."  compiled  from  his  "Review"  <:i
vols..  New  York,  1S.V5).  He  collected  and  prewired
for  the  press,  in  1864,1  greater  j>art  of  the  material

for  the  three  volume-  of  the  quarto  edition, and
compiled  the  octavo  volume  entitled  "Statistical
View  of  the  United  States,"  being  a  compendium
of  the  Seventh  Census, that  of  1880),  of  which  180,-
000  epics  were  ordered  by  iwia teaafWaahington,

1*54). He was also author Of "The S.uthern

States,  their  Agriculture,  Commt  (1856),

and  edited  ■  work  on  mortality  statist

1>K  CAMP,  John,  nasal  officer,  h,  in  New  .I.r-

sey  in  1H12;  <1.  in  Burlington.  N.  .1..  >'.*». Inn
He  was  app'intcd  to  the  navy  from  Florida  in  0c»
tober,  1*'.! 7,  and  served  OB  the  aVwp  "  Yandalia,"
of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in 1-  II- was  pro-

moted to  passed  midshipman  in 1888,  was  in  the

India  squadron  till  1887,  and  commissioned
lieutenant  iii  1888,  and  served  on  the  frigate  -Con-
stitution" along  the  enact  of  African  1864  He
was  coinmi— ioned  commander  in  1858,  and  served
in  the  naw-yard.  New  York,  as  light-house  m-
s|M-ctor,  and  aa  commander  of  the  0tOf»  shi|
lief."  He  commanded  the  -team  sloop  "  I^»aU0^•,'
at  the  attack  iiin.ii  Ports  .lackson  and  St.  Philip,
and  the  capture  of  New  Orleans  (Apri
participated  in  various  actions  on  the  Miffiiwippi,
Including  Vicksburg, while in command of  the

nhickon." He  was  com  missioned  captain  in


1-20


DKCANKSOKA


DECATUR


1862,  and  was  in  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  in
L868  1.  having  command  of  the  frigate  "Wa-
bash." He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  commo-
dore in  1806,  commanded  tin-  store-ship  "Poto-
mac" at  the  Penaaoola  navy-yard  during  18M  ?
and  the  receiving-ship  "  Potomac"  at  Philadelphia
daring  1868-9,  and  was  retired  in  1870  with  the
rank  of  rear-admiral.

DECANKSORA,  Indian  orator,  b.  about  1640.
Fie  was  a  chief  of  the  tribe  of  Onondagas,  which
was  one  of  the  leagued  Six  Nations.  While  at-
tending the  conference  at  Albany  that  was  held
in  1679  with  the  agent  of  Virginia,  he,  with  other
chiefs,  presented  the  claims  of  the  Indian  people.
It  was  said  of  the  Indian  speakers,  by  those  who
were  present  at  the  conference,  that  they  all  "  had
great  fluency  of  words,  and  much  more  grace  in
manner  than  any  man  could  expect  among  a  peo-
ple entirely  ignorant  of  the  liberal  arts  and  sci-
ences." And  of  Decanesora  it  was  said  that  he
had  "  a  graceful  elocution  that  would  have  pleased
in  anv  part  of  the  world."

DECATUR,  Stephen,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Prankford,  near  Phila-
delphia, 14  Nov.,  1808.  His  father  was  a  native  of
Rochelle,  in  Prance,  and  an  officer  in  the  French
navy,  who  had  emigrated  to  the  United  States  at
the  repeal  of  the  edict  of  Nantes,  and  married  an
American  lady  residing  in  Rhode  Island.  Stephen
removed  to  Philadelphia  when  a  very  young  man,
and  was  there  married,  after  which  he  became
captain  of  a  merchantman  at  an  early  age,  and
during  the  Revolution  commanded  the  privateers
"Royal  Louis"  and  "Pair  American,  gaining
distinction  by  the  capture  of  English  vessels.  He
was  appointed  post-captain  in  the  navy  on  11  May,
1798,  at  the  beginning  of  hostilities  with  France,
and  in  the  "  Delaware,"  twenty  guns,  cruised  on
the  American  coast  and  in  the  West  Indies,  and
captured  the  French  privateers  "  Le  Croyable"  and
"  Marsuin."  He  commanded  a  squadron  of  thir-
teen vessels  on  the  Guadeloupe  station  in  1800,
the  frigate  "  Philadelphia  "  being  his  flag-ship,  and
after  his  discharge  from  the  service,  under  the
peace  establishment  of  1801.  engaged  in  business
in  Philadelphia. — His  son,  Stephen,  naval  officer,

b.  in  Sinnepux-
ent,  Md.,  5
Jan.,  1779;  d.
near  Bladens-
burg,  Md.,  22
March,  1820.
He  made  a  voy-
age with  his
father  in  1787.
At  the  age  of
seventeen  he
was  employed
by  Messrs.  Gur-
ney  and  Smith,
of  Philadel-
phia (who  were
agents  for  the
navy),  and  went
to  New  Jersey
to  superintend
the  getting  out
of the Tceel-

Jiieces  for  the
rigate  "  United
States,"  in  which  ship  he  was  launched,  and  which
he  successfully  commanded  in  the  war  of  1812-'5.
Through  the  aid  of  Com.  Barry,  he  obtained  a
warrant  as  midshipman,  dated  30  April,  1798,  and
was  placed  on  board  the  frigate  "  United  States."


<s?£e/b/Lts^y.


He  was  at  that  time  nineteen  years  of  age,  well  in-
formed for  his  age.  eliivalroiis  in  temper,  courteous
in  his  deportment,  and  adding  grace  of  manner  to
an  attractive  person.  While  attached  to  the  frig-
ate "United  States"  under  Com.  Barry,  Decatur
cruised  in  the  West  Indies,  capturing  several
French  privateers  that  were  preying  upon  Amer-
ican commerce.  He  labored  hard  to  make  him-
self master  of  his  profession*  On  one  occasion
the  "  United  States  chased  the  French  privateer
"  L'Araour  de  la  Patrie,"  of  six  guns,  which  vessel,
in  attempting  to  escape,  received  a  twenty-four*
pound  shot  at  her  water-line  from  the  "United
States."  She  at  once  shortened  sail  and  surren-
dered, and  Decatur  was  sent  in  a  boat  to  take  pos-
session. When  he  got  alongside,  "  L'Amour  de  la
Patrie  "  was  sinking  fast,  and  the  crew,  stripped  of
their  clothing,  were  assembled  at  the  side,  lagging
to  be  taken  into  the  boat.  As  it  was  impossible
to  take  on  board  sixty  men,  Decatur  ordered  the
French  captain  to  put  his  helm  up  and  run  down
to  the  frigate  as  the  only  chance  of  saving  the
crew.  This  was  done,  and  though  the  vessel  sank
when  within  fifty  yards  of  the  "  United  States,"
the  crew  was  saved  to  a  man.  In  a  short  time
Decatur  became  a  good  officer  and  an  excellent
sailor.  A  contemporary  said  he  was  a  man  of  an
age,  an  officer  of  uncommon  character  and  rare
promise,  one  not  equalled  in  a  million.  Just  at
the  time  this  remark  was  made,  the  cry  "Man
overboard ! "  resounded  through  the  ship,  and
boats  were  called  away.  Without  hesitation.  De-
catur sprang  from  the  mizzen-chains,  and  in  a
few  moments  his  muscular  arms  were  holding  the
drowning  man  above  the  waves,  which  he  contin-
ued tUl  the  boats  reached  the  spot,  when  he  passed
the  nearly  dying  youth  into  one  of  them,  ana  then
climbed  in  himself.  It  is  of  such  men  that  heroes
are  made,  and  the  one  Decatur  saved,  while  him-
self gaining  celebrity,  lived  to  see  his  preserver
attain  a  fame  unsurpassed  by  that  of  any  officer  of
his  time  in  the  American  navy!  In  1799  Decatur
was  commissioned  lieutenant.  He  sailed  again
with  Com.  Barry  when  he  conveyed  the  commis-
sioners to  France.  On  the  return  of  the  "  United
States  "  she  was  laid  up  for  thorough  repairs.  De-
catur obtained  orders  to  the  "  Norfolk,"  of  eigh-
teen guns,  Commander  Thomas  Calvert,  but  in
September,  1800,  again  joined  his  old  ship  the
"  United  States."  When  the  French  war  was  end-
ed, and  the  treaty  of  peace  between  France  and
the  United  States  had  been  ratified  by  the  senate
on  3  Feb.,  1801,  and  promulgated  by  the  presi-
dent, congress  passed  a  law  directing  the  sale
of  the  whole  navy  except  six  ships,  and  discharg-
ing from  the  service  all  but  nine  of  the  twenty-
eight  captains,  all  of  the  commanders,  and  all
but  thirty-six  of  the  one  hundred  and  ten  lieu-
tenants. Stephen  Decatur  was  one  of  those  se-
lected to  remain  in  the  navy.  His  brother  James
also  remained  as  a  midshipman,  while  the  gal-
lant commander  (the  elder  Decatur)  resigned  his
commission  and  returned  to  private  life.  The
discharge  of  the  officers  and  crews  was  no  sooner
effected  than  the  pacha  of  Tripoli,  though  the
United  States  paid  nim  yearly  tribute  most  faith-
fully and  shamefully,  felt  slighted  because  our  gov-
ernment had  presented  a  fine  frigate  to  the  dey
of  Algiers,  ana  had  sent  him  none ;  and  also  be-
cause one  of  the  ministers  of  the  bey  of  Tunis  had
received  $40,000  from  the  United  States,  whereas
he  (the  pacha)  had  received  but  little  more.  <>n
10  May,  1801.  the  impudent  pacha  declared  war
against  the  United  States,  cut  down  the  American
flag-staff,  and  began  hostilities  agairist  the  Ameri-


DECATUK


m*n


191


am  merchant marine,  at  that I ime  totally  nnf>r<»-

I. A squadron  "f f<>ur  vessels,  under  the

command of  Coin.  Richard Dale, was  fitted mil.

and  DwatM  joined  tin-  "  Kssex."  OMOf  tin-  SQUadr

being  selected  l>y  ('ant.  Befabridge  to  till  the
Important  place  of  iir-t  lieutenant  when  be  lia<I
bOM  hut  three  years  in  tli  \fter  inform-

ing  effective service in restraining  the  Barhary

rs  fruiii  molesting  American  vessels,  ami  oon-
tnerioan  merchantmen  safely  Into  the  At-
lantic, tin-  "Essex"  aailed  for  New  Fort  <>n  17
.Inn  hlng  that  port  on  22  July. Deoatnr

joined  there  tin-  frigate  "  New  York."  ('apt.  James

Barron,  ami  sailed  again  for  the  Mediterranean.

Ih  was  transferred  t<>  the  command  uf  the  ••  Nor-
folk,"' of  eighteen  guns,  and  afterward  t"  the
oner  *  Enterprise,"  of  twelve  guns,  under
Coin.  Preble.  The  latter,  bearing  <>f  the  loss  of
the  "Philadelphia"  off  Tripoli  by  striking  <»n  a
reef,  sailed  in  the  frigate  "Constitution  "  for  that
place,  taking  Deoaftni  with  him.  On  M  Dee.  Deca-
tur captured  the  ketch  "Mastieo"  off  Tri|»oli.
which  vessel  was  named  the  ••  Intrepid,"  and  after-
ward was  aaad  09  destroy  the  "  Philadelphia,"  then
moored  under  the  guns  of  Tripoli,  the  Tripolitatis
having  succeeded  in  getting  her  afloat  and  taking
her  into  the  harbor.  Decatur  volunteered  for  this
service,  left  Syracuse  in  midwinter,  and  arrived
off  Tripoli,  1<>  Fell.,  1N(M.  and.  with  a  picked  erew
of  officers  and  men,  stood  into  the  harbor,  boarded
the  "  Philadelphia,"  and  carried  her.  Then  the
order  was  given  to  set  fire  to  her,  and  in  ten  min-
utes she  was  ablaze.  Decatur  and  his  crew  escaped
to  the  "  Intrepid,"  and  made  their  wav  out  of  the
harbor  amid  the  rapid  firing  and  falling  shot  of
141  guns.  The  "Philadelphia"  was  totally  de-
stroyed. Admiral  Nelson  pronounced  this  -the
ino-t  daring  act  of  the  age."  In  the  subsequent
attack  on  Tri|Mili,  Decatur  took  charge  of  a  divis-
ion, and  greatly  distinguished  himself  in  taking
reogoanee  on  the  Tripolitans  for  the  death  of  his
brother  James.  He  received  his  commission  as
captain,  in  reward  for  his  gallant  services  in  de-
stroying the  "  Philadelphia."  on  N  May.  1801  He
served  at  Tripoli  during  tbe  war,  and  in  Septem-
ber was  appointed  by  Preble  to  the  command  of
the  "Constitution,"  from  which  he  was  afterward
transferred  to  the  frigate  "Congress."  Peace  be-
tween Tripoli  and  the  United  States  having  been
concluded,  8  June,  1805,  Decatur  returned  home,
laid  up  the  "Congress,"  and  was  received  most
enthusiastically  throughout  the  country.  In  Feb-
ruary, lyOH,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
court-martial  that  triad  Coin.  James  Barron  for
surrendering  the  " Chesapeake "  tothe  British  man-
of-war  "  Leopard."  Decatur  was  next  appointed
to  command  the  "Chesapeake."  This  was  during
the  time  that  the  embargo  was  laid  on  British
commerce.  He  was  afterward  ordered  to  the  frig-
ate "  United  States,"  in  which  ship,  in  1810.  be
hoisted  his  broad  pennanl  as  oommodore  of  the

southern  station. 'I  his  command  was  held  by  htm
when  war  began  between  England  and  the  United
State-  in  1818. Putting  to  BBS,  he  soon  fell  in  with
the  British  frigate  "Macedonian,"  which  he  cap-
tured after  a  short,  sharp  action,  in  which  the  ene-
my's ship  was  completely  dismasted  and  much  cut
to  pieces. Jury-masts  were  rigged,  and  the  "  Mace-
donian "  brought  safely  into  |K»rt. In  the  spring
Of 1*14 Deflator took command of the frigate
psident " and a squadron consisting Of the
.."  the  "  Hornet, "and  the  store-ship «* Tom
Bowline." He  left his  squadron in  New  York  to
escape  the  British  blockade  :  but,  having  grounded
|  'ing  to  sea  and  injured  his  vessel,  he  decided


to  return  to  port for  re|wir-.  but  Ml  in  with  four
British frigates,  to  which the  ••  President
obliged  t"  Minvnder  after  n  BJOal  "1"'
nine,  in which one frigate,  the

so  cut  up  an  to  !«•  obliged  t..  haul  out  (or  »h«  drift-
ed out)  of  action. The  ••  Presides!  "  «u  not  BUT*
rendered  until  aha  was  surrounded  bj  Um
< >t  her  frigates— t  In-  "  Majcst  ic,"  t  be  "  Pi  in.  B*
the  "TonodoB* and  when  nerd  the  ap-

pearance of  a  slaughter-hoiiw. She  hud  t  •
Rvs  killed  and  sixty  wounded  -one  ipmrter  of  bef
crew.  While  tin.  war  of  1812  wa(4  jn  progrem,  tl

of  Algiers  bagaa  to  eaptm  American  men  haul

men:  and,  when  |>eace  was  estatili-ln-d.  the  United
States  fitted  out  two  squadron*  to  punt-h  Algiers
for  her  treachery  and  the  violation  of  her  treaty.
Decatur  was  grrOO  the  command  of  one  BfUOdlOa
and  Bainbridge  of  the  other.  <  in  Deflnrt  arrival
in  the  Mediterranean,  In-  captured  the  Algeria*
frigate  "  Mashouda,"  forty-six  goo,  flag-hip  of
Admiral Pais Hainiuida,  after  a  brave  rest-

He  also  oapturadL  subsequently,  tin-  a lgrrine  brir-

of-war  "  Kstedio."  H<-  arrived  off  Algiers  OB  H
June,  1815,  where  iieacc  was  concluded  <>n  term*
very  favorable  to  the  United  States.  It  was  stipu-
lated that  the  United  States  should  DSfUr  pay  tril>-
ute  to  the  dev  of  Algiers,  and  all  Christian  cap-
tives were  to  lie  released.  This  treaty  and  the  ,\,-
mands  of  Decatur  gave  the  death-blow  to  that
cruel  system  which  for  centuries,  to  the  shame  of
Christendom,  had  elevated  the  Iiarlmry  powers  into

baneful  importance. Deoatur  next  went  to  Tunis

and  demanded  indemnity  from  the  bey  for  violat-
ing treat v  stipulations,  which  demand  was  con-
ceded. He  then  made  a  similar  demand  on  the
pacha  of  Tri|M)li,  and  for  the  release  of  Keapob-
tan  and  Danish  prisoners,  all  of  which  was  grant-
ed, thus  ending  forever  the  pretensions  of  the
Barbery  powers.  For  tin*  Deoatur  received  the
thanks  of  all  Europe;  ami.  on  the  assembling  of
congress  m December,  1815,  President Madison

began  his  message  with  a  high  eiilogium  npOO  his
success  against  the  Barlmry  st;,t.  ~.  Decatur  ar-
rived in  Washington  in  January,  1815,  and  was
appointed  navy  commissioner  with  Commodores
Kodgers  and  Potter,  in  which  office  h<-  gave  all  his
zeal, skill. and  experience  in  building  up  the  young
navy  of  the  republic.  While  attached  to  the  boeru
of  navy  commissioners  Deoatur  made  some  re-
marks of  a  censorious  nature  against  Com.  Barron,
which  the  latter
objected  to,  and
which  Deoatur
refused  to  re-
tract, though  he
disclaimed  any
intention  to  be
insulting.  A

long  correspond-
ence ensued,  in
which  Deoatur
did  all  that  an
honorable man

could  do  to  re-
move unfavor-
able impressions
from  Com.  Bar-
ron's mind, but

nevertheless the

latter  challell-ed

Deoatur. The

mmtintr  uoounsd  at  Bladensbnrg.  23  Mnn  t
(apt.  Elliott being Barron's  second,  end
Bainbridge  Decatur's. When  the  srord  ■',lrp*!***
given,  Barron  fell,  wounded  m  the  hip.  where  Dece-


l'2'J


DE  CELLES


DE  COUDRES


tur  said  he  would  shoot  him.  Decatur  was  shot  in
t  in-  abdomen,  and  fell  won  after  Barron.  He  \\as
taken  to  his  home,  where  he  died  that  night.  No
man  wai  ever  more  regretted  by  the  country  than
this  heroic  officer,  to  whom  the  highest  honors  wen
accorded,  and  he  was  followed  to  his  grave  by  the
largest  concourse  of  people — public  and  private —
that  had  ever  assembled  in  Washington  city. — His
younger  brother,  James,  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman. 21  Nov.,  1798,  and  was  promoted  to  be
lieutenant,  20  April,  1802.  In  the  attack  of  3
Aug.,  1804,  on  the  Tripolitans,  he  commanded  one
of  the  American  gun-boats,  and  was  instantly
killed  by  a  musket-ball  while  attempting  to  board
one  of  the  enemy's  vessels.

DE  CELLES,  Alfred  Hm-los.  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  in  St.  Laurent,  near  Montreal,  15  Aug.,
1844.  He  was  educated  at  Quebec  seminary  and
Laval  university.  He  was  editor  of  "  Le  journal
de  Quebec"  from  1867  till  1872,  and  of  "  La  Mi-
nerve  "  from  1872  till  1880,  when  he  was  appointed
assistant  librarian  of  parliament.  He  was  also  con-
nected editorially  with  "  L'opinion  publique."

DE  CHARMS,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 17  Oct.,  1796;  d.  20  March,  1864.  His  an-
cestors wTere  Huguenots,  who  took  refuge  in  Eng-
land in  1685  upon  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of
Nantes.  In  early  life  he  was  a  printer.  In  1825
he  engaged  in  the  study  of  Swedenborgian  theology
under  the  Rev.  Thomas  Worcester,  of  Boston,  at
the  same  time  superintending  the  publication  of  the
"  New  Jerusalem  Magazine  in  that  city,  the  first
three  numbers  of  which  he  set  in  type  and  printed
with  his  own  hands.  Subsequently,  by  the  assist-
ance of  a  friend,  he  was  enabled  to  enter  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1826,  and,  at  the  sug-
gestion of  the  same  friend,  he  began  the  study  of
theology  in  London,  to  qualify  himself  for  the
Swedenborgian  ministry. During  the  two  years

fmssed  in  England  he  supported  himself  by  his
abor  as  a  journeyman  printer.  His  theological
studies  were  continued  in  Baltimore,  and  his  first
sermon,  on  the  "  Paramount  Importance  of  Spiritu-
al Things,"  was  published  in  that  city  in  1828,  and
was  afterward  reprinted  in  London.  After  a  year
of  pastoral  labor  in  Bedford,  Pa.,  he  went  to
London,  and  studied  under  the  Rev.  Samuel  Noble.
On  returning  to  this  country  in  1832,  he  became
pastor  in  Cincinnati,  1832-9,  and  conducted  a  pe-
riodical called  "  The  Precursor."  He  subsequently
?  reached  in  Philadelphia,  1839-'45,  Baltimore,
845-'50,  and  New  York.  In  his  later  days  he  de-
voted much  attention  to  mechanical  contrivances
and  inventions  of  his  own.  He  rendered  valuable
service  to  the  periodical  literature  of  his  church,
and  issued  several  volumes  of  sermons  on  the
fundamental  doctrines  of  Swedenborg.  He  pub-
lished also  "  Freedom  and  Slavery  in  the  Light  of
the  New  Jerusalem";  "Sermon  illustrating  the
Doctrine  of  the  Lord  "  (Philadelphia,  1840) ;  "Series
of  Lectures  delivered  at  Charleston,  S.  C."  (1841) ;
and  "The  New  Churchman  Extra"  (1  vol.),  a
treatise  devoted  to  polemics  and  church  history  in
the  United  States  and  Europe.

DE  COSMOS,  Amor,  Canadian  journalist,  b.
in  Windsor,  Nova  Scotia,  about  1830.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  place  and  in  Halifax.  He
went  to  California  in  1852,  and  to  British  Colum-
bia in  1858,  in  which  year  he  founded  the  "  British
Colonist "  newspaper,  which  he  owned  and  edited
from  that  date  until  1863.  In  1870  he  founded
the  "  Daily  Standard,"  and  was  its  editor  and  pro-
prietor until  1872,  when  he  retired.  The  same
?rear  he  formed  an  administration  in  British  <<>-
umbia,  and  held  the  portfolio  of  president  of  the


executive  council  (without  salary)  from  the  date  of
the  formation  of  the  government  until  he  retired
from  local  politics  in  1*74.  in  consequence  of  the
operation  o!  the  act  against  dual  representation.
Mr.  I»e  Cosmos  was  the  first  in  British  Columbia
to  advocate  the  introduction  of  responsible  gov-
ernment into  the  colony,  the  first  to  recommend
the  union  of  the  Pacific  provinces,  which  he  ac-
complished in  1867,  and  also  the  first  to  advocate
the  union  of  British  Columbia  with  the  Dominion,
and  was  subsequently  instrumental  in  securing  the
unanimous  acceptance  of  the  terms  of  union  made
with  Canada.  He  represented  Victoria  in  the
Vancouver  island  assembly  after  the  union  of  that
island  with  British  Columbia,  and  sat  in  the  legis-
lative council  almost  uninterruptedly  from  1867
till  1871.  In  1871  British  Columbia  was  united
to  Canada,  and  Mr.  De  Cosmos  was  elected  to  both
the  local  assembly  and  the  Canadian  parliament.
He  was  re-elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1878,  and  again  in  1874  and  1878.

DE  COSTA,  Benjamin  Franklin,  clergyman,
b.  in  Charlestown,  Slass..  10  July,  1831.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Biblical  institute,  Concord,  N.  H.,
in  1856,  and  entered  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  was  rector  at  North  Adams,  Mass.,
from  1857  till  1858,  when  he  went  to  Newton  Lower
Falls,  where  he  remained  until  1860.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  chaplain  of  the  5th  and  18th
Massachusetts  infantry,  and  was  in  the  battles  of
Bull  Run  and  Yorktown.  In  1863  he  settled  in
New  York  and  engaged  in  journalism.  He  was
the  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Times  "  in  1863,  of
the  "  Episcopalian  "  in  1864,  and  of  the  "  Magazine
of  American  History"  in  1882,  and  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Huguenot  society  of  America.  In
1884  he  organized  the  first  branch  of  the  "  White
Cross  Society,"  and  is  its  president.  He  was  also
one  of  the  original  promoters  and  organizers  of
the  Church  Temperance  Society,  of  which  he  was
the  first  secretary.  He  is  now  (i887)  rector  of  the
Church  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  in  New  York
city,  and,  in  addition  to  his  religious  work,  is  ac-
tive in  social  movements,  and  has  often  addressed
the  working-men  upon  the  relations  between  capi-
tal and  labor.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  in  1881  by  the  College  of  William  and
Mary.  He  is  a  member  of  various  literary  associ-
ations. He  has  published  "The  Pre-Columbian
Discovery  of  America  by  the  Northmen  "  (Albany,
1869) ;  "  Sailing  Directions  of  Henry  Hudson,  pre-
pared for  his  Use  in  1608  "  (1869) ;  "  The  North-
men in  Maine"  (1870);  "The  Moabite  Stone"
(New  York,  1870);  "The  Rector  of  Roxburgh."
a  novel,  under  the  nam  deplume  of  William  Hick-
ling  (1873);  several  monographs  in  regard  to
Mount  Desert  and  Lake  George;  and  "Cabo  de
Baxos  "  and  "  Cabo  de  Arenas,  studies  in  cartol-
ogv.  He  contributed  to  volumes  iii  and  iv  of  the
"Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America."  He
has  edited  White's  "Memoirs  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  Church"  (1881).

DE  COUDRES,  Louis,  brass-founder,  b.  in
1789;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16  Dec.,  1872.  He
was  apprenticed  at  the  age  of  thirteen  to  James  P.
Allaire,  who  was  carrying  on  a  small  brass  and
bell  foundry.  At  this  establishment  the  brass
castings  were  made  for  McQueen,  who  had  a  ma-
chine-shop, and  did  the  work  for  Robert  Fulton,
in  applying  his  steam-engine  to  the  first  paddle-
wheel  boat,  the  "Clermont,"  on  the  North  river.
Several  years  later  Mr.  Allaire  established  his
steam-engine  works  in  Cherry  street,  New  York,
which  became  famous  for  the  number  and  charac-
ter of  the  engines  it  supplied  to  th,e  early  steam-


DKKMS


UK POBVT


l*i


boats.  Mr.  Dl  Coudres continued  with  Mr.  Al
m. .r<-  than  half  a  century.  SOUS  <.f  ih.-  time  a*  su-
perintendent "f  tin-  Iron-foundry,  ami  all  of  the
Ume  in  charp-  of  the  brass-casting  department,  in
which  art  hi*  reputation  was  |.r<  '-eminent.  Thi*
branch  of  t lit*  Allaire  works  itossrss,-.!  for  mam
yean  almost  a  monopoly  in  IjalnaaHna Tin-  Hot

great  fire-alarm  bells  put  up  in  the  City  Hall  park
ast  by  Mr.  He  Coinlrea.
ID  I  Ms.  <  ii.ui,>  Force,  clergyman, b.  in  Bal-
timore, Mil..  1  Deo,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  I 'a.,  in  lHliU,  and  en-
ternl  i  he  Methodist  ministry  in  New  Jersey.  SoOO
afterward  ho  became  general  agent  for  the  Ameri-
can Bible  society  in  North  Carolina.  In  1H41  he
accepted  the  professorship  of  logic  and  rhetoric  in
tin-  university  of  North  Carolina,  at  Chapel  Hill.
holding  this  office  five  years,  after  which  he  was
for  one  vear  professor  of"  natural  sciences  in  Ran-
dolph-Macon  college,  at  Ashland.  Va.  Returning
to  N' «rtli  Carolina, he  was  stationed  as  a  Methodist
pMlOral  New  Borne,  and  in  1N50  was  a  delegate  to
the  general  conference  of  the  Methodist  Kpiscopal
church,  south,  which  met  in  St.  Ixniis.  While
there  he  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  Greens-
boro, N.  C..  female  college,  and  also  to  the  presi-
deiu  v  of  Centenary  college,  at  Jackson,  I^a.  He
chose  the  former,  and  ssrved  till  1HT>4,  from  which
time  he  was  engaged  in  the  regular  pastorate  till
1858.  Afterward  he  was  the  presiding  elder  of  t  he-
Wilmington  and  New  Berne  district*  of  the  North
Carolina  conference.  At  the  close  of  1865  he  went
to  New  York,  was  occupied  for  a  time  in  literary
pursuits,  and  subsequently  established  the  Church
of  the  Strangers,  of  which  he  is  still  (1887)  the
pastor.  He  was  at  one  time  president  of  Rutgers
female  college.  New  York  city.  Ho  bat  been  the
president  of  the  American  institute  of  Christian
philosophy  since  1881,  and  is  now  (1887)  editor  of
••Christian  Thought,"  a  monthly  magazine.  He
has  also  edited  Frank  Leslie's  ••  Sunday  Magazine."
and  five  volumes  of  the  "Southern  Methodist  Pul-
it,"  and  compiled  throe  volume*  of  "Annals  of  j
uthern  Methodism."  Ho  has  received  the  degree
of  D.  I),  from  Randolph-Macon  college,  and  that
Of  Mi.  D.  from  the  University  of  North  Carolina.
Besides  the  publication  of  several  volumes  of  ser-
BWOJL  and  many  addresses,  he  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  periodical  literature,  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Triumph  of  Peace  and  other  Poems"  (New
York,  1840) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  Dr.  (  larke  "  <  1  K4<» ;  ••  I  >,-
votional  Melodies"  (1842);  "Twelve  College  S»r-
mons"(l844);  "The  Home  Altar  "  (I860) ;  -What
Now!"  (1853);  "Weights  and  Wings"  (1*74) :  ••  A
Scotch  Verdict  in  Re-Kvolution  "  (1886) ;  and  "The
Light  of  the  Nations"  (1868%  in  which  the  author
does  oot  attempt  to  present  the  biography  of  <  hri*t.
hut  takes  the  records  of  the  evangelists  who  write
about  the  man  Jesus,  the  Bond  Mary,  as  he  would
the  narratives  of  the  classic  authors,  and  strive*  to
represent  the  consciousness  of  Jesus  without  refer-
ence to  theological  conclusions.  He  has  written
with  considerable  force  in  opposition  to  the  doc-
trine of  evolution.

DKKKINii.  Nathaniel, author,  h.  85 June,  1791;
d.  mar  Portland.  Me.,  in  1KM1.  Hi*  grandfather
was  Nathaniel  I  Jeering,  to  whose  energy  and  enter-
prise Portland  owes  so  much  of  its  early  prosperity.
Sir.  Dsering  studied  at  Phillips  Kxeter  academy,
and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1810,  Bs  en-
I  the  count ing-hotise  of  Asa  Clapp.  in  Port-
land, but  soon  relinquished  business  pursuits  f< .r
the  law.  and he  was  admitted  to  the  liar  in  1815,

and  practised  In  Canaan, and  afterward  in  Unburn
(ik.w  SkowbeganX  N,«- II  was  while  Mr.  I  Jeering


Bo


was  living  at  Canaan  that  Lydia  Maria  Child  wrote
a  well-known  spigram  upon  hm  b  ,

••  Wh.M  \.  r  w.-.|*  the  young  lawyer  Bj

Will  Mir.i\  ring,

For  what  must  hi*  |-

When  even  his  name  i»  S
lie  r.turne.1  t..  Portland  in \KH).  Idmsslf

to  literary  pur*uits,  and  was  for  editor

of  a  political  jwiint,  the  ••  Inde|»-ti.|. mt  Statesman."
While  still  at  Mil  burn  he  puhli*h.-«|  "  Carfthsssct,"
a  tragedy  foimde.l  u|ion  th  hn  mssssi  Hi

of  Father  Baal* and  the  Norridgewock  Indian*  by
the  British  in 17*20. Thi*  work  tn.<  follow
"The  Clairvoyants," a  comedy, which has besn
several time* produced ujn.ii the  stage  in  Boston

and  Portland.  His  mlsnanancmiH  writing*  inclnds
humorous  tales  of  ••  down-east  "  life.  His  roost
Bnished  plaj  i*  "  BnZTaris,"  a  tragi

UK  FOREST.  John  William,  author  and  ml
dier.  b.  in llumphrey*ville  (now  S-vm..iir..  OoMk,

81  March.  1896.  He  attended  no  oollsge,  but  par-
sued  independent  studies,  mainly  abroad,  was  a
student  in  Latin,  and  liecame  a  fluent  speaker  of
French,  Italian,  and  Spani*h.  While  yet  a  youth,
he  [Missed  four  vears  travelling  in  Europe,  and
two  year*  in  the  Levant,  residing  chiefly  in  Syria.
Again,  in  I860,  he  visited  Europe,  making
sive  tours  through  (treat  Britain.  France.  Italy,
Germany.  Greece,  and  Asia  Minor.  From  that
time  until  tin-
civil  war  Itegan
he  wrote  short
stories  for  peri-
odicals, having
already  I  H-coiiie
an  author  of
sereral  ixx.ks.
In  1861,  as  cap-
tain, he  re-
cruited a  com-
pany for  the
18th  Connecti-
cut volunteers,
tndserred  con-
stantly in  the
Held  till  Janu-
ary, 1*<m.  tak-
ing an  active
part  under

(ien*.  Weitzel
and  Banks  in  the  southwestern  states,  and  under
( ien.  Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and  leav-
ing the  army  with  the  brevet  of  major.  Graphic
descriptions  of battle  scenes in Louisiana,  and

Of  Sheridan's  battles  in  the  valley  of  the  Shen-
andoah, were  published  in  "Harper's  Monthly"
during  the  war  by  Maj.  De  Forest,  who  was  pres-
ent on  all  the  occasions  thu*  mentioned,  and  was
fortunate  enough,  while  expsHenctM
days  und.r  tire,  to  reoeire  but  one  trUDng  wound.
-  one  of  only  two  or  three  American  literary
men  that  laid  down  the  pan  for  the  sword. FTOflJ

lsttf  till  inw  heremainsld  in  the  army  as  adjutant  -
general  of  the  reteran  reasrrs  oorna,  and  after-
ward a*  chief  of  B  district  under  the  Freedmaii'*
bureau.  Since  then  he  has  resided  in  New  H«\. ■:>.
except  when  travelling  in  Btttopa. The  honorary

of  A.  M.  was  confound  anon  him  I
allege  in  1868, Besides  essays,  •  f.

.•in*,  and  eboul  fifty  short  stories,  numerous  mili-
tary sketch.*,  and  K-.k-r.  t  of  which
were  anotivmoit*.  be,  in  1*?M.  contributed  t<>  the
••Atlantic  Monthly "  a  short  ssrial story, entitled
••The  Ij»iis..ii  Tragedy."  He  ha*  publish.  -I  "  The
Bistort  of  the  Indians  of  Connecticut,  from  the


y^^y^tn^r--


124


I  »K FREES


DE HAAS


Earliest-known  Period  to  1850"  (Hartford,  1853);
"  Oriental  Acquaintance, *'  ■  sketch  of  travels  in
Asia  Minor  (New  York,  1856);  "  Witching  Times"
(ls.*>C));  "European  Acquaintance"  (1858);  "Sea-
cliff,"  a  novel  (Boston,  1859);  "Miss  Ravenel's
Conversion"  (New  York,  186?) ;  "Overland  "  (New
York,  1871):  "Kate  Beaumont"  (Boston,  1879);
"  The  Wetherell  Affair  "  (New  York,  1873) ;  "  Hon-
est John  Vane"  (New  Haven,  1875);  "Justine
Vane"  (New  York,  1875);  "  Plaving  the  Mischief"
(1876);  "  Irene  Vane  "  (1877) ;  ""Irene,  the  Mission-
ary" (Boston,  1879);  "The  Oddest  of  Courtships,
or  the  Bloody  Chasm  "  (New  York,  1881).

DEFREES,  John  DM  politician,  b.  in  Sparta,
Tenn.,  8  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Berkeley  Springs,  West
Va.,  19  Oct,  1882.  In  1818  he  was  apprenticed  by
his  father  to  a  printer  in  Ohio,  and  at  the  same
time  began  to  study  law.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Indiana  in  1836,  having  removed  to  that
state  a  few  years  before  to  establish  a  newspaper
in  conjunction  with  his  brother.  He  was  soon
elected  to  the  legislature,  and  was  several  times  re-
elected. In  1844  he  resigned  his  seat  in  the  state
senate,  and  bought  the  "  Indiana  State  Journal,"  a
weekly  paper  published  at  Indianapolis.  He  re-
moved there  and  made  that  paper  a  daily,  which
he  edited  for  several  years.  After  the  Whig  party
was  dissolved  he  united  with  the  Republican,  and
in  1856  became  the  first  chairman  of  the  republi-
can state  committee,  which  place  he  occupied  until
1860.  Mr.  Defrees  was  a  friend  of  many  leading
politicians,  among  whom  were  Clay,  Crittenden,
Webster,  and  Corwin,  who  regarded  him  as  an
adroit  politician.  President  Lincoln  appointed
him  to  the  office  of  government  printer,  which  he
filled  for  manv  years.

DEGOLLADO,  Santos  (day-gol-yah'-do),  Mexi-
can general,  b.  in  Morelia,  state  of  Michoacan,
Mexico,  30  July,  1819 ;  d.  in  June,  1861.  He  had
a  good  education,  but  little  is  known  of  his  life
until  he  became  prominent  at  the  beginning  of
1854  by  revolting  against  the  then  powerful  dicta-
tor, Santa  Anna,  and,  together  with  Epitacio  Huerta
and  Pueblita,  headed  the  rising  in  the  city  of  his
birth.  He  organized  an  army  about  2,000  strong,
at  the  head  of  which  he  marched  resolutely  toward
the  city  of  Mexico,  issuing  on  the  way  a  proclama-
tion, adopting  the  principles  of  the  "  Plan  de
Ayutla,"  issued  on  11  March,  by  Gen.  Juan  Alvarez,
whose  forces  he  joined.  After  several  victorious
engagements  with  the  troops  of  the  dictator  and
the  flight  of  the  latter  (16  Aug.,  18.55),  Gen.  Alvarez
was  proclaimed  president,  and  Degollado  with  the
liberal  army  entered  the  capital,  15  Nov.,  1855.
Degollado  belonged  to  the  liberal  party,  and  with
Juarez,  Lerdo  de  Tejada,  Leon  Guzman,  and  Eze-
quiel  Montes,  devoted  all  his  energy  to  the  success
of  the  principles  proclaimed  at  Ayutla,  and  was
one  of  the  deputies  who  signed  the  new  Federal
constitution,  5  Feb.,  1857.  During  the  ensuing
troubles  of  the  reactionary  or  church  party,  headed
by  Miramon,  he  was  in  the  field  again  in  aid  of  the
liberal  government  represented  by  Juarez,  and
commanded  the  constitutional  forces  at  the  unsuc-
cessful battle  of  Tacubava,  11  April,  1859,  against
the  reactionary  army  under  Leonardo  Marquez.  In
the  same  year  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state
of  Michoacan,  which  office  he  filled  until  1861,
when  serious  political  complications  called  him  to
the  capital  of  the  republic.  Notwithstanding  the
final  defeat  of  Miramon's  forces  at  the  battle  of
Calpulalpam,  22  Dec.,  1860,  and  his  subsequent
flight  from  the  country,  the  church  party  rose

Sjain,  and  forces  under  Zuloaga,  Marquez,  and
egrete  threatened  the  government,  and  Degollado


hastened  to  tender  his  services,  but  in  the  mean-
while he  hail  Ik'cII  Igaill  elected  to  congress.  When
in  June,  1861.  his  friend,  Mclchor  Ocampo,  was
takn  prisoner  by  forces  under  the  command  of
Cajiga,  and,  on  the  road  to  Morelia,  wag  nrnnnfai
ated  at  Tepeji  by  order  of  Marques,  the  goretn-
ment,  indignant  at  this  new  outrage,  took  active
measures,  and  Degollado  asked  of  congn—  permis-
sion to  take  the  command  of  the  forces  sent  against
the  rebels.  Impatient  of  the  arrival  of  a  convoy
commanded  by  Gen.  O'Horan,  he  left  the  city  at  the
head  of  150  men,  and,  in  the  dense  woods"  called
Monte  de  las  Cruces,  met  the  enemy  under  com-
mand of  Galvez  and  Buitron,  who  were  in  ambush.
After  a  desperate  fight  of  several  hours,  his  ammu-
nition was  exhausted,  his  troops  scattered,  and  De-
gollado taken  prisoner.  He  was  robbed  and  dragged
away  on  foot,  when  suddenly  Galvez's  voice  was
heard,  and  Degollado  was  assassinated  bv  Ins  captors.

DE  GROOT,  Albert,  captain,  b.  on  Staten
Island  in  1813;  d.  in  Richfield  Springs,  N.  V.,  17
Sept.,  1887.  He  was  taken  into  service  by  Cor-
nelius Vanderbilt,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,
commanding  boats  on  the  Hudson.  He  erected
the  Prescott  House,  on  Broadway,  in  1857,  and
constructed  the  steamer  "Jenny  Lind."  During
the  war  he  built  the  steamers  "  Resolute  "  and  "  Re-
liance," which  were  purchased  for  the  navy.  He
promoted  the  erection  of  the  Vanderbilt  bronzes,
and  presented  to  the  printers  of  New  York  the
statue  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  which  stands  in  front
of  the  "  Times  "  and  "  Tribune  "  buildings.

DE  HAAS,  John  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  Holland
about  1735 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  3  June,  1786.  His
ancestors  were  an  ancient  family  of  northern  France.
In  1750  he  removed  with  his  father  to  the  United
States,  settling  in  Lancaster  county,  Pa.  He  was
ensign  in  the  old  French  war,  and  took  part  in
Bouquet's  battle  with  the  Indians  at  Bushy  Run,
near  Pittsburg,  5  and  6  Aug.,  1763.  In  1776  he
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  1st  Pennsylvania  regi-
ment. He  served  in  Canada  and  at  Ticonderoga,
and  after  the  battle  of  Long  Island  was  promoted
to  brigadier-general,  21  Feb.,  1777,  serving  until  the
close  of  the  war.  In  1779  he  went  to  Philadelphia,
where  he  spent  the  latter  years  of  his  life.  His  son
served  as  ensign  in  his  own  regiment.

DE  HAAS,  William  Frederick,  marine  paint-
er, b.  in  Rotterdam,  Holland,  in  1830 ;  d.  in  Fayal,
Azores,  16  July,  1880.  He  studied  in  his  native
city  and  at  the  Hague,  emigrated  to  New  York  in
1854,  and  devoted  himself  to  painting  coast-scenery.
He  exhibited  at  the  National  academy.  New  York,
in  1867,  "  Sunrise  on  the  Susquehanna  "  ;  in  1875,
"  Fishing-Boats  off  Mt.  Desert,"  "  Boon  Island,
Coast  of  Maine,"  and  "  Midsummer  Noon,  Bidde-
ford  Beach  "  ;  in  1876,  "  The  Lower  Harbor  of  Hali-
fax "  and  "  Evening  at  Halifax  "  ;  in  1877,  "  Narra-
gansett  Pier." — His  brother,  Maurice  Frederick
Hendrick,  b.  in  Rotterdam  in  1832,  studied  at
Rotterdam  and  the  Hague,  and  went  to  London  in
1851,  where  he  painted  in  water-colors  for  a  year.
He  made  many  sketches  on  the  English  and  Dutch
coasts,  and  in  1857  was  appointed  artist  t<>  the
Dutch  navy.  The  subjects  of  his  earlier  pictures
are  chiefly  from  the  English  Channel  and  French
coast.  Among  them  are  "  Storm  off  the  Isle  of
Jersey"  and  "  After  the  Wreck."  In  ia59  he  re-
moved to  New  York,  where  he  was  elected  an  asso-
ciate to  the  National  academy  in  1863, an  academi-
cian in  1867,  and  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  American  society  of  painters  in  water-colors.
Among  his  numerous  pictures  are  "  Farragut's  Fleet

?assing  the Forts  below New  Orleans." '•  The
acht  Dauntless  off  Dover,"  "  Desefting  the  Burn-


DE  ii  m:t


Dfl KAY


IT.


Ship,"  "Off  the  Coast  of  Frame,"  -Sunset  at

"  "  I'hc  Breaking  up  of  a  Storm  at  Star  Island,"

"'I'lic  Beach  at W.  -t Hampton," "  Karly M<>rn-

ff tin- C..n>t."  "White Island Lighthouse,"

"Drifted  Lahore  in  'Long  bland  Bomd

Moonlight,"  •'Tin-  Shipwreck."  "  Moonriss  an.l

Sunset,"  "|)iiii.iic  Cove,  ula  ofwlght,"  "Sniis.i

at Cans Ann."  ••  A Marine  View,  Boarboroagh,"
an. I  "  I'lie  Rapids  above  Niagara."

M HABT.  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Blinbeth-

t..\Mi.  N.  .1..  7  !>.<■..  171''. ;  <1.  in  Morristown,  N.  .1..  |fl

.inn-'.  1801. Il«'  practised  law  before  tin-  Revolu-
tion. He  whs  appointed  maj..r  of  the  1st  New  .b-r-

battaUon.  7  N«>v.,  1778,  and  lieutenant-colonel
in  177»>. Before  tin-  close  <>f  the  war  he  resigned

hie  onminlilon  ami  rammed  law-practice  at  M<>r-
etatown. One  of  his  two  brothers  was  elsoengaged

in  the  service  as  aide  to  Qen.  Wayne,  ami  fell  at
Port  Ijcc  in  17H0.  Oolooal  Dt  Hart  was  eminent
as  a  lawyer,  and  possessed  much  wit  and  humor.
He  was  i. resident  ..f  the  St.  Tamtnanv  society  in
1780.— Hb  ion,  William  (helwood,  soldier,  h.
in  New  Vnrk  state  in  1800:  d.  in  BUaebethtown,
N.  .1..  -,'  April.  1848,  was  graduated  at  the  V.  S.
military  academy  in  1880, and  became  ■  lieutenant
of  ordnance.  He  nrved  on  ordnance  duty  until
.'.  and  was  in  various  garrisons  and  courts-mar-
tial till  IKll.when  he  became  aide-de-camp  to  (Jan.
Scott.  In  1838  he  was  made  captain  of  the  8d  ar-
tillery, serving  on  the  northern  frontier  during  the
disturbances  in  Canada.  While  on  special  dutv
from  l846-*7  he  prepared  his  » observations  oh
Military  Law.  and  the  Constitution  and  Practice  of
Courts-Martial."  In  1847  he  ■erred  in  the  war
with  Mexico  under  Gen.  Scott,  and  was  lieutenant-
governor  of  Puebla.

DE  HAVEN,  Edvrin  J.,  arctic  explorer,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1NM>:  d.  there.  8  Oct..  1886.  He
was  a  midshipman  when  only  ten  years  of  age,  and
after  thirty-six  years  of  naval  service  was  placed
ujxin  the  retired  list  on  account  of  his  impaired
vision.  His  last  cruise  was  completed  in  18.~>7,  when
he  resigned.  He  served  in  Wilkes's  exploring  ex-
pedition fr-.m  1839  till  1842,  and  commanded  the
first  expedition  fitted  out,  nt  the  expense  of  Henry
Grinned,  <>f  New  York,  to  search  for  Sir  John
Franklin.  It  consisted  of  two  small  vessels — the
"  Advance."  of  140.  and  the  "  Rescue."  of  80  t..ns.
This  expedition,  of  which  Dr.  Kane  has  written  so
graphically,  left  New  Vork.  84  May.  I860,  and  was
absent  over  sixteen  months,  wintering  in  the  Arctic
circle.  On  his  return.  Lieut.  I ».•  Haven  was  em-
ployed in  the  coast  survey,  and  in  the  national  ob-
servatorv  under  Lieut.  Maurv.

DEMON.  Theodore,  P.  K.  bishop,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass..  s  Dr.-..  1771'.:  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('..  ti  Am;..
1X17.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,  with
the  highest  honors.  He  studied  theology  under  the
Rev.  Dr.  Parker,  rector  of  Trinity  church,  Boston.
officiating  during  that  time  as  lay  reader  at  Cam-
bridge and  Newport.  H.  I.  He  was  ordained  dea-
con by  Bishoti  Bass,  in  Ncwburyport.24  De. ■..  17!»7.
and  early  in  January.  1788, entered  upon  the  duties
of  rector  of  Trinitv  church.  Newport.  He  was  or-
dained pri.st.  '.)  Oct.,  1800.  In  lK0'2-':{  he  visited
the -south  for  the  licnefit  of  his  hi  alt h.  ami.  after
his  return  home,  received  urgent  invitations  from
tWO Churches  in  Charleston.  S.  ( '..  to  remove  to  that
City,  Which  were  declined.  In  IMOS  he  was  a  depu-
ty from  tl astern  dioCCSC  to  the  general  conven-
tion, held in Baltimore.  Md. The oexl yeai

pted  the  rectorship  <>f  St.  Michael's  church.
Charleston,  and  in  1810  removed  thither,  lie  was
ejected  bishop  of  the  diocese  in  February.  1818,
being  consecrated  on  1".  o,t. He  was  present  at


neral convention held in Philadelphia  in
1814,  and  also  at  that held
-17. On his  return to  Charleston he  WW
stricken  with  the  yellow  fever,  and  died  tranquilly
and  hopefully. His  mortal  remaii
the  chancel  ..f  St.  Michael',  church. Bishop  Dwhon
published  a  number  nf  Kpi-w-opul  char,
moits. After  his  death  a  selection  from I

published,  which  met  with  ■  large  sale
(London.  IHSil  and  lv

DEITZLES,  <Jeorre  Wa«hlmrt»n.  snldh-r.  b.
in  Pine  Gnrre,  Schuylkill  <<...  iv.  80  "
d.  n-ar  Tin-son. Arizona. 11 A|  •  lb-  nJ

eeived  a  eosnamavaahool ■donation,  ream

Kansas, and  Mfww  ap  with  tie

a  member  of  the  Eansai  aoaasof  representative*

in  1K*»7-'M,  and  again  in  1868-W,  and  dnr
former  period  was  elected  -pcaker. Be  uu.  sahsa-
quently  mayor  of  Ijiwrcncc.  and treasurer  of  the
f'niversity  of  Kansas. At  the  hegiimiui;  of  tin-
war  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  1st  regiment  <-f
Kansas  volunteers. 11. was  promoted  t..  be  brijrn-
dier-generai,  89  Nov.,  in;^,  but  resigned  in  I
Of  the  year  following; In 1W4  he  was  commis-
sioned major-general  of Kansas  militia, l:
killed  by  being  thrown  from  a  oarriai

1>E  K  A  V.  James  Ellsworth,  naturalist,  b,  in
Lisbon,  Portugal,  in  1788;  d.  In  Oyster  Bay.  L  l ..

'■21  Nov.,  1861.  He  studied  medicine  at  Edinburgh,
and  there  took  his  degree  as  a  physician.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  married  a  daughter

of  Henry  Eckford,  the  naval  arohiteot,  whom  he

subsequently  accompanied  t..  Turkey,  where  the
latter  was  appointed  superintendenl  <>f  the  naval
yards  at  Constantinople.  Or.  De  Kay  also  b
intimate  with  his  brother-in-law.  Joseph  U<«dman
Drake,  Fitz-(ireenc  Halleck.  William  Culleii  Bry-
ant, and  other  men  of  mark  in  literature  and
science.  He  was  intrusted  by  Mr.  Bckford  with
negotiations  with  Brasil  and  other  South  American
powers,  relative  t<>  the  ships  <>f  war  thai  had  been
ordered  by  the  fatter.  Upon  returning  to  this
country,  be  settled  permanently  at  Oyster  Bay.
L.  I.,  devoting  himself  to  the  study  <>f  natural  his-
tory and  contributing  to  the  New  Vork  press,  i  >TI
the  outbreak  of  cholera  in  the  latter  city.  Dr.  He
Kay  hastened  to  give  his  services  to  the  afllicb-d,
although  the  practice  of  his  profession  was  repug-
nant to  him.  He  was  subsequently  a  founder  of
the  Lyceum  of  natural  history,  afterward  merged
into  the  National  academy  of  science.  In  lv
state  ordered  a  geological  survey,  making  it  OOSSr

prehenaive  enough  to  .over  botany  and  soSogy,
and  Intrusting  moss  departments  to  Dr.  D
The  results  of  his  researches  are  contained  in  flTe
volumes  of  the  "Survey  "  (1848  1> . r

he is the author of "Travels  in Turk.  \
Vork.  1888). — Hk  brother.  Oeorire  Coleman.  na\al
offlcer,  b.  in New  Vork  city  in ISO-.1;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  81  Jan..  1848. He  was  pnjmnsl  for
College,  but  ran  away  to  sen. lb-  bsoams  a  skilful

navigator, and  took  vsssals  built  by  Henry  BoklBwJ

to  S.uth  America. He  volunteered  in  the  navy  of
..ntine  republic,  then  at war  with Brazil.

and  was  liven  command  of  a  brig  ■  Jam,  1887.

After  taking  several  prizes,  he  accepted  a  captain's
commission.  n\  Inch  he  had  declined  on  entering  the
service,  preferring  to  win  it  by  promotion. In  an

men!  with  the  brig  "  Cacique,"  commanded
by  Cast  Hsiisnn  thai  vessel  was  captured,  though
twice  the  size  ..f  |>  md  much  more  heavily

an 1. When  returning  to  Buen  Jane,

is  brie;,  the  "Brandt/en."  was  dm
shore  la  the  river  Plata  by  a  Brazilian  squadron.

ittled  the  Teasel  to  prevent  her  capture.


126


DE KOVEN


DE KKOYFT


swam  ashore  with  his  crew, and  on  reaching  Buenos
Avn's  was  made  oommodore.  After  the  peace  he
delivered  a  corvette  to  the  porta  tor  Henry  Kck-
tord.  ll>' was  with  him  in  Constantinople  when
be  died,  K<kford  at  the  time  being  superintendent
of  the  Ottoman  ship-yards.  Returning  to  New
York,  De  Kay  married  in  1833  Janet,  only  child  of
Joseph  Rodman  Drake,  the  poet.  In  1*17  he
took  the  lT.  S.  Mote  "Macedonian"  to  Ireland
with  supplies  for  the  sufferers  from  the  famine,
having  exerted  himself  to  secure  the  passage  of
an  act  of  congress  permitting  a  government  rend
to  be  so  employed.  See  "Outline  of  the  Life
of  Cora.  George  C.  De  Kay"  by  Pitz-Greene  Hal-
leck  (New  York,  1847).— George  Coleman's  son,
Joseph  Rodman  Drake,  soldier,  b.  21  Oct.,  1836;
d.  in  New  York  city,  9  June,  1880,  served  with
credit  during  the  civil  war  on  the  staffs  of  Gens.
Mansfield,  Pope,  and  Hooker,  and  won  the  brevet
of  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallantry  in  several  bat-
tles.—Another  son  of  George  Coleman,  George
Coleman,  soldier,  b.  24  Aug.,  1842 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, 27  June,  1862,  left  his  studies  in  Dresden,
Saxony,  in  1861,  returned  to  the  United  States,  and
entered  the  National  service  as  lieutenant  of  artil-
lery, and  afterward  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Thomas
Williams  till  he  received  a  mortal  wound  in  a
fight  with  bushwhackers  at  Grand  Gulf. — Another
son  of  George  Coleman,  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  7  March,
1845,  ran  away  from  school  in  the  second  year  of
the  civil  war  and  joined  the  71st  New  York  volun-
teers. He  was  afterward  made  lieutenant  in  the
8th  Connecticut  regiment,  served  on  the  staffs  of
Gens.  B.  F.  Butler,  Devens,  and  Terry,  and  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  major.  After  the  war  he  went
to  Crete  to  assist  the  Greeks  against  the  Turks. —
Another  son,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  25  July,  1848,  has  published  "The  Bohe-
mian" (New  York,  1878);  "Hesperus"  (1880);
"Vision  of  Nimrod"  (1881);  "Vision  of  Esther"
(1882);  and  "Love  Poems  of  Louis  Barnaval"
(1883). His  best  known  story  is*"  Manmatha."

DE  KOVEN,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  19  Sept.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Racine,  Wis.,  19
March,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1851,  and  at  the  General  theological  seminary  in
1854,  was  ordained  priest  in  1855,  and  became
rector  of  the  church  of  St.  John  Chrysostom,
Delafield,  Wis.,  and  principal  of  St.  John's  hall,
the  preparatory  department  for  Nashotah  theolog-
ical seminary.  In  1859  this  department,  through
his  instrumentality,  was  merged  in  Racine  college,
Mr.  De  Koven  becoming  the  warden.  He  was  a
leader  in  the  high-church  movement  in  the  west,
and  inaugurated  radical  changes  in  the  management
and  discipline  of  the  college.  He  introduced  the
Oxford  cap  and  gown  in  1861.  to  be  worn  both  by
students  and  professors ;  inaugurated  the  confer-
ring a  gold  tassel  to  be  worn  by  the  student  that
attained  the  highest  proficiency;  invited  from
England  a  celebrated  teacher  of  church-music,  and
established  the  first  Episcopal  surpliced  choir
west  of  New  York  city.  He  was  prominent  in  all
matters  of  church  education,  and  a  leader  in  the
diocesan  and  general  conventions.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  in>1862  by  Hobart.
In  1873  he  lacked  but  a  few  votes  of  being  elected
bishop  of  Massachusetts.  The  election  turned  on
the  questions  at  issue  between  the  high  and  low
church  parties  of  New  England,  and  Dr.  De  Koven
was  the  candidate  of  the  former,  being  put  for-
ward as  one  of  the  most  powerful  orators  of  the
Episcopalian  pulpit.  But  more  general  attention
was  attracted  to  him  by  an  address  delivered  in
the  convention  of  1874 The  controversy  between


!  the  high  and  low  church  panics  had  then  assumed

a  bitter  antagonism,  and  threatened  a  serious  dis-

!  sension  if  not  a  final  division. The  addreei  in

Question  produced  a  profound  impression,  and  Dr.
»e  Koven was  perhaps  in  consequence  elected  ^
1  bishop  of  Illinois,  but  was  not  confirmed  by  the'
diocese. In the year following, his  name  was
I  again  proposed for  a  bishopric,  but  was  subse-
I  quently  withdrawn  by  his  friends,  there  being  no
!  hope  of  a  confirmation. Meantime  he  continued
j  his  work  as  an  educator  in  building  np  the  insti-
!  tution  at  Racine. By  his  efforts  a  commodious
edifice  was  erected  for  the  college  chapel,  200  acres
of  adjoining  land  was  purchased,  and  costly  build-
ings were  put  in  as  extensions  and  connections  to
those  already  standing, until the  college  quad-
rangle was  nearly  completed. In  1878  he  was
called  to  be  an  assistant  rector  of  Trinity  church,
New  York,  but  declined. A  short  time  before  his
death  he  was  chosen  rector  of  St.  Mark's,  Phila-
delphia, but  had  not  time  to  act  upon  it. He  was
noted  for  his  kindly  courtesy,  his  genial  humor,
and  his  brilliant  conversational  powers. In  the
pulpit  he  displayed  many  of  the  best  qualities  of
the  sacred  orator. His  death  was  caused  by  slip-
ping on  the  ice  in  a  lonely  place,  on  his  way  from
the  station  to  the  college,  and  breaking  his  leg.
The  weather  was  cold,  and  he  lay  for  several  hours
before  it  was  known  and  any  help  reached  him.
He  was  the  author  of  several  stones  for  boys  and
"Serinons  Preached  on  Various  Occasions, pub-
lished since  his  death,  with  a  preface  by  the  Rev.
Morgan  Dix,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1880).

DE  KRAFFT,  James  Charles  Philip,  naval
officer,  b.  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  12  Jan.,  1826;
d.  there,  29  Oct.,  1885.  He  was  appointed  midship-
man from  Illinois  in  1841,  and  attached  to  the  frig-
ate "  Congress,"  in  the  Mediterranean  squadron.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  tookpart  in  the  first
attack  on  Alvarado  in  1846.  He  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant,  15  Sept,  1855,  and  detailed  to
the  command  of  the  frigate  "  Niagara"  in  1860,  in
which  vessel  he  was  present  at  the  assault  on  Fort
McCrean,  one  of  the  defences  of  Pensacola,  the
following  year.  In  1862-'3  he  was  on  dutv  in  the
navy-yard  at  Washington,  and  commanded  the
steamer  "Conemaugh,  Western  Gulf-blockading
squadron,  in  1864-'6,  during  which  period  he  as-
sisted in  the  operations  against  Fort  Powell,  Mo-
bile bay.  Commissioned  as  commander  in  1866,
and  as  captain  in  1872,  he  served  subsequently  as
captain  of  the  "  Hartford,"  as  chief  of  staff  of  the
Asiatic  station,  and  had  charge  of  the  Washington
and  Philadelphia  navy-yards.  He  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  rear-admiral  in  June,  1885.

DE  KROYFT,  Sarah  Helen,  author,  b.  near
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  29  Oct.,  1818.  Her  maiden  name
was  Aldrich.  She  obtained  a  good  education  by
teaching  in  winter  and  attending  school  in  summer
for  seven  years.  Her  attainments  included  French,
Italian,  and  the  higher  mathematics.  She  was  gradu-
ated at  Lima,  N.  Y.,  seminary,  and  in  1845  married
Dr.  William  De  Kroyft,  of  Rochester,  who  died  on
his  wedding-day  of  injuries  received  in  falling  from
a  carriage.  Within  the  month  following  she  a-w<  >kc
one  morning  to  find  her  sight  entirely  gone.  She
spent  a  vear  or  two  at  the  New  York  institution  for
the  blind,  with  the  intention  of  becoming  an  organ-
ist, and  while  there  began  to  write  for  new-papers
and  periodicals.  In  1850  she  published  a  collection
of  letters  under  the  title  "A  Place  in  thy  Memory,"
nearly  200,000  copies  of  which  have  heeii  sold.  She
has  travelled  extensively  in  the  United  States,
About  1865  she  added  Latin  to  the  list  of  her  ac-
quisitions, and  a  few  years  later  entered  the  lect  ure-


DELAFIELD


DELAF1I


127


with  it  disooorse  "M  "Darwin  and M .-
•i  has  U.n  re|>eatedly  delivered  in  tbi  princi-
pal cities,  ami  many  of  tin-  larger  rillag

S'..rk. BermOfl successful -kit<li i»  "Littll

a  true  story  of  a  blind  Im.\  (New  York,  I
sin-  has  new  rsoovsred  bar  right.

hi  l  \  I  I  ELD,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  England,
18  Marsh.  1748;  ■!.  In  mi  rorl  city,  8  July,  1884
Snui  after  coming  of  age  be  emigrated  t<>  fchia
country.  Tin-  •hip  Upon  which  he  took  passage
bore  letters  of  marque,  ami  captured  ■  French  ves-
sel. Mr.  Dalaflald  volunteered  in  the  action,  and
shared  the  prize-money  to  the  extent  of  film.  lb-
landad  in  New  York  city,  .">  April,  1788,  ami  found
himself  aWrtlfliallj  welcomc<l  us  the  U-arer  of  a
manuscript  copy  of  the  text  of  the  treaty  of
peace,  which  had  ban  bandad  him  at  the  moment
of  sailing  by  an  offleia]  In  the  British  service.  The
conditions  of  peace  were  known,  hut  the  text
had  not  yet  been  made  public  in  Fnglaml  :  and.
although  the  official  copy  had  been  forwarded,

the  "Vigilant  "  had  Outstripped the  bearer  of  the

government  despatches  by  some  daws.  After  sev-
eral experiments,  Mr.  Delattcld  established  himself
in  New  York  M  a  merchant.  He  was  exceptional-
ly successful,  retiring  in  1798 one  of  the  wealthiest
men  in  the  country.  A  twelvemonth  afterward
he  was  at  the  head  of  the  private  underwriters  of
the  city.  Time  brought  reverses,  as  both  the
French'  and  the  English  were  striving  to  sweep
American  commerce  from  the  seas.  While  many
of  the  private  underwriters  were  obliged  to  sus-
jH-nd.  Nut.  Dalaflald  was  among  those  who  paid
every  loss,  but  onlv  by  sacrificing  his  entire  capital
and  mortgaging  his  real  estate.  He  was  a  founder
and  director  of  the  Mutual  insurance  company,  es-
tablished  15  June,  1787,  that  being  the  first  com-
pany organized  to  take  risks  against  tire  in  the
city  of  New  York  after  the  Revolution.  On  12
Jan.,  1792,  he  was  appointed  a  director  of  the
branch  of  the  F.  S.  hank,  and  was  afterward  elect-
ed to  the  same  office.  He  was  one  of  forty  gentle-
men who  subscribed  $10,000  each,  and  founded  (1
Feb..  1790)  the  United  insurance  company,  also
acting  as  a  director,  and  serving  as  president  for
many  years.  His  summer  residence  on  the  Fast
river,  opposite  Hlackwell's  island,  known  ss"8uns-
wick,"  nuilt  in  1791,  was  one  of  the  largest  and
best  appointed  private  houses  near  New  York.
Mr.  Delafield  had  nine  sons  and  four  daughters.
Two  of  his  sons  died  young. — His  son  John,
banker,  h.  in  New  York  city.  22  Jan..  17S«>:  d.  22
Oct.,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1808,  and
immediately  obtained  employment  as  confidential
clerk  ami  su|>ercargo.  A  few  years  later,  having
cmliurked  in  the  shipping  business,  and  being  on
board  one  of  his  own  vessels,  be  was  driven  by
■  of  weather  into  the  harbor  of  t'orunna,
Spain,  and  witnessed  the  storming  of  that  city  by
the  French.  On  the  night  of  IT  Jan..  1808,'  the
enemy  having  opened  fire  on  the  shipping,  the
cables  were  cut,  and  Mr.  Delafield  put  to  sea  with
a  family  of  noble  Spanish  refugees  in  addition  to
his  crew.  Although  short  of  provisions  and  almost
in  a  sinking  condition,  the  vessel  was  brought  sab»-
lv  to  London.  There  he  established  himself  as  a
banker,  1H08-'10. During  the  war  of  1818-'H be

was  held  as  a  prisoner,  but,  through  the  influence

of  relatives  in  Fngland.  he  was  permitted  to  con-
tinue hi*  business,  with  the  privilege  of  travelling
fifteen miles  around I' x  bridge, where he had a

country seat, and to the  city <>f L Ion. His

large  fortune  was  suddenly  swept away  in  a  finan-

•  risis.  and  it  was  then that his  friend.  Wash

ington  Irving,  dedicated  to  him  the  graceful  story


entitled  "The  Wife."  published  in  the  "Sketch-
Hook."  In  is-.'o  he  returned  «■
served  as  cashier  ami  president  of  the  ('bonis
bank  from  |H30  till  I8SH,  when  he  resigned  toeo-
ccpt  the  presidency  of  the  Nsa  V..rk  Unking  com-
pany. Mr.  DelaflaM  was  the  tir«t  mm

rk  philharmonl  sniofa  1<-r  wvaral

pMI met at his house. He' aim.  suggested thl
plan,  end  was  an  original  member,  of
fund  eooiety. Be  obtained  large  mbecriptioaa  for,
and  jrsatly  ui«lt*.i  in  eetablishlng.  tbi

universitv.  and  expended  time  and  money  in  re-
viving the  New  York  historical  *,„  lety, II

deeply  engaged  in  similar  imiwilta  or  in  i  neinem.

he  still  found  leisure  to  devote  to  the  embellish-
in.  lit  of  his  country  scat  at  11.11  Oats,  SJsJdag  it
a  marvel  of  horticultural  Uaiity.  Owing  to  the
n-pudiation  of  their  obligations  bl  MMM  of  the
western  states,  the  New  York Unking  esSBpany

was  forced  to eospend, and  forasseond  time  Mr.
Dalaflald  found  himself  mddenly  launvsriahed.

The  remainder  of  his  life  was  devoted  M  agrieul-
ture,  his  favorite  occupation.  He  purchased  s
large  estate.  "Oaklands, near  Geneva,  N.  V..  ami

removed  there  in  1848.  Before  many  years  hiiWBI
known  as  the  model farm  of  the  state. He  was

among  the  first  to  urge  the  Importance  of  a  <  bcav
ical  analysis  of  the  soil,  scientific  drainage, and  the
value  and  uses  of  various  kinds  of  manure.  A  de-
scription of  his  farm  is  given  in  the  ••Transactions  **
of  the  New  York  state  agricultural  societv  for  1*47,
pp.  800-811,  of  which  association  bewasfot
vears  chosen  president.  BewsaaJsothsflrsI  presid-
ing officer  elected  by  the  State  agricultural  college.
—Another  son.  Joseph,  scientist,  b.  in  New  York
city.  8fl  Aug.  17!«>;  d.  in  New  York  city.  18  Feb.,
ls7."»,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  i*<»*.  etndled  law,
and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1811.  He  win  ap-
pointed  lieutenant  in  the  Bth  regiment,  New  York
state  militia,  in  1810,  and  captain  of  drafted  militia

in  1812. At  the  close  of  the  latter  year  he  wasCOttt-

miarioned  in  the  I'.  S.  eervioe  ea  a  captain  in  Haw-
kins's regiment,  and  promoted  to  be  major  of  the
46th  infantry.  15  April.  1N14.  hut  resigned  at  the
close  of  the  war. lie  wss  sppointed I v.

under  the  f.th  and  7th  articles  of  the  treaty  of
(ihent.  for  setting  off  the  northern  ixmndary  of
the  United  States,  and  had  command  of  the  parties
in  the  field  from  1X21  till  1888.  Both  the  prsaV
dent  and  congress  formally  acknowledged  the  fideli-
ty with  which  Maj.  Delafield  had  discharged  his
duties.  During  his  sojourn  in  the  north,  hi
the  formation  of  the  collection  of  minerals  that  for
many  vears  ranked  as  one  of  the  best  in  private
hands  i'n  the  country.  Maj.  Delafield  was  a  immUr
of  many  scientific  associations,  both  in  the  United
States  and  in  Europe.  He  served  a*  president  of
the  New  York  Ivceum  of  natural  history  fn
till  1808,  when  in-  declined  a  re  election,  and  wsea
member  of  the  ■oaJSty  for  fifty-two  years.  In  1888
Maj.  Delafield  built  at  his  country  scat  on  the
Hudson,  in  the  southern  |wrt  of  the  town  of  7os>
k.rs.  known  as  ••  Field-ton,"  »  lime-kiln  so  con-
structed as  to  bum  continuouslv.  on  a  plan  until
then  unknown  in  this  country.  Ft  several  yean
the  works  yielded  large  profits,  ami  served  as  the
model  for 'others.— Henry  ami  William.
chants,  twin  brother!  of  the  preceding,  b.  in

wick  "  fnOW  a  |mrt  of Long  Island  <  H

July,  1788; llenrv  .1.  in New York  citv.  15  Folk,

William  d.  in  New  York  city.  80  N'oi
Thev  were  prepared  to  enter  Yale,  but  their  father
Hewed  t"  their  desire  •» DSgin  busim-ss  at  i
\ few Near- later the linn  of II.  8 87,  IMafkld
1  was  fonnded, dealing  at  first  with  England,  then


128


DELAFIELD


DELAMATKK


with  China,  India,  and  South  America,  and  in  the
end  almost  exclusively  with  the  West  Indies.  Both
the  l>n>thi'rs  held  mauy  positions  of  trust  and  re-
sponsibility in  business  corporations.  Henry,  dur-
ing the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Soulouque,  acted  as
consul  for  Hayti.  Both  brothers  served  as  volun-
teers during  the  war  of  1812. — Edward,  physician.
In-other  of  the  preceding,  b.  in  New  York  citv,
17  May.  1812;  d.  there,  13  Feb.,  1875,  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1812,  and  at  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons  in  1815.  He  served  as  a  nugeon
in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1814.  In  1817  he  sailed  for
London,  studied  under  Sir  Astley  Cooper  and  Dr.
Abernethy,  and  passed  several  months  in  the  hos-

Ritals  of  Paris.  In  1820,  in  connection  with  Dr.  J.
[earny  Rodgers,  he  founded  the  New  York  eye
and  ear  infirmary,  of  which  institution  he  was  at-
tending surgeon  until  1850,  and  consulting  surgeon
until  1870.  He  60on  afterward  entered  into  part-
nership with  Dr.  Borrowe,  and  almost  immediately
found  himself  possessed  of  a  large  and  lucrative
practice.  In  1834  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  at-
tending physicians  of  the  New  York  hospital,  and
in  1835  became  professor  of  obstetrics  and  diseases
of  women  and  children  in  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  but  resigned  both  offices  in  1838  on
account  of  his  increasing  private  practice.  In  1842
he  organized  the  society  for  the  relief  of  widows
and  orphans  of  medical  men,  serving  as  its  first

S  resident.  He  was  a  founder  (1865)  and  first  presi-
ent  of  the  New  York  ophthalmological  society,
and  in  1858  was  chosen  president  of  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  remaining  at  its  head
until  his  death.  From  1858  he  was  the  senior  con-
sulting physician  of  St.  Luke's  hospital,  and  from
its  establishment  in  1872  senior  consulting  physi-
cian of  the  Woman's  hospital,  and  president  of  the
medical  board.  From  its  foundation  in  1854  he
served  as  president  of  the  medical  board  of  the
Nursery  and  child's  hospital.  At  the  organization
of  the  Roosevelt  hospital,  in  1867,  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  governors,  and  was  afterward
chosen  president,  retaining  the  office  during  his
life. — Franci.s,  physician,  son  of  Edward,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  Aug.,  1841,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1860,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons
in  1863.  He  was  attached  for  a  time  to  the  house
staff*  of  Bellevue  hospital,  and  studied  medicine  in
Paris,  Berlin,  and  London.  He  has  filled  the  fol-
lowing, among  other,  offices :  surgeon  in  the  New
York  eye  and  car  infirmary,  and  physician  and
pathologist  to  the  Roosevelt  hospital  (1871) ;  physi-
cian to  Bellevue  hospital  (1874) ;  adjunct  professor
(1875),  and  subsequently  (1882)  professor,  of  pathol-
ogy and  the  practice  of  medicine  in  the  New  York
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons ;  consulting  phv-
sician  to  Bellevue  hospital  (1885) ;  and  (1886)  first
president  of  the  Association  of  American  physi-
cians and  pathologists.  He  has  written :  "  Manual
of  Physical  Diagnosis"  (1878);  "Hand-book  of
I  '■  ist  -  Mortem  Examinations  and  Morbid  Anatomv  "
(1872) ;  "  Studies  in  Pathological  Anatomy  "  (1882) ;
an<  1  '•  1  land-book  of  Pathological  Anatomy  "  (1885).
— Richard,  military  engineer,  son  of  John,  senior;
b.  in  New  York  city,  1  Sept.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, 5  Nov.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1818  an  the  head  of  his
class,  and  was  immediately  promoted  to  be  2d  lieu-
tenant of  engineers,  being  assigned. to  duty  with
the  American  boundary  commission  under  the
treaty  of  Ghent.  In  1820  he  received  his  commis-
sion as  1st  lieutenant,  and  in  1828  was  made  captain.
From  1819  till  1838  he  was  employed  in  tbe  con-
struction of  the  defences  of  Hampton  Roads,  as
superintending  engineer  on  the  fortifications  in  the


n2»*&sfx*i


vicinity  of  the  KiwJMJJIJli,  and  those  on  or  near
Delaware  river  and  hay.  Promoted  to  the  rank  of
major  in  1888,  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of
the  U.  S.  military  academy  at  West  Point,  where  he
remained  for  seven  years,  and  subsequently  held  the
office  from  1856  till  March,  1881,  when  he  was  re-'
lieved.  at  his  own  request.  From  1846  till  1855  he
superintended  the  defences  of  New  York  harbor
and  the  Hudson  river  Improvements,  with  the  ex-
ception of  ten
months,when
he  acted  as
chief  engin-
eer of  the  De-
partment of
Texas.  Dur-
ing the  Cri-
mean war
(1855-'6)  he
was  ordered
to  Europe  in
companywith
('apt.  (after-
ward Maj.-
Gen.)  Mc-
Clellan  and
Maj.  Mor-
decai  to  re-
port on  any
changes  that
had  been  made  in  modern  warfare.  His  elab-
orate report  was  printed  by  congress  in  1860.  He
was  made  lieutenant-colonel in  1861,  colonel  in

1863,  brigadier-general  and  chief  of  engineers  in

1864,  and  received  the  brevet  rank  of  major-
general,  13  May,  1865,  "  for  faithful,  meritorious,
and  distinguished  services  in  the  engineer  depart-
ment during  the  rebellion."  He  was  retired  8
Aug.,  1866.  his  name  having  been  borne  on  the
army  register  for  over  forty-five  years.  He  ren-
dered valuable  service  to  the  government  during
the  civil  war,  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Morgan,  of  New
York  (1861-'3),  in  the  reorganization  and  equip-
ment of  the  state  forces.  From  1864  till  1870  he
was  on  duty  at  Washington  as  commander  of  the
engineer  corps,  and  in  charge  of  the  bureau  of  en-
gineers of  the  war  department,  and  served  as  in-
spector of  the  military  academy,  as  member  of  the
light-house  board,  and  of  the  commission  for  the
improvement  of  Boston  harbor.  He  was  also  one
of  the  regents  of  the  Smithsonian  institution.

DELAM ATER,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Chatham,
N.  Y.,  18  April,  1787;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  28
March,  1867.  His  family  (the  De  la  Moitres)  was
of  French  origin,  his  ancestors  being  Huguenot  ex-
iles, who  found  refuge  in  Holland.  His  father  re-
moved to  Duanesburg,  N.  Y.,  then  in  Albany  county,
where  he  received  a  good  education  for  those  days,
and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  was  licensed  to  practise
medicine.  He  entered  into  partnership  with  his
uncle,  Dr.  Dorr,  of  Chatham,  but  in  1815  established
himself  in  Sheffield,  Mass.,  and  during  a  residence
of  eight  years  in  that  place  his  professional  ability
began  to  be  recognized.  In  1823  he  was  invited
to  a  professorship  in  the  Berkshire  medical  insti-
tute, Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  when,  in  1887,  a  new
medical  school  was  opened  by  the  regents  of  the
state  of  New  York  at  Fairfield,  Herkimer  oo.,  Dr.
Delamater  was  assigned  to  a  leading  place  in  its
faculty.  After  residing  there  eight  years  he  re-
moved to  Willoughby,  Ohio,  having  previously
visited  Cincinnati,  where  he  delivered  a  courM  of
lecture^.  Saying  labored  in  the  Medical  institute
at  Willoughby  about  six  years,  he  removed  in  1842
to  Cleveland,  "where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his


DE LAN


ISO


life,  lit-  tix.k  |Mirt  in  tba  establishment  of  the
eland  medical  college,  lectured  at  Bowdoin,
Dartmouth.  Genera,  and  other  college!  throughout
the  country,  tod  at  hie  death  left  Im  manuscript
notes  of  over  icventy  different  oouraai  on  almost

.  branch  "f  mtdfos1  science. He  was  an  b
ami  student,  gifted  with  a  clear  mind,  a  aaver-faU*
lag  memory,  and  ■  remarfcabJe  ^mmand  <>f  Ian-

_•■,  ami  it  is  doubtful  whether.  u>  a  college  lee-
r,  he  has  evei  l>een  surjiassed  in  this  country.
consulting  physician.  Ids  opinions  took  high
mnk.  In  I860  he  resigned  in-  work  in  connection
with  tin1  college,  and  wai  made  profeeeor  emeritus,
at  tlif  same  time  receiving  the  tifjcnt*  of  LL.  D.
ii.  nibseqoently  delivered  nfty lectures, taking  the
plan  '<i  a  member  <»f  the  faculty  oaued  away  on

duties  arising  from  the  civil  war.  which  VM  lii>
last  appearance  in  public

1»K  LANCET, tftlenne  (Stephen),  merchant,

I),  in  Caen,  France.  M  Oct-  1668;  d.  in  the  city
of  New  York,  L8  NOV.,  1711.  Having  bean  com-
pelled, as  ■  rrofaatanf.  to  leave  Prance  on  the
revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes  (18  Oct,  II
he  eseu|>ed  into  Holland.  Deciding  to  become  a
British  ■object  and  to  emigrate  to  America,  he
crossed  to  Kngland  and  took  the  oath  of  allegiance
to  James  II.  He  landed  in  New  York,  7  .lime.
168<5.  His  mother  had  given  him.  on  his  departure
from  Caen,  a  portion  of  the  family  jewels,  lie  sold
them  for  i:t(M).  became  ■  merchant,  and  iminnrri
a  fortune  of  6100,000. Be  married  Anne,  aBoond

daughter  of  Stephanus  van  Cortlandt,  96  Jan.,
1?IM).  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  public  affairs.
representing  the  fourth  ward  of  New  York  as  al-
derman in  l(i!tl-':t,  and  was  a  member  of  assembly
for  twenty-four  years.  While  sitting  in  the  latter
body  he  gars  his  salary,  during  one  session,  to  pur-
ehfljM  th«'  first  town-clock  erected  in  New  York:
and  with  the  aid  of  his  partner  imported  and  pre-
sented to  the  city  the  first  fire-engine  that  had
bean  brought  into  the  province.  Mr.  !>>•  Lancey
was  buried  in  the  family  vault  in  Trinity  church.
New  York.  The  three  of  his  sons  that  left  descend-
ants are  mentioned  below.  His  eldest  daughter
married  Sir  Peter  Warren.  K.  C.  B.  The  He  Lanoej
house,  which  is  now  (1887)  the  oldest  building  in  the


city  of  New  York,  was  erected  in  17<>0  by  Btienne,
upon  a  piece  of  land  given  to  him  by  his  father-in-
law.  Mr.  De  Lancey  resided  there  until  be  erected
a  larger  bouse  in  Broadway,  just  above  Trinity
church,  which  was  removed  about  17M  to  build
tin'  citv  hotel. The 'site  is  now  occupied  by  the

reel  Building." The  old  bouse  was  then  con-
verted into a -tore. At Stephen de Lam
death,  in 1741,  it passed  to  his  youngest  son,  CoL
Oliver  de  Lancey  (the  Brig.-Gen.  De  Lancey  of  the

lution). Retiring  from  mercantile  life, Oliver
dfl  Lancey  s<ild it  toSunual  Fraunces  (or  Francis
as  commonly  .sjiellcd),  a  mulatto  of  French  origin,
ii. — tf


who  bought  it  to  ostahhsh  ■  tavern,  ai
named  the  M  Queen*!  Head,"  in  bono*  •  •»  the  new
Queen  Charlotte. Fire  yean  later  Fraunccw  tnm»-

it to  John  J  one*,  who  only r
lTt;;,  when  Bolton  and  SigeJJ  lanosaded  an. I  k.pt
it  till  February,  177<>. Bolton  remained  alone  till
May. 177<», when Samuel Pratt]  Hlack

Sam."  at  he  was  usually  ttyled)  r.  Miiii.-i  |  iiaaiun
..f  hi-  property  and  kept  it  in  the  bari  -t  ■

some  time  lifter  the  Revolution. During  all  thin

period  thehonatwae  the  aaadonartan  for  nil  **>-

uid  oluhs.  bring  used  for  public  and  i
dinners  and  ■odal  gatherings. Than
the  ion-  room, originally  Mrs.  he  Lanceyi  draw-

•iii.  with  its  five  windows  front,  that.

Washington  bade  farewell  to  the  offleen  of  the

Army  of  the  Ke\olution.  Sin..  1  ~,1<;  many  centen-
nial celebration!  have  bean  bald  in  the  on  hostel-

ry. Originally  it  had  tWO  itorica,  with  a  Up-TOOf,

and  raised  cornice  and  baluatiade, the  Bpnorctorica

bring  a  modern  addition, it  j,  .,f  nnau  Holland

brick,  with  heavy  tim!>ers.  in  the  ol<l  Dutch  My  le.
— James,  chief  justice  and  Htnttmant  gnTornor  of

the  province  Of New York, eldest v.n of the prv-

ceding.  b.  in New York  city.  27  Nov.. \?
there,  80  July,  1760. He  was  graduated  at  Cam-
bridge,  Kngland.  and  Bubsequentiy  studied  law  in

the  Inner  Temple,  London.  Having  been  admit-
ted to  the  l>ar.  he  returned  to  New  York  toward
the  close  of  1985,  and  BOOB  became  prominent  in
public  life. He  was  made  a  member  of  the  council

in  1789,  and  in  1781  was  appointed  eseond  judgv
of  the  supreme  court.  The  year  previoui  he  had
been  placed  at  the  head  of  a  commission  to  frame

a  new  charter  for  the  city  of  New York. The  in-
strument then  prepared,  known  ai  "the  M.
cry charter,*1  was  mainly  the  w..rk  of  .In
Lancey.  who,  for  his  M-rviccs,  was  presented  with
the  freedom  of  the  city,  he  bring  the  first  person

U|m>ii  whom  that honor  was  conferred. In 17:t{.

on the  removal  of  Chief-Justice Lewis  Morris,
Judge  De  Lancey  was  appointed  in  hJa  rtead,aad
ii.-  retained  the  office  during  the  remainder  of  hat
life. In 1746  occurred  a  contest ••<
Clinton  and  the  assembly  regarding  the  formers

Salary. As the chief justice es|Miused the Jmijiu-

lar  side  in  the  controversy, be  gained  the  ill-will  of
the  governor,  which  soon  developed  into  active
hostility  on  the  occasion  of  the  hitter's  receiving  a
commission  from  the  king  bearing  date  87  (,,t..
1747.  appointing  He  Lancey  Ueotapant-govcrnor.
Instead  of  delivering  it  to  him  as  ordered,  Clinton
pocketed  it  and  wrote  an  org)  nt  letter  to  the  min-
istry not  only  advising  its  withdrawal,  bat  de-
manding He  Lancey*!  removal  from  the  chief  jas-
ticeship.  With  neither  of  these  requests  did  the
home  government  comply  :  but  ( "linton  maintained
his  hostile  attitude,  and  it  was  only  after  his  own
•npersedure,  ami the  death  by suicide  of  his  suc-

ceasor,  thai  he  finally  delivered  the  delayed
mission  (October,  1758). On  18  June,

He Lancey convened and presided over the first

congress  ever  held  in  America,  a  congress  of  dah>

Prom  all  the  colonics,  held  by  direction  of
the  English  government  for  the  purpoo!  ,.r

mon  ilefetice  and  conciiiat ing  the  Indiana, It  wa*
at  this  congress  that  Itcnjamin  Fmnklin  pnmoeed
a  plan  for  the  union  of  the  colonies  by  act  OX  |«r-
liament. <>n:tl  Oct,  1754,OoT.  D
the  charter  of  King's  mow  Colun

so  great  was  the  opposition  of  the  hecbyteriana

that  he  kept  it in  his  DOasaanoU  until  Ka]  "f  the
following  year  befOM  delivering  it  to  the  ft
poration. About the same time he attci

council  of  the  governors  of  the  different  o


130


DE  LANCEY


DE  LANCEY


held  at  Alexandria,  Va.,  to  concert  DMMM  with
(Jen.  Braddook  ■gainst  the  French. In  September

of  the  same  year  {\">~>)  Sir  Charles  Hardy  arrived
and  assumed  the  functions  of  governor,  the  lieu-
tenant-governor returning  to  the  bench.  Twenty-
two  months  later,  however,  Sir  Charles,  who  was
an  admiral  in  the  English  navy,  having  asked  for
active  employment,  sailed  (2  July,  1757)  from  New
York  in  command  of  an  expedition  against  Louis-
burg,  leaving  De  Lancey  again  the  ruler  of  the
province,  which  he  remained  till  his  death, three
years  later.  Gov.  De  Lancey  was  a  man  of  great
learning  as  a  jurist  and  almost  unbounded  personal
influence,  and  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  ablest  of
the  provincial  rulers  of  New  York.  Unfortunately,
he  did  not  escape  the  criticisms  of  his  contempora-
ries. Gov.  De  Lancey  left  three  sons,  two  of  whom
are  mentioned  below.  Of  his  four  daughters,  one,
Anne,  married  Judge  Thomas  Jones,  the  historian.
— James,  soldier  and  political  leader,  eldest  son  of
the  preceding,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1732;  d.  in
Bath,  England,  in  1800.  He  was  educated  at  Eton
and  Cambridge,  and  he  entered  the  army  on  his  re-
turn to  New  York  at  the  beginning  of  the  French
war.  He  served  in  the  Niagara  campaign  of  1755,
under  Sir  William  Johnson,  and  commanded  the
detachment  that,  aided  by  a  small  re-enforcement
under  Col.  Massey,  defeated  the  French  force  sent
to  succor  Fort  Niagara,  and  compelled  the  surrender
of  that  work  the  day  following.  He  also  served  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Abercrombie  in  the  expedition
against  Ticonderoga  in  1758.  On  succeeding  to  his
father's  estate  in  1700,  and  thus  becoming  the  rich-
est man  in  America,  he  took  a  prominent  part  in
public  affairs.  He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
in  1768-'75,  and  assumed  the  leadership  of  the  con-
servative party,  refusing  a  seat  in  the  council  lest
it  might  hamper  his  freedom  of  action.  He  was
the  author  of  the  resolution  (adopted  25  March,
1775)  ordering  that  a  petition  be  sent  to  the  king,
a  memorial  to  the  lords,  and  a  remonstrance  to  the
commons,  demanding  redress  of  the  grievances  of
the  colonists.  These  were  subsequently  presented
by  Edmund  Burke,  but  contemptuously  refused  and
voted  down.  The  remonstrance  to  the  commons
was  drafted  by  James  de  Lancey.  In  May,  1775,
he  sailed  for  England  to  urge  the  views  of  the  as-
sembly of  New  York  on  the  home  government.
But  he  was  unsuccessful,  and,  as  hostilities  hail
meantime  begun,  he  decided  to  remain  abroad,  and
in  the  following  year  sent  for  his  family.  He  never
returned  to  this  country.  His  immense  estates  were
confiscated  and  he  was  banished,  for  voting  against
the  resolutions  of  the  congress  of  1774.  When,  in
1788,  parliament  finally  passed  an  act  partially
compensating  the  loyalists  for  their  losses.  De
Lancey  was  chosen  by  those  from  New  York  to
act  as  their  representative  in  the  board  of  agents,
and  he  became,  after  Sir  William  Pepperell,  its
most  active  member.  Of  his  five  children,  his  two
sons  (one  of  whom  was  in  the  British  navy,  the
other  in  the  army)  died  bachelors.  His  eldest
daughter  married  Sir  Jukes  Granville  Clifton,
Bart. — John  Peter,  soldier,  brother  of  the  pre-
ceding, b.  in  New  York  city,  15  July,  1753;  d.  in
Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  30  Jan.,  1828.  He  was  edu-
cated in  England,  entered  the  British  army  in
1771  as  ensign,  and  was  promoted  to  be  captain
of  the  18th  regiment  of  foot.  During  a  portion  of
the  Revolutionary  war  he  served,  by  special  per-
mission, as  major  of  the  regiment  of  Pennsylvania
loyalists,  and  was  present  at  the  battles  of  the
Brandywine  and  Germantown.  and  at  the  capture
of  Pensacola.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  ret  anted
to  his  regiment,  and  was  successively  stationed  in


the  i-land  of  Jersey  and  at  Gibraltar.  Resigning
from  the  army,  he  returned  to  the  I'nited  States
in  1?N!».  and  resided  until  hi-  death  at  .Mamaro-
neck.—William  Healhcote,  bishop  of  western
New  York,  son  of  the  preceding.  D>  in  Mamaro-
neck, N.  Y.,  8  Oct..  17U7;  d.  in  Geneva.  N.  V..  .V
April,  1865,  His  education,  beginning  at  the  vil-
lage schools  in  Mamaroneck,  and  carried  on  at  the
academy  of  New  Rochelle  under  Messrs.  Waits  and
Staples,  was  continued  at  the  private  school  of  tin-
Rev.  Seth  Hart,  at  Hempstead,  L.  I.,  and  at  that
of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Lewis  Ernest  Eigenbrodt,  at  Ja-
maica, L.  I.,  by  whom  he  was  fitted  for  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1817.  He  studied
divinity  under  the  Rt.  Rev.  John  Henry  Hobart,
then  bishop  of  New  York,  and  was  ordained  deacon
on  28  Dec,  1819,  and  priest.  6  March,  1822.  As
deacon  he  was  chosen  by  the  vestry  of  Grace
church,  N.  Y.,  in  the  spring  of  1820,  to  take  tem-
porary charge  of  that  parish,  and  served  till  Janu-
ary, 1821,  when  the  Rev.  Dr.  Wainwright  was
elected  rector.  Mr.  De  Lancey  was  immediately
chosen  by  the  vestry  of  Trinity  church,  N.  Y.,  for
three  months,  to  fili  the  vacancy  caused  by  Dr.
Wainwright's  acceptance  of  the  rectorship  of  Grace,
in  1821  he  was  called  to  St.  Thomass  church,
Mamaroneck,  a  parish  he  had  founded  while  in
Yale,  with  the  aid  of  his  father  and  Peter  Jay
Munro,  and  served  it  for  ten  months  without  salary,
also  aiding^  in  securing  the  erection  of  a  church
edifice.  In  March,  1822,  as  soon  as  he  was  ordained
priest,  Mr.  De  Lancey  went  to  Philadelphia,  on
the  invitation  of  the  venerable  Bishop  White,  at
the  suggestion  of  Bishop  Hobart,  to  Income  the
former's  personal  assistant  in  the  three  united
churches  of  Christ  church,  St.  Peter's,  ami  St.
James's.  Thus  began  that  intimate  friendship
with  Bishop  White  which  was  only  terminated  by
the  death  of  the  latter  in  the  summer  of  1836,  a
friendship  so  marked  that  Bishop  White  called
him  his  adopted  son,  and  consulted  with  him  pri-
vately on  all  matters  of  importance.  No  man  bad
the  confidence  of  that  venerable  prelate  to  so  great
an  extent  as  he,  and  no  man  knew  directly  from
the  bishop  so  many  of  the  details  of  the  history  of
the  inception  and  progress  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  from  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary
war  to  the  year  1836  as  did  Mr.  De  Lancey.  In
March,  1823,  he  was  unanimously  elected  by  the
vestry  of  the  three  united  churches  in  Philadel-
phia one  of  the  assistant  ministers  of  the  parish,
the  other  two  being  the  Rev.  James  Abercrombie,
D.  D.,  and  the  Rev.  Jackson  Kemper,  1).  D.  In  May,
1823,  he  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  Convention  of
the  diocese  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  annually  re-
elected till  1830,  when  he  declined  further  re-elec-
tion.  In  the  same  year  (1823)  he  was  chosen  secre-
tary to  the  house  of  bishops,  and  re-elected  by
them  to  the  office  in  1826.  In  1827  he  was  called
to  St.  Thomas's  church,  New  York,  the  wardens
coming  to  Philadelphia  to  deliver  the  call  in  per-
son. But  he  deemed  it  his  duty  to  remain  where
he  was.  In  the  same  year,  though  not  quite  thirty-
years  of  age,  Mr.  De  Lancey  was  unanimouslv
eleoted  provost  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
which  had  somewhat  declined.  At  the  request  of
Bishop  White  and  Horace  Binney,  .Mr.  !><•  Lancey.
though  he  much  preferred  to  continue  in  his
chosen  profession,  accepted  the  office.  This  was
that  old  "college  in  Philadelphia"  founded  by-
Benjamin  Franklin.  Chief-Justice  Allen,  and  other
noted  men  of  that  day.  He  also  received  (in  1827)
the  degree  of  D.  I>.  from  his  alma  mater.  Wing
the  younp'st  person  upon  whom,  up  to  that  time,
that honor had been conferred. *He remained


DE  i.w


l>K I


i:u


JAr  ^>ivt XL+j&L&nsoty


«st  fire  yean,  ami.  baring  »»r<»n^lit  the  uni-
.  k  to  it  |>nn»|KTou«  condition  (taking  it
witii  21 -in. 1. m*  and  tearing  it  with

.1.  t..  resume  hi*  pnfMriOO. fa ls;W  he  was
..•  three  united  churches  licing  separated

in  thai ram)  ssnhtnnl mfnkttT  of Bt c

church.  Philadel-
phia, with  the  n-
rerstonoftl
tor-hip  upon  the
death  <'f  Biabop
White,  who  was
continued

of  all  three.  Thai
rviiit  ooourred  in

m.l  Dr.  l>c
Laiir.v  contin-
ued rector  of  Bt

r.tirVunt  il  in:ii».
when.  u|miii  the
division  ..f  (be
llioee*c <>f N.w

Y.»rk,  then  cm-
bracing  the  whole

stat.  '.In  -was.  •lect-

ed  biahopof  weet>
ern New Fork,

that  half  of  th.'  state  west  of  a  north-and-south
line  just  east  <»f  the  citv  of  I'tica.  He  was  con-
lied  at  Auburn  in  the  new  diocese  on  !t  May,
'  Bishop  (iriswold,  of  Massachusetts.  I  icing  the
consecrator,  assiste<l  by  Bishop  George  W.  Doane.of
New  .Jersey,  ami  Bi*h<>ps  Henry  If.  Ondcrdonk  ami
Benjamin  T.  On.lerdonk.of  Pennsylvania  and  New
York  resix-ctivcly.  Bishop  De  Lancey  moored  t"
Sonera,  N'.  Y..  nearly  lite  centre  of  the  new  diocese,
and  tin-  seat  of  Geneva  college,  where  he  resided

daring  his  episcopate,  At  that  date,  \*'-M,  there
was  not  a  railroad  in  the  state  of  New  York  wesl
of  Uti.il.  cxi.pt  a  howeline  with  wooden  rails  be-
tween ByiUOUBe  and  Auburn,  nor  did  a  railroad
reach  Genera  until  late  in  1K41.  His  labors,  there-
for<\  in  trarelling  continually  OW  so  large  a  ter-
ritory, by  horse-power  only,  dating  the  earlier  part
of  his  term  of  Office,  were  extremely  ardiioii*. 111

1859  Bishop  De  Lanoeyand  the  biahopof  Michi-
gan were  sent  by  the  house  of  bishops  as  delegates
t<>  the  celebration  in  London  of  the  150th  anni-
versary of  the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the
gospel  in  foreign  parts,  in  response  to  an  invitation
fr.nn  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  This  was  the
fir-t  timet  lie  American  church  was  erer  represented

olli.-ially  in  England,  and  the  first  timethat  Ameri-
can bishops  took  part  officially  with  Anglican  bish-
ops  in the public  services  in  St.  Paul's  cathedral

ami  Westminster  Abbey. On  thin  oonasion  the  de-
gree of  I>.  C  I  j.  was  conferred  by  the  Dhirersitj  <»f
rd upon Bishop De  Lancey. He had pre-
riously  spent  a  year  (1886-*6)  iii  Europe,  and  in
'  lie  again  went  there  on  account  of  his  wife's
health,  and  travelled  extensively. During  this  visit
he  was  invited  by  the  Archbishop  <>f  Canterbury  to
assist  as  a  consecrator  in  the  consecration  of  an
idi  bishop  for  British  Columbia,  in  Westmin-
Vbbey,  the  first  time  an  American  bishop  erer
united  in  the  consecration  of  an  English  bishop.
Tin-  legislation  of  the  American  church  during  the
twenty-su  years  of  his  episcopate,  and  her  Institu-
tions as  a  whole,  notably  thai  <>f  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  bear  the  impress  of  his  judgment,
his  foresight,  his influence,  and hi*  firm  and <1<-
ourteous,  character. He  first

firoposed  the  adoption  of  the  provincial  system  in
he  American  church,  and the  change  intheor-
zation  of the  General theological  seminary,


which,  though  it  did  not  .-cur  till  ncarlv  I
years  after  In-  death,  ha*  i, n,  ,4

slightly  different  manner,  in  mak
a  diocesan  institution.  To  him  »
ow.-s  ti„.  existent  ■  mow  llobart) .

the  endowment  that  *m\.*i  it  from  est ii
the  re-wit  of  hi*  |MTs«.nal  influence  and  labor  with
tryof  Trinity  church,  and  alm>  the  founding
of  |>e  Venus  college  at  Niagara,  ami  the  Training-
school  at  Genera,  the  fonner  through  In*  mtlu.  n.,.
with  and  his  ftdrioe  t..  his  personal friend,

.\.  and  the  latter  to  bJg  individual  exertions
in  mising  the  fund*. In  the  grounds  «.f  the  latter
*tan.N  a  fin.- *tone  church,  ensti-*!  after  hi*  d<
friends  in  Philadelphia  and  in  western  Nee
at  his  monument. Bewasnceiij  rfxfsel  high,  of
graceful  mien  and  commanding  presence,  united

with  the  most  courteous  manners  and  great  riradty,

ami  wa*  on.-  ..f  the  most  agreeable  of  men, lie

was  a  most  .looiient  and  forcible  speaker,  and few

clergymen  could  read  the  terries  ->  w.n  and  so

impressively. In  debate be  WSJ  ino*t skilful,  and

as  a  parliamentarian  unequalled  among  hi*  profi  *-

-ional  brethren. He  married,  9J  Nov.,  1840,  Fran-

"lid  (laughter  of  Peter  .lay  Munro.

maroneek,  N.  S'..  and  left  thn-c  eons  and  one
daughter.  Besides  hi*  various  charge*,  official  ser-
mons, and  addressee,  and  a  few  rrimtllantw
pamphlets,  Bishop  !>••  Lancey  published  no  other
works.— F.d ward  Flovd. lawyer, eldest  torn
i.iiu  Heathcote.  b.  in  Mainaroneck,  N.
1891,  was  educated  at  the  Unirersity  <>f  Pennsrt-

ranis  and  at  llobart  college. being graduated at  the
latter  institution  in  1*1:5.  He  attended  the  law-
school  of  Harvard  in  1*44-T>.  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  December,  l*4<s.  beginning  t<>  practise
in  the  city  of  New  Fork,  where  be  has  sues  re-
sided. He  has  travelled  extensirelr  in  Buropaj
Egypt, and  Asia  Minor,  and  also  the  Briti*h  Ameri-
can prorincea.  Mr.  Delanoer  early  erinoed  a  talent
for  historical  research.  He  has  been  pieaklenl  «'f
the  New  York  genealogical  and  UograpbJi
ciety  (In;:!  '7i.  of  the  Westchester  county  histori-
cal society  11874  "'••).  end  <>f  the  St.  Nicholas  society

(lKHO-'l)." Ill 1S?!I he Was elected dollies!

responding  secretary  <>f  the  New  York  historical
society,  which  office  he  still  hold*.  He  has  edited
Jones  8  "History  of  New  York  during  the
lutionary  War"  (New  Y«>rk.  1879), and  the  "  S
Correspondence  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton  "  ("Magarins
of  American  History."  October,  1888,  to  August,
1884),  He  i*  the  author  of  "  Memoir  of  the  Hon.
.lam.*  De  Lancer,  Lieutenant-Gorernor  of  the
Province  of  New  York"  (AIImiiiv,  |H,*»li,  and  m  roL

iv..  ••  Documentary  History  "f  New  York  '"

"The  Capture  of  Fort  Washington  the  Result  Of

Treason  "  (New  York.  1^;; i;  ••  Mi  moirof  Jans W

Beekman"  (New  York.  IsTlM:  "  Memoir  of  William
Allen,  chief  .lust i.e  of  Penney lranm'1  (PhBadal-

phia,  1879);  "Origin  and  History  "f  Manors  in  the
Province  of  N.w  York"  (N.w  York.  1K-S4;i;  and
"  History  of  Mamaroiieck.  N.  Y."  (New  Y rk.  1886).

Peter, member  of  assembly,  second  son  of

Ktienne.  b.  iii  New  York  city.  M  Aul'..  l?'»-">;  d.  in

w.st  Pinna,  Westohsstnr eex,  N.  Fn  it  «►.-!..  i?7t).

He  was  a  man  <»f  gnat  wefclth  ami  influence,  and
*at in  the  New  York  assembly  for  Weatcherter

county  from 1 7"K>  till 1 7i;\  w  h.  n he  declined  »■
election  in  favor  of  his  second  son.  John. I!
si\  s.,iis.  sereral  >-f  whom  are  mention**!  beli

bis  Are  daughters,  AUee  osarried  Balph  lsard,the

S.ioii Carolina senator,  and Su*an beaaUM  the

wife  of  Col.  Thomas  BareJar,  the  tlr*t  British
consul  appointed  in  New  York  after  the  |-

st. -plien. lawyer  and  loyalist,  son  of  the


132


DE  LANCET


DM LANCET


Sraosding,  i>.  In  the  <ity  of  New  York  about  1740;
.  in  Annapolis,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1K01.  In  1788  be
WM  commissioned  clerk  of  the  city  and  county  of
Albany,  which latter  then  comprised  all  of the

province  weal  of  llmlson  river  and  north  of  Ulster
county.  Later  he  was  also  recorder  of  the  same
city,  and  several  times  served  as  a  commissioner
to  treat  with  the  Indians.  He  was  a  member  of
tin-  Albany  oommittee  of  safety  in  1775.  On  4
June,  1770,  he  was  dining  with  the  mayor  and  a
number  of  loyalists  in  celebration  of  the  king's
birthday,  when  he  and  others  were  seized  by  the
Revolutionary  party  and  thrown  into  prison.  A
few  days  later  they  were  taken  to  Hartford,  Conn.,
where  they  remained  in  confinement,  on  a  charge
of  "disaffection,"  until  lil>erated,  on  26  Dec.  by
order  of  Gov.  Trumbull.  De  Lancey  did  not  take
up  arms,  but  remained  in  New  York  until  17H:i,
when  he  removed  to  Annapolis,  Nova  Scotia,  where
in  17W  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  council. —
John,  lawyer,  brother  of  the  preceding,  b.  in  the
city  of  New  York  about  1741 ;  d.  there  in  1829.  He
was  high  sheriff  of  Westchester  county  in  1769,  and
succeeded  his  fat  her  as  member  of  assembly  for  that
borough,  serving  from  1768  till  1772,  and  being  re-
elected from  17!):5  till  1795.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  general  committee  of  one  hundred  (May,
1776),  and  of  the  first  provincial  council  for  the  city
of  New  York  in  1775-'6.  He  was  not  attainted  of
treason,  nor  was  his  property  confiscated. — James,
soldier,  brother  of  the  preceding,  b.  in  West  Farms,
Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  about  1750;  d.  near  Annapo-
lis, Nova  Scotia,  in  1809.  He  succeeded  his  brother,
John,  as  high  sheriff  of  his  native  county  in  1770,
and  served  till  1776.  He  took  no  part  in  the  Revo-
lution till  1777,  when  Gov.  Tryon  commissioned
him  captain  of  a  troop  of  light-horse  of  fifty  men,
called  by  that  official  "the  elite  of  the  county,"
and  selected  from  the  Westchester  militia  regiment,
then  commanded  by  Col.  Hewlett.  At  their  head
be  began  those  rapid  and  successful  raids  within
the  enemv's  lines  in  Westchester  and  Connecticut
that  made  him  famous.  He  succeeded  Hewlett
as  colonel  of  the  regiment  (or  "  Refugees,"  as  they
were  commonly  called)  in  1780,  after  the  members
of  his  troop  had  been  nearly  all  killed  or  cap-
tured. The  latter,  from  their  seizures  of  cattle,
had  earned  the  sobriquet  of  "  Cowboys,"  a  desig-
nation afterward  applied  to  marauders  who,  with-
out commissions  or  military  organization,  robbed
friend  and  foe  alike.  Col.  De  Lancey  never  served
outside  of  Westchester  county  and  its  borders,  or
held  a  commission  in  either  of  "  De  Lancey's  bat-
talions" commanded  by  his  uncle,  Oliver,  as  has
been  erroneously  said.  He  was  twice  taken  prisoner
by  stratagem,  but  the  troop  itself  was  never  cap-
tured. Many  plans  to  this  end  were  laid  by  Wash-
ington and  his  generals;  but  the  alertness,  dash,
and  courage  of  its  leader  always  served  to  bring
them  to  naught.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  re-
tired to  Nova  Scotia,  having  been  attainted  and  his
estate  confiscated  by  the  act  of  1779.  After  his
arrival  in  Nova  Scotia,  he  was  appointed  member
of  the  council,  in  which  body  he  sat  for  several
years.  By  many  biographical  writers  (notably
Sabine)  he  has  been  confounded  with  his  cousin.
James,  son  of  Lieut.-Gov.  De  Lancey. — Warren,
soldier  and  loyalist,  brother  of  the  preceding,  d.
in  Madison  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1855.  He  was  the
VOOngesI  son  of  Peter,  ran  away  from  home  to
join  the  British  army,  and  received  a  commission
as  cornet  of  horse  in  reward  for  his  gallant  rv  at
the  battle  of  White  Plains,  N.  Y.  Alter  the  war
he  resided  in  the  city  of  New  York  and  in  Pough-
keepsie,  subsequently  removing  to  Madison  county.


—Oliver,  soldier,  youngest  son  of  Ktienne,  b.  in
New  Ton  city.  16  Sept,  1708:  d.  In  Beverley,
Yorkshire.  England.  27  Nov..  1 7*5.  He  WBB  origi-
nally a  merchant,  being  a  member  of  the  linn

founded  by  his  father.  He  early  look  an  active
part  in  public  affairs,  and  was  noted  for  his  deris-
ion of  character  and  his  personal  popularity.  Be
represented  the  city  of  New  York  in  theaaaambly
in  175l>-*60.  and  served  as  alderman  of  the  out-ward
from  1751  till  1757.  Be  was  active  in  military  af-
fairs  during  the  entire  French  war.  and.  in  1755.
obtained  leave  from  Connecticut  to  raise  men  there
for  service  in  New  York,  for  which  he  received  the
thanks  of  the  assembly  of  his  own  province.  In
.March,  1758.  he  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  the  forces  then  being  collected  for  the  expedi-
tion against  Crown  Point,  and  succeeded  in  rais-
ing the  entire  New  York  city  regiment  within  tan
days.  He  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  New  York
contingent,  under  Gen.  Abercromhie  (about  5,000
si  rongl  as  colonel-in-chief.  In  the  attack  on  Fort
Ticonderoga,8July,  1758,  he  supported  Lord  Howe,
and  was  near  that  officer  when  he  fell  mortally
wounded.  In  November  of  the  same  year  the  as-
sembly of  New  York  again  voted  him  its  thanks
"for  his  great  service  and  singular  care  of  the
troops  of  the  colony  while  under  his  command."
In  1760  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  provin-
cial council,  retaining  his  seat  until  1776.  In  17'i:i
he  was  made  receiver-general,  and,  in  1 773,  colonel-
in-chief  of  the  southern  military  district  of  the
Srovince.  "  In  June,  1776,"  says  the  historian
ones,  "he  joined  Gen.  Howe  on  Staten  Island;
and,  had  that  officer  profited  by  his  honest  advice,
the  American  war,  1  will  be  bold  to  say,  would
have  ended  in  a  very  different  manner  from  what
it  did."  In  September  of  that  year  he  raised  three
regiments  of  loyalists,  largely  at  his  own  expense,
of  500  men  each,  known  as  "  De  Lancey's  battal-
ions." Of  these  regiments  a  brigade  was  formed,
and  Col.  De  Lancey  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general,  becoming  the  senior  brigadier-general  in
the  loyalist  service.  He  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  Long  Island,  where  he  remained  during
the  war.  One  of  his  battalions  served  in  the  south
with  great  credit  under  his  son-in-law,  Col.  John
Harris  Cruger,  doing  effective  service  in  the  de-
fence of  Fort  Ninety-Six  against  Gen.  Greene.  In
November,  1777,  his  country-seat  at  Bloomingdale,
on  the  Hudson,  was  robbed  and  burned  at  night  by
a  party  of  Americans  from  the  water-guard  at  Tar-
rytown,  his  wife  and  daughters  being  driven  from
the  house  in  their  night-dresses  and  compelled  to
spend  the  night  in  the  fields,  now  the  Central  Park.
Having  been  attainted,  and  his  immense  estates  in
New  York  and  New  Jersey  confiscated,  Gen.  De
Lancey  retired  to  England,  where  he  resided  in
Beverley,  until  his  death.  Of  his  four  daughters,
Susanna  married  Sir  William  Draper,  while  Char-
lotte became  the  wife  of  Sir  David  Dundas,  K.  ( '.  B.,
who  succeeded  the  Duke  of  York  as  commander-
in-chief  of  the  British  army. — Stephen,  lawyer  and
soldier,  eldest  son  of  the  preceding,  b.  in  New  York
city  about  1740;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  Dec
1798.  He  was  educated  in  England,  and  practised
law  in  New  York  before  the  Revolutionary  war.
during  which  he  served  as  lieutenant-colonel  and
colonel  of  the  "  De  Lancey's"  second  battalion.
After  the  war  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of
the  Bahama  islands,  and  subsequently  was  made
governor  of  Tobago  and  its  dependencies.  His
health  becoming  impaired  while  he  held  the  latter
office,  he  sailed  for  England  to  rejoin  his  family.
But  he  grew  rapidly  worse  on  the  voyage,  and.  at
his  own  request,  was  transferred  to  an  American


hi: LAM


DELANO


188


ten»c\  bound  tor  PoftaDooth,  N.  H..  whan  be  died

■lid  VII  buried  a  few  days  after  his  arrival.— Sir
\\  illi.un  Hour,  tidier, onh  son  "f  the  preceding,
b.  in  N«w  York  about  17*1 ;  a.  in  June,  1818,  In  oon-
seqtiencc Of  wounds  received  at  the  battle  of  Wa-
terloo, lie was  educated in England, and  early

red  the  British  army. He  served  with  great
distinction  under  Wellington  in  Spain,  and  wej
times  honorably  mentioned  in  his  despatches.

At tlie  close  of  the  war  he  was  made  a Knight  of

the  Hath.  When  Napoleon  bunded  from  Elba,  Wel-
lington, in  forming  bis  staff,  insisted  on  having  Dt

ippointed as his  quartermaster-general.

officer  really  entitled  to  the  promotion  was  Sir

William's  brother-in-law, Sir  Hudson  Lowe;  but,

as  Wellington  had  conceived  a  dislike  fur  him.  he

refused  to  ■ ipl  that  officer  in  that  oapacitY.  The

military  authorities,  however,  insisted  on  his  ap-
pointment, and  it  was  only  when  Wellington  made

the  promotion  of  De  Lanoey  a  smm  i/mi  /«>/*  of  his
ptance  of  the  supreme  ooramana  that  the  for-
mer yielded.  Six  Weeks  before  the  liattle  of  Wa-
terloo, Sir  William  married  the  daughter  of  Sir
James  Mall,  of  hunglass,  the  Scotch  scientist.
His  bride  accompanied  him  on  the  continent.  On
the  second  day  of  the  battle  Sir  William  was
knocked  from  his  horse  by  a  spent  eannon-lmll,
and  it  was  at  first  supposed  that  he  had  bean  in-
stantly killed.  Thirty-six  hours  afterward  he  was
discovered  still  alive  and  in  his  senses,  but  inca-
pable of  motion,  although  without  any  visible
wound.  Notwithstanding  the  skill  of  the  sur-
geons, and  the  tender  oare  of  his  wife,  he  suc-
cumbed to- his  injuries  nine  days  after  the  battle. —
Oliver,  .Ir.,  soldier,  brother  of  the  preceding,  b.
in  New  Fork  eity  in  1758;  d.  in  Edinburgh,  Soot-
land,  :$  Sept.,  1822.  He  was  educated  in  England,
and  entered  the  14th  dragoons,  as  cornet,  in  1786,
In  May,  17?:$,  he  was  appointed  captain  in  the  17th
light  dragoons,  in  which  he  remained  for  forty-
nine  years,  rising  through  every  grade,  and  8UO-
eeeding  the  first  Duke  of  Newcastle  as  its  colonel,
10  May.  1796.  In  177  4  be  was  sent  to  America
with  despatches  for  the  commander-in-chief,  and
orders  to  provide  accommodation  and  remount
aorSQS  for  the  regiment.  Having  discharged  his
commissions,  he  joined  his  comrades  on  their
arrival  at  Boston,  24  May,  1775.  and  in  the  follow-
ing month  witnessed  the  engagement  on  Hunker
Hill.  On  the  landing  of  Howe  at  QravBSSnd  bay
in  August,  (apt.  l>e  Lancey,  with  a  detachment
of  the  17th.  captured  an  American  patrol,  and
seized  the  pass  through  the  Long  Island  hills,
which  enabled  the  Hritish  general  to  turn  the
American  left  and  win  the  battle  of  Long  Island.
On  the  evening  Of  the  88th  of  the  same  month  Sir
William  Krskine.  with  the  17th  light  dragoons
and  the  71st  foot,  about  7(H)  men  in  all.  surprised
and  seized  at  Carpenter's  house,  Jamaica,  L.  I.,
Geo.  Woodhull  and  many  of  his  men.  The  gen-
eral, who  tried  to  escujte  under  (over  of  the  night,
lieing  discovered  by  the  sentries  getting  over  a
board  fence,  was  oul  down,  severely  wounded  In  the
head  and  arm.  and  only  saved  from  instant  death
by  the  interference  of  ('apt.  De  Lanoey.  He,  bow-
.  died  of  the  injuries  then  received,  in  spite  of
id  nursing,  on  the  20th  of  the  following
month. In an affidavit made by Lieut. Robert

Troup,  17  Jan.,  177<;.  before  the  committee  of  the

New  York  convention,  it  is  declared  that  Wood-
hull  said  he  surrendered  to  Oliver  De  Lancey,  and
that  after  the  delivery  of  his  sword  the  latter
struck  him;  and  that  other- of  the  party,  follow-
ing hi-  example,  cut  and  hacked  him  "in  the  man-
ner  he then was." On  this  sole  authority rests


the  charge  against  Ds  Lanoev,  flrM  m»de  psjhlfa
m 1846. On the  other  hand. Williai
■wore  before  the  New  York  eoinm
fourteen  days  after  the  <»

tight-horsemen  bald  him  that  he  had  taken  Gen.

fl •dhull  in  the  dark  in  a  bsm,  and  that I-
he  would  answer,  when  he  spoke  to  the  (reneral,  he
had  cut  him  on  the  head  and both  arm-." These
are  the  only  Statements  made  under  oath  that  refer
to  the  matter,  while  the  weight  of  all the  other

testimony  is  to  the  effect  that  he  |  (  hi-.

interference,  saved  WoodholTs  life.  The  two  fami-
lies wen-  related,  and  one  of  1 1  rand-
-.ii-  of  the  American  general  to  the
Christian name of he Lancey. In 17Ti 8 De

Lanoev  served  with  his  regiment  in  Feunsyh
and  New  Jersey,  being  promoted  major. I  Jane,
177H.  and  deputy  nnaftormastai  genwaj in  the
Sooth  CaroUna  expeaitfon. 1!  at  at  the

of  Charleston. In  1781  he  was  oommlssl

lieutenant-colonel,  and  appointed  adjutant-.
end  in  America,  in  I7S<>.  to  SQOOeed  Maj.  Andre.
After  the  conclusion  of  hostilities  he  was  made
the  head  of  a  OommhtaJOO  to  settle  the  accounts
of  the  war.  In  17!M  he  was  promoted  to  be  li.-u-
ti-nant-<olonel  of  his  regiment,  and  snbesattetttly

colonel. After  serving  a-  flrpntj  adjntanf  son

eral.  he  was  appointed  barrack-ma-ter-geiicral.  an
office which he held for ten year-. On ."» 0
1794.  he  was  named  major-general, in 1801 licii-
tenant-general.  ami  in 1812  general. He  sat for
manv  years in parliament  as  a  representative  of

Maidstone, Gen.  he  Lanoey  never  married. He
died  while  on  a  visit  to  his  sister,  Lady  Dundee.
DELANO. Atnasa,  traveller,  b.  jn Dnxboiy,

M.i-..  21  Feb.,  i7(i;!:  d.  In  ini7. His  father.  Bam-

11**1,  was  a  soldier  in  the  old  French  war.  and  an
earnest  patriot  in  177'i.  AmsSB  enlisted  in  the
army  in  1777.  but  was  compelled  by  his  father  to
leave  on  account  of  his  youth.  He  afterward
served  in  the  militia,  and  in  1 77!*  sailed  one  cruise
in  the  privateer  "  Mars"  He  became  a  sailor  on  a
merchantman  in  1781,  and  in  17s:!  "8  assisted  his
father  in  his  trade  of  ship-building.  His  first  voy-
age as  commander  was  in  17*<>  In  a  vessel  belt
bog  to  his  uncle.  He  afterward  made  many  voy-
ages to  all  parts  of  the  world.  In  1810  the  au-
thorities of  St.  Bartholomew,  West  Indies,  tried
to  sie/.e  his  ship,  the-  Perseverance,"  for  an  all*
violation  of  the  revenue  laws,  but  he  put  to  sea
under  tire  of  their  batteries  and  escaped.  He  pub-
lished a  work  entitled  *•  Narrative  of  Voyages  and
Travels"  (Hoston.  1S17).

DELANO.  Columbus,  congressman,  b,  In  Shore-
ham, N't.. 0 June, 1809. He lellloVed to MoUHt

Vernon,  ( *hio.  in  1817,  was  educated  at  tin-  common
schools,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  \>nr
in  1881. He  practised  at  Mount  Vernon,  and  be*

caine  eminent  as  an  advocate  and  criminal  lawyer.
He  was  a  delegate  in  1880  to  the  National  republi-
can convent  ion  at  Chicago  which  Dominated  Lin-
coln and  Hamlin.  He  served  as  state  commissary-
general of  Ohio  in  1881,  and  was  a  member  of  the

ohio  house  <>f  representatlvai  m  l*»*!.  tad  was
elected  i  member  of  isaigioni  from  thai  stata  in

1844,  INIM.  and  ISlili. He  was  a  delegate  in

to  the National republican convention at Halti-

more,  which  nominated  Lincoln  and  Johnson, On

8 March. 1869, he was appointed by President

Grant  oommiasioner  of  internal  revenue,  and  while
be  held  office  reorganised  the  bnreao,  thereby  b>
oreasing  the  receipts  over  ino  per  cent  in  eight

mollths. He  succeeded Jacob h.  <

of  the  interior  in  October,  1870,  a  portfolio  thai  he
retained  till  1878. Mr.  Delano  has  for  many  years


134


DELAPLAINE


DKLAVVARK


been  one  of  Qm  trustees  of  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,
which  conferred  on  him  the  degree  <>f  LL.  I).,  ami
in  connect  ion  with  which  he  has  endowed  a  gram-
mar sihonl  (sailed  Delano  hall.

DELAPLAINE,  John  Ferris,  diplomatist.!).
in  New  York  city,  24  April,  1815:  d.  there.  14  Feb.,
1885,  was  the  son  of  John  P.  Delaplaine,  an  old
New  York  shipping-merchant,  who  left  a  large
fortune.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1833,  Studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
but  never  practised.  After  residing  in  New  York
for  over  twenty  years  he  went  abroad,  and.  when
he  had  passed  five  years  in  travel,  was  attached  to
the  American  legation  at  Vienna.  In  I860  he  was
made  secretary  of  the  legation,  a  place  that  he  re-
tained until  (888,  when  he  resigned,  owing  to  his
offloe  being  abolished.  While  in  Vienna  he  made
a  large  and  curious  collection  of  bric-a-brac,  clocks,
pictures,  and  statuary.  He  returned  to  New  York
in  1884,  and  a  commission  in  lunacy  was  soon  after-
ward appointed  to  take  charge  of  his  affairs,  on
account  of  his  mental  incapacity.  By  his  will,
made  in  18(50,  he  left  an  estate  worth  about  $ 000,-
<MX),  and  a  subsequent  codicil  provided  for  the  en-
dowment of  a  Delaplaine  institute  for  the  relief  of
the  friendless.  An  action  was  brought  for  the
construction  of  the  will,  and  judgment  declaring
the  invalidity  of  that  trust  was  rendered  in  Feb-
ruary. 1887.— His  brother,  Isaac  Clason,  lawyer,
b.  in  New  York  city,  27  Oct.,  1817;  d.  there.  17
July,  18(56.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1834,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was
elected  to  congress  from  New  York  as  a  fusion ist.
and  served  from  4  July,  1801,  till  3  March,  1803.

DELAPLAINE,  Joseph,  publisher,  b.in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  20  Dec,  177*;  d.  there.  31  May,  1824.
He  early  opened  a  bookstore  in  Philadelphia,  and
in  1812,  with  John  Fanning  Watson,  published
"Epitome  Historian  Sacrae,"  and  in  1813  began  the
serial  publication  of  his  "Repository  of  the  Lives
and  Portraits  of  Distinguished  Americans,"  a  series
of  engravings  with  biographical  notices.  Subse-
quently he  exhibited  his  gallery  of  portraits  in  the
larger  cities  of  the  Union.

DELAUNE,  Jacques,  educator,  b.  in  Cotes  du
Nord,  France,  in  1812;  d.  in  Paris  in  1849.  He
studied  theology  at  St.  Brieux,  and  after  his  or-
dination was  appointed  assistant  in  the  cathedral
there.  In  1839  he  resolved  to  devote  himself  to
the  American  mission.  On  his  arrival  in  Indiana
he  received  charge  of  the  missions  of  St.  Patrick's,
St.  Peter's,  and  St.  Mary's,  in  Davies  county,  and
in  1842  was  appointed  pastor  of  Madison.  In  the
latter  town  he  established  the  order  of  the  Sisters
of  Providence,  and  built  an  academy  for  them.
He  also  opened  a  school  for  boys.  In  the  summer
of  1846  he  became  president  of  St.  Mary's  college,
Louisville,  Ky.,  which  he  conducted  for  two  years.
His  success  was  so  pronounced  that  he  was  invited
in  1848  to  take  charge  of  a  similar  institution  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  but  was  compelled  to  abandon
the  enterprise  by  illness,  and  went  to  Europe.

DELAVAN,  Edward  Cornelius,  reformer, b. in
Schenectady  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1793  ;  d.  in  Sche-
nectady, 15  Jan.,  1871.  He  was  a  wine-merchant,
and  acquired  a  fortune.  At  one  time  he  owned
much  real  estate  in  Albany,  including  the  Dela-
van  house,  which  he  erected.  In  1828,  in  com-
pany with  Dr.  Eliphalet  Nott,  he  formed  the
State  temperance  society  in  Schenectady,  and
entered  with  zeal  into  the  cause  of  temperance  re-
form, devoting  his  ample  means  to  its  promotion,
speaking,  lecturing,  and  writing  on  the  subject,
and  employing  others  in  all  these  ways  to  further
the  cau>e. II.'  met  with  great  opposition in  this


work.  In  is:r>  he  wrote  to  the  Albany  ••  Evening
Journal,"  charging  an  Albany  brewer  with  usinj;
filthy  and  stagnant  water  for  malt in<.'.  The  brewer
prosecuted  him  for  libel,  and  the  trial,  which  took
place  in  iHjo  and  attracted  wide  attention,  occu-
pied six  days,  and  resulted  in  a  verdict  forDelavan.
After  this,  several  similar  suits  that  had  1-
gun  against  him  for  damages  aggregating  $300,000,
were  abandoned.  Mr.  Delavan  had  the  proceed-
ings of  this  trial  printed  in  pamphlet-form  for
distribution  as  a  tract.  He  procured,  about  1840,
several  drawings  of  the  human  stomach  when
diseased  by 'the  use  of  alcoholic  drinks,  from  post-
mortem  examinations  made  by  Prof.  Sewall,  of
Washington,  D.  C.  These  he  had  engraved  and
printed  in  colors,  and  made  very  effective  use  of
them.  He  also  published  for  years,  at  his  own  ex-
pense, a  periodical  advocating,  often  with  illus-
trations, the  temperance  cause;  this  was  subse-
quently merged  in  the  "Journal  of  the  American
Temperance  Union,"  to  whose  funds  he  was  a
most  liberal  contributor.  He  had  trained  himself  to
public  speaking,  and  became  an  efficient  advocate
of  the  cause  he  had  so  much  at  heart.  Mr.  Delavan
presented  to  Union  college  a  collection  of  shells
and  minerals  valued  at  $30,000. He  lost  a  large

Sortion  of  his  property  a  few  years  before  his
eath.  He  published  numerous  articles  and  tracts,
and  "  Temperance  in  Wine  Countries  "  (1860).
1)E  LA  YE(»A,  (Jarcilaso.  See  Gaecilaso.
DELAWARE,  or  DELAWARE,  Thomas
West,  Lord,  governor  of  Virginia,  d.  at  sea,  7
June,  1618.  lie  succeeded  his  father  as  third
Lord  Delawarr  in  1602,  and  in  1009  was  appoint-
ed governor  and  captain-general  of  Virginia.  He
arrived  at  Jamestown,  9  June,  1010,  with  three
ships,  after  a  voyage  of  three  months  and  a  half.
His  coming  re-
vived the  courage
of  the  colonists,
who  had  l>een  re-
duced almost  to
despair,  owing  to
privation  and  inis-
government,  and
his  judicious  and
energetic  man-
agement soon  re-
stored order  and
industry.  He  es-
tablished a  post
at  Riquotau  (now
Hampton),  at  the
mouth  of  James
river,  and  built
two  forts,  which
he  named  Henry
and  Charles,  in
honor  of  theking's
sons.  Being  ill,
in  March,  1011,  he  embarked  for  Nevis,  in  the
West  Indies;  but,  having  been  driven  north  by
opposing  winds,  they  entered  the  mouth  of  a  huge
river,  called  by  the  natives  Chickohocki,  but  which
received  the  name  of  Delaware  in  his  honor.  He
then  sailed  for  England ;  but  in  April,  1618,  urged
by  the  colonists  to  return  in  consequence  of  the
oppressive  rule  of  Argall,  he  sailed  again  for  Vir-
ginia, but  died  on  the  voyage.  He  expended  larire
sums  in  establishing  the  colony  of  Virginia,  and
was  universally  regarded  as  a  noble  and  philan-
thropic man.  The  present  Earl  Delawarr,  Reginald
Windsor  Sackville-West.  is  his  lineal  descendant.
He  published  "A  True  Relation  to  the  Council  of
Virginia"  (1011 ;  reprinted,  1858).  •


i»i:  i


DE LIX1EKS  BKR1


180


|>| I  I  (»N. It. i\  ill <  . iiml.  ii.  1 1. in

:, Carolina in 1822  : il. in Santa

;  S«*pt..  IM72. He  was  educated  in  liii

lated  in  medicine  at  the  Uni-
ty of  Pennsylvania  in  1888. Hi-  entered  the

i— istunt siirpi.ii  mi  21  Aug.,  !

<1  in  the  Seminole  war,  ami  was  then  stationed

d  years  on  the  western frontier. At the

lining  of  the  Mexican  war  ho  went  with  Gen.

.r  to  the  Kin  (irandc.  was  present  at  most  <>f

the  battles  in  the  campaign  toward  Mexico,  ami

entered thai city when it surrendered. For

these  -ervices,  as  well  as  fnr  gallantry  in action,

where  be  senral  times  tin.k  the  place  <>f  .  oiumaml-

.fflcers  who  had  been  killed  or  wounded,  Dr.

|>. I n  twioe  received  the  thanks  nf  congress,

l.ut  waa again  assigned  to  fmntier  ilutv  in  Mexico,
on  the  ground  of  his  great  energy  and  hardihood.
IL-  was  promoted  !<>  surgeon,  with  the  rank  of
major,  on  88  Aug.,  1858,  and  on  19  Pen*  1861,  re-
signed his  commission  and  was  placed  at  the  head
of  the  medical  department  <»f  the  Confederate
army.  At  the  close  "f  the  war  he  went  to  Mrxirn.
but  after  a  year's  residence  in  that  country  he  re-
turned to  New  Mexico,  when  ho  hail  been  stationed
for  many  years,  and  owned  property,  continuing  in
practice  until  his  death.  He  was  a  man  of  One
literary  culture,  and  a  rigorous  writer.

IU  LEST,  Francois  Charles  (duh-lay-ne),  au-
thor. I),  in  St.  Charles  parish.  La.,  2*  Jan.,  1815;  d.
in  Hay  St.  Louis,  Miss.,  r,»  June,  1880. His  parents

were  French.  He  was  educated  in  the  .Medical
Beboolof  Pari-,  where  he  went  in  1889, and  returned
in  1*42.  He  became  well  known  in  his  profession,
ami  contributed  frequently  to  the  newspapen  «>f

his  city  00  practical  subjects.  He  was  city  phy-
sician in  ISfe-'OO,  and  president  of  the  Hoard  of
health  in  1857-^8.  Mis  works,  which  are  written
in  French,  include  ••  Kssai  sur  la  liliertc"  (New
Orleans,  isjti;  "Etudes  sur  les  passions "  ( 18  19  :
"Qnelque  nets  sur  la  nativismc. '  translated  Into
English  (1854);  *'  Fievre  jauiie."  a  treatise  on  the
epidemic  of  1848  (185!»);  ••  Le  roi  coton"  and
'•( ionfeden is  ct  fedenux"  (18(H);  "Memoire  sur
rcpidemie  de  fievre  jaune  qui  a  regnc  a  la  Noti-
veile  Orleans  et  dans  les  campaniles.'*  a  work  of
much  learning  and  careful  research  (|si;s,:
•I.Vvole  du  people,"  a  one-act  comedy  in  rem;
-  Lies  ohroniques  Imlienncs"  (1877);  and  a  memoir
on  u  Quarantine  "  1 1878),
DEL6ADILL0,  IMego  (del-gah-deel  -yo),  Span-

ish  judge,  I),  in Oranada,  Spain,  in  the  latter  part  of
the  1  ."it'll  century:  d.  there  in  1598.  lie  was  gradu-
ated as  a  lawyer  at  the  university  of  Alcala,  and  in
1587  appointed  Judge  of  the  first  amlicm-ia  or  su-
preme court  of  New  Spain.  He  left  Seville  in  Au-
gust, and  landed  at  Vera  Cruz  on  0  Dec.,  1596.  Two
other  judges  having  died  during  the  voyage,  Delga-
dillo  and  Ortiz  de  Matienzo  alone  founded  the
audieiu  ia  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  awarded  him-
self several  rejiart indent os,  and  soon  managed  to
■and  home  a  large  amount  of  money:  be  obtained
from  the  municipal  council  a  grant  of  land,  which
forbidden  to  the  judges  |»y  the  laws,  and  had

his  brother  appointed  governor  of  the  Zepot
province.  Finally  be  declared  himself  in  open  en-
mil  v  w  ith  ( lortes,  and  opposed  t  be  missionaries  and
the  l)isho|>s.  To  make  himself  [Mipular among  the
Spanish  colonists  and  the  natives,  he  founded  An-
te.piera  (now  Oajaca).  (piellcd  a  dangerottl  revolt
of  the  Indians  in  that  province.  Imported  tin  mul-
barry-tree  and  the -ilk-worm  in  1590,being  the  first
_'in  their  culture  in  the  New  World,  and  the
olive-tree  in  the  following  year.  In  the  mean
while  his  acts  of  maladministration  had  reached


their  ut iii.  —i .  when  i  trued  often

Cruz,  18  July,  1581,  and  resolved  to  put  aa
the  whole  audieueia. All  the  {udgei
cord,  and  intended  t..  depose  Corte* ;  hut  lii»hop

Zuimirraga  succeeded  in  checking  them. I
diciicia  was  called  to  answer  heron- other
195  suits wen  begun,  and DelgadiUo,  like  the
other  memben  of  the  audiencia,
lose  all  his  repartimientos,  and  t«.  pej  940,000  be-
sides. He  returned  t->  Spam,  and  retired  to  his
native  city,  where  a  seven  illness,  brought  about
by  nil  troubles,  ended  his  life.

DELG  LDO.  Pedro  (del-gah'-do),  Spanish  mh>
-ionary,  l>.  in  Burgos,  old  Castile,  in  1487;  d.  in  the
city  of  Mexicn  in  1599. His  parents  beloi
the  highest  Ca-tilian  nobility,  ami  had  gnat  inftu-

eiice  at  the  oourt  of  Quean  Isabella, low

gado  was  sent  to  Valladolid  t<>  Study,  but,  MM
out  of  health,  returned  Inune.  BotM  time  after*
ward  he  entered  a  Hominican  COUVenl  at  Sala-
manca, where  he  studied  arts  and  theology, and, OU

being  ordained  priest,  went  at •••  t..  Ooa&a  with

Father  Juan  Hurtado.  where  they  founded  a  con-
vent and  college,  which  is  still  a  school  f<>r  Spanish
missionaries.  Father  Prtantns  took  him  I
Spain  in  i">2<5.  and  Delgado  was  soon  appointed
prior  of  the  Dominican  convent  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  and  provincial  of  his  order  in  1598.  IL
was  the  first  master  of  novices  and  preach
eral  in  that province,  and  took  much int.

tin aversion and instruction of the Indians

whose  language  he  learned  in  order  to  !«•  able  to

preach  and  teach  among  them.  He  was  tin-  best
friend  and  assistant  of  Father  Hartnlnme  dc  las
Cases,  the  gnat  protector  of  the  Indian-,  ami  gave
him  much  valuable  information  for  his  *•  Historia

de  Indias  "' and  Other  writings.  Charles  V.,  hav-
ing been  informed  l.y  Las  Casas  about  the  learning
ami  virtues  of  Delgado, appointed  him  bishop  of
Charcas,  Peru;  l.ut  be  declined  the  appointment,
preferring  to  continue  his  work  in  Mexico,  when
he  remained  for  the  re-t  of  hi-  life,  devoting  him-
self entirely  to  literary  and  scientific  teaching  and
to  charity.  His  remains  were  buried  in  the  chap-
ter-hall  of  Santo  Domingo,  Mexico.

DE  LIMFKS  HKKMONT.  Jacques  Antoine
Mario,  Spanish  viceroy,  b.  in  Niort.  France.  t»
Fdi..  1755;  d.  in  Cordoba,  96  Aug..  Inio.  He  en-
tered the  service  of  the  order  of  Malta  and  after-
ward the  Spanish  navy. when  he  soon  attained  the
rank  of  captain,  and  during  the  war  with
Britain  was  sent  ..n  s  mis-ion  to  South  America.
When  Buenos  Ayres  wa-  captured  in  June,  1809,
by  the  English  under  Here-ford.  De  Link
looted  a  force  and  marched  against  the  oonqucrora,
who  capitulated  12  Aug.  with  a  • killed,

1,900  prisoners,  TOO  muskets,  90  guns, and  •'!  stand-
ards. After  Montevideo  hail  bean  recaptured  l.y
the  British  fores  under  Anchmnty, 9  Feb*  iv,,T.

De  Linicr-  WSJ  attacked  by  them  in  the  vicinity  of
Buenos Ayns,  driven within it- walls,  anil l<e-

sieged  by  an  army  <>f  w.noo  men  under  Qaa.
Whitelock;  l.ut  he  defended  the  <itv  valiantlv.
caused  great  losses  t«>  the  British,  took  on  5  Jon
l.ooo  pri-oii.T-.  breed  them  to  raise  the  riage,  and

soon  afterward,  in  OOnoaauenOS  of  the  capitulation

of  ?  July,  to  evacuate  Montevideo  and  abandon

the  whole  country  within  two  month-. F->r  tln-*>

services  l"'  waj  made  viceroy if  Buenos
When  the  fir-t  demonstrations  f.-r  independence
annealed  toward  the  end  <>f  lstr*.  Ds  Link
driven  l.y  the  insurgents  fnun  Hu.no-  A>res.and
for  Ins  temporising  poUey  was  sapersedea  i
tuter  de  Cisneros,  sent  out  by  the  Junta  d<
early  in  1809. Da  Union  »'as  given  the  title  of


136


DBLLET


DE LONG


('•unit  of  Hui'ikk  Ayrcs.  and  ordered  to  return  to

Europe,  bal  retired  to  Mendoss.  His  deposition
produced  a  new  revolution  in  Buenos  Ayres,  and
soon  oompelled  Cisnerae  to  abdicate;  bal  when
I)e  Liniers,  at  the  head  of  8^000  men,  whom  he

had  collected,  marched  upon  the  capital  to  re-
establish the  royal  authority,  he  was  defeated  and

raptured  !>v  the  revolutionists,  and  shot  in  Cabeza
del  Tigrc,  Cordoba.

PELLET.  James,  OMmber  of  congress,  i>.  in  Ire-
land in  1788;  d.  in  Claiborne,  Ala.,  21  Dec,  1848.
His  parents  emigrated  from  Ireland  and  settled  in
South  Carolina  when  he  was  a  boy.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  college  of  South  Carolina  in  1810,
studied  law  in  Columbia,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1813,  and  was  for  a  time  a  commissioner  in
equity.  In  1817  he  removed  to  Alabama  and  set-
tled in  Claiborne,  .Monroe  co.,  where  he  distin-
guished himself  as  a  lawyer,  and  by  speculation  in
land  became  wealthy.  Be  was  appointed  a  judge
of  the  circuit  court,  and  frequently  represented  his
county  in  the  state  legislature.  He  was  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  from  Alabama  from  1839  till
1841.  and  again  from  1843  till  1845.

DELLIUS,  Godfreidus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hol-
land ;  d.  in  Antwerp  about  1705.  In  1(583  he  came
to  this  country,  and  was  settled  at  Albany  as  as-
sistant to  Gideon  Schaats,  pastor  of  the  Reformed
church  there,  and  preached  also  at  Schenectady.
He  continued  in  this  service  about  sixteen  years.
In  common  with  all  the  reform  clergy,  he  refused
to  recognize  Leisler's  usurpation  in  1689,  and  the
latter,  among  other  accusations,  charged  Dellius
with  being  a  principal  actor  in  the  French  and
English  difficulties,  and  an  enemy  to  the  Prince  of
Orange,  who  had  succeeded  King  James.  After
the  execution  of  Leisler,  in  May,  1691,  Gov.  Slough-
ter  recalled  Dellius,  who  was  on  the  point  of  em-
barking for  Europe,  and  he  soon  returned  to  Albany.
On  the  conclusion  of  peace  between  England  and
France,  Dellius  and  Peter  Schuyler  were  sent  as
agents,  in  April,  1698,  to  Count  de  Frontenac,  in
Canada,  to  announce  the  peace,  and  bring  to  an
end  the  provincial  hostilities.  Acting  under  the
authority  of  Bellomont,  they  took  with  them  nine-
teen French  prisoners,  and  obtained  the  delivery
of  British  colonists  held  as  prisoners  by  the  French.
Soon  after  his  return  from  this  mission,  two  Chris-
tian Indians  declared  on  oath  that  Dellius,  Peter
Schuyler,  Evert  Banker,  and  Dirck  Wessels  had,  in
1696,  fraudulently  obtained  a  deed  for  a  large  tract
of  land  from  the  Indians.  This  land,  the  deed  of
which  was  confirmed  by  Gov.  Fletcher,  was  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Hudson,  above  Albany,  and  was
seventy  miles  in  length  and  twelve  in  breadth,  Del-
lius also  obtained  a  tract  of  land  in  the  valley  of
the  Mohawk,  fifty  miles  bv  four.  The  Indians,  at
an  appointed  interview,  told  Bellomont  all  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  conveyance  of  the  deed,  and  the
latter,  in  the  spring  of  1699,  secured  a  bill  to  vacate
the  lands,  and  also  a  vote  to  suspend  Dellius  from
ministerial  duty  in  Albany  county.  The  classis  of
Amsterdam  complained  to  the  bishop  of  London
of  Bellomont's  conduct,  and  Albany  and  New
York  contributed  £700  to  enable  Dellius  to  go  to
England  and  oppose  the  vacating  bill  before  it  re-
ceived the  kind's  signature.  The  Indians  who  had
sworn  against  him  afterward  took  counter-oaths,
and,  just  before  his  departure,  asked  Dellius  to  for-
give them.  But,  as  they  were  his  converts,  and  he
was  known  to  have  great  power  over  them,  this
circumstance  loses  its  apparent  force.  Some  ac-
counts say  that  he  returned  to  this  country  and
was  a  missionary  among  the  Indians  from  the  Epis-
copal church  in  1705-'io.


DELMAR,  Alexander,  political  economist,  h.

in  New  York  city.  !»  Aug.,  1886.  Hi-  father  was  a
native  of  Spain.  I  If  WSJ  a  writer  on  a  New  York
journal  in  1854,  and  became  financial  editor  of
"Hunt's  Merchants'  Magazine,"  and  of  several
New  York  papers.  He  established  the  "Social  Sci-
ence Review,  and  was  its  editor  in  1864  '<;.  lb-
was  called  upon  to  organise  the  r.  s.  bureau  of
statistics  in  1868,  was  its  director  in  1867-*8,  and
has  attained  note  as  a  mining  expert,  lie  is  the
author  of  "Gold  Money  ami  Paper  Money"  (New
York.  1868);  "Treatise  on  Taxation  " :  ••  |\-
Political  Economy " (1865);  -The  National  Bank-
ing System"  (1865);  "Statistical  Band-Book"
(1866);  "What  is  Free  Trade!"  (1868);  "Letter
on  the  Finances"  (1868);  "The  Suppressed  Re-
port" (1869);  "History  of  the  Precious  Metals"
(London,  1880);  and  "History  of  Money  in  An-
cient Countries"  (1884). •

DELMONTE,  Felix  Marin.  Dominican  lawyer,
b.  in  Santo  Domingo  city,  Dominican  Republic,
about  1810.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  city,
where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  a
member  of  Da  Trinitaria,  a  secret  society  founded
by  Duarte  to  free  the  country  from  Haytian  rule.
Delmonte  has  filled  many  high  offices  in  the  gov-
ernment of  the  republic,  and  has  been  many  times
a  member  of  the  Dominican  congress,  lie  has
published  "  Las  virgenes  de  Galindo,"  an  historical
tale  in  verse;  "El  Mendigo,"  a  drama;  "Ozama,"
a  drama ;  and  manv  lyrical  poems.  Several  of  his
poems  are  included  in  "  Poet  as  Contemporaneos"
(Madrid),  and  also  in  the  "  Lira  Quisqueya"  (San-
to Domingo).

DELMONTE  Y  TEJADA,  Antonio,  b.  in  San-
tiago de  los  Caballeros,  Santo  Domingo,  in  1783;
d.  in  1861.  He  took  part  against  the  revolted
slaves  of  Hayti,  afterward  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1805  in  Santo  Domingo
city,  but  emigrated  to  Cuba,  where  he  spent  the
rest  of  his  life.  He  published  ."  Historia  ae  Santo
Domingo,*'  the  history  of  the  island  from  the  dis-
covery until  the  present  day  (3  vols..  Havana).

DE  LONG,  George  Washington,  explorer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  22  Aug.,  1844;  d.  in  Siberia,  30
Oct.,  1881.  His  early  education  was  obtained  in
the  public  schools  of  Brooklyn.  He  was  appointed
an  acting  midshipman  at  the  IT.  S.  naval  academy
in  1861.  graduated  in  1865,  and  was  promoted  to
be  ensign,  1  Dec,  1866;  master,  12  March,  1868;
lieutenant,  29  March,  1869;  and  lieutenant-com-
mander, 1  Nov.,  1879.  He  served  in  the  European
squadron  in  1865-'9and  1873-'4,  in  the  South  At-
lantic fleet  in  1870,  on  the  North  Atlantic  station
in  1874,  and  was  executive  officer  of  the  school-ship
"  St.  Mary's,"  off  New  York  city,  in  1875-'8.  On  1
March,  1871,  he  married  Miss  Emma  J.  Wotton,
the  ceremony  taking  place  on  the  U.  S.  steamer
"Shenandoah,"  in  the  harbor  of  Havre,  owing  to  the
impracticability  of  complving  with  French  laws  as
to  marriage  on  French  soil.  In  1873  he  was  serving
on  the  "Juniata,"  which,  commanded  by  Capt.  I).  L.
Braine,  was  ordered  to  search  for  the  missing  arc-
ticsteamer " Polaris"and itscrew.  Supplemcntarv
to  the  movements  of  the  "Tigress"  in  the  north
water  of  Baffin's  bay,  Capt.  Braine  thought  -
along  the  fast  ice  of  Melville  bay  important,  and
detached  Lieut.  De  Long  with  the  steam  launch
"Juniata."  Be  left  LTpernivik,  2  Aug.,  with  Lieut.
Charles  W.  Chipp  and  seven  others,  crossed  Mel-
ville bay  in  a  steam  launch  thirty-two  feet  long,
and  reached  a  point  le>s  than  ten  miles  from  Cajie
York,  but  was  prevented  by  a  violent  gale  from
landing  or  further  pursuing  the  search.  From  Oc-
tober,  1873,  till  18TO,  Lieut.  De  Long1  serve!


m:  i


DELVALLE


i:«7


geograp


re  officer  on  the  sahool-ehip  ••  si
Tin*  "Jennnette"  (which,  as  tin-  ••  I'liininni."  had
made  two  irotk  voyages  under  sir  Allan  xoong)
whs  purchased  by  James  Gordon  Bennett,  -Ir..  ana
ngthened  ana  lit  ted  onJ  at  his  expense  for  a
thn  »f  exploration  via  Bering  strait.

peeial act of congress the government a>-

samed  authority,  while  Mr.  Bennett  met  the  ex-
pense. The  "  Jeannetta"  sailed  from  Ban  Fran-
•,  under  Lieut.  I >*•  Lima's  command,  x  July,
1 The  equipage  numbered tnirtv-three,  in-
stalling livi'  officers  of  the  navy. Touching  at
Ounalaska,  St.  Michael's,  and  St.  Lawrence  bay,
De  Long  proceeded  toChne8erdse  Kamen,  Siberia,
arch  f«>r  Nordenskiold,  who  left  before  hi*  er-
rival. steaming  northward  end  taking  the  pack,

the  "  Jeannctte  "  was  iieset.  5  Sept.,  1*75),  off  Herald
Island,  in  about  71"  85'  N„  7V  W.  The  vessel
never  escaped  the  peek, and,  after  drifting  over  «»oo
miles  to  the  northweet,  In  e  deviovs  course,  making

twice  the  distance,  was  crnslied  liv  the  ice  in ;;

18  N.  iv>  BL,  18  Jane,  1891.  Lieut-Coin.  De  Lone
and  his  party  wen  thus  adrift  in  the  polar  sea  1 ."»( >
phical  miles  fnun  the  new  Siberian  islands,
and  over  :HMI  from
the nearest point

of the  mainland
of  Asia. Da  Long

started  southward
with  his  party,
and  reached  Men-
net  t  island.  28
July,  and  Thail-
deiis  island  (one  of
the  new  Siberian
group),  20  Aug.,
1881.  The  party
had  made  this  re-
markable Journey
so  far  alternate-
ly by  sledge  and
boat.  From  this
point  they  pro-
ceeded in  tniats.
under  the  com-
mand respectively
<»f  l>e  Long,  Lieut.
Chipp,  und  Chief-
Engineer  George
W. Melville. Chipp's  boat  was  lost,  with  eight

men,  in  ■  gale  on  18  Sept.,  oir  the  Lena  delta;

but  Melville,  with  nine  others,  reached,  through
one  of  the  eastern  months  of  the  river,  a  small
village  on  the  Lena.  De  Long,  Dr.  Ambler,  and
thirteen  others  reached  the  main  mouth  of  the
Lena,  17  Sept..  having  travelled  ftboul  vJ.soO  miles.
and  reached  the  main-land  at  a  poinl  606  miles  dis-
tant from  their  lost  ship.  Obliged  by  new  ice  to
abandon  their  boat  and  travel  overland,  they  pro-
ceeded slowly  up  the  Lena,  much  embarrassed  by
sick  ami  helpless  men  and  their  cuml>ersome  rec-
ords. On  U  Oct.  they  could  go  no  farther.  Two
men.  s,nt  forward  by  De  Long  to  obtain  relief.
■arrived,  bat  the  others  purifhtfl  of  exposure  and

starvation  within  twenty-five  miles  of  a  Siberian
settlement. I>e  Long's  diary,  written  up  to  the

last  day.  shows  that he  end  two  others  were  living

on  80  Oct.  None  and  Nindemann,the  men  sent
forward  by I>e Long,  fell in  with  natives  on  88

,  and  with  Melville,  88  Oct,  at  Benin. Melville
poshed  his  March,  e  i:  boat  laccess,  northward  t.

•  mity  of  the  Lena  delta  in  November,  and.  re-
newing his  search  in  March.  1KS»>.  found  the  dead
bodies  and  the  records  of  the  expedition  on  the
of  that  month. By  direction  of  the  U,  S.  govern-


ment.  the  remain-  .,f  I>,-  Long  and  his  unfortunate

companions  were  bronchi  to  In-  nat

lh.\ were  interred with  distingui«hcd I
b.,  1884. The  attainment  of  the  l,,.
tude  in Asiatic  aeaa,  and  the  discover)  of  Jean-
mtte.  Henrietta,  and Bennett islands,  epjaear  nt
Bret  to  I..-  meagre  ami  inadequate  n-ult«  from  w>
long  and  disastrous  a  voyage. Hut  to  the  pa
results  must  be  add<
fore  he  Long's northwesl  drift  the  kmg-eooght-for

Wrangell land  shrank,  from  a  continent  sUp|xj«ad

tend  from  the  confines  of  Asm  to  Giwenland,

into  a  small  island.  Itut  the  hydrographical  Con-
ditions of the ."((MNNI ~|iiare miles of the |«ilar

ocean  charted  by  De  Long  clearly  indicate  the
character  of  ffl*jd08  other  smmN  miles  of  area  to
the  south, where  doubtless  a shallow  sea  exists,

with occasional small islands of no c;reat

When  \v  ranged  island  pn.\rd  tii  In-  an  lnejonsJdef>
able  land,  De  Long's  expedition  wns  doomed  to

conqwrativc  failure,  and Bering  stniit  waa  closed
as  a  mad  to  high  latitudes; for  without  a  pro:-
ing  coast  no  vessel  can  hop,-  to  navigate  the  jiolar
schs. The  valuable hydrographio,  magnetic,  and
meteorologieal  observations of  the  wipfdltipsj  still

remain  inaccessible  and  undiscussed  (1W7).  al-
though ten  times  the  amount  necessary  for  their
pro|M-r  publication  has  Itccn  devoted  to  inveottga*

tions  of  tl xpedition,  with  the  result  fortunately

of  Illustrating  Commander  De  Longs  many  ad-
mirable qualities  as  an  officer  and  a  man.  The
court  of  inquiry,  in  its  lindings.  said  officially:
"Special  commendation  is  due  Lieut. -Commander
De  Ijong  for  the  high  qualities  displayed  by  him  in
the  conduct  of  the  expedition.*'  De  Long's  jour-
nals have  been  edited  bv  his  widow,  under  the  title
"The  Voyage  of  the  Jeannette"  (Boston,  It*
and  the  storv  of  the  search  is  to  be  found  in  Mel-
ville's ••  In  the  Lena  Delta " (Boston,  1**4).

DKLORMK,  Louis.  Canadian  lawyer.  l>.  m
Montreal.  ■Jit  Dec.  1884 He  was  educated  at  St.

Sulpice  college,  Montreal,  and  at  the  College  of  St.
llyacint he,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  lair
ot  Lower  Canada  in  1*47.  He  represented  St  Ilya-
cinthe  in  the  Dominion  parliament  from  1810  till
isTs,  and  was  the  Hist  to  propose  the  money-order
s\~tein  between  the  United  States  and  Canada.  He
was  appointed  clerk  of  the  legislative  assembly  of
the  province  of  (Quebec  in  Mav.  1819.

DELYALLE  or  DEL  TALLE,  Arlslobolo
(del-val  -v.ivi.  Argentine  statesman,  b.  in  Buenos
Ayres  in  1847.  lie  was  graduated  at  the  aniveraity

of  his  native  city,  and  began  practice  at  the  Iwr  in
1868.  He  Identified  himself  with  the  national
autonomist  party,  was  soon  acknowledged  as  one
of  its  leaden,  and  elected  in  18M  senator  for  the
province  of  Boenos  ayres. He  was  re  sleeted  far

several  terms,  and  distinguished  himself  as  an  ora-
tor and  defender  of  the  autonomy  of  the  prov-
inces against  encroachment*  of  the  Federal  powec

In  \*:~>  ins  party  nominated  him  for  aovenmrof
the  province,  but  he  was  defeated, Daring  the

dispute  between  Chili  and  the  Argentine  Republic

concerning  their  boundary  in  Knngeada,  ha,  »•►-
aether  with  the  D.  s. minister,  sndsttvored  to

bring idx.ut a pacitlc ■olotkm  Of the  question.

and  their  afforta  were  rewarded  by  the  boundary

treatv  signed  in Buenos  Oct..  1881. In

iHM4*he  was  again  one  of  three  peraons  pn>|to*ed

by  his  party  for  the  nomination  for  governor;  bof

D'Amico  was  considered  a  stronger  candidate,  and

ed. Delralle  continues  one  of  the  mast

influential  members  of  the  Federal  senate,  Be  baa

published -  IntnwliHfion al  dvrecho  admiiiistra-
Itueiioa  Ayres).


138


DEMAREST


DEMINQ


DEMAREST,  David  1).,  clergyman.  I),  in  Har-
rington, Bergen  co.,  N.  JM 80  July,  1819.  He  eras
graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1837,  end  at  the  New
lunswiok  theological  seminary  in  1840.  end  en*
lend  tin'  ministry  of  tli«'  Befonned  Dutch  church.

After  holding  pastorates  in  Catskill.  Flatbush
(Ulster  ro.).  New  Brunswick,  and  Hudson,  lie  be-
came in 1866,  urofessnr  of  pastoral  theology  and

•acred  rhetoric.  In  Bfow  Brunswick  seminary. He

received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  1'rinceton  in
1857.  Dr.  Demand  bat  published  sermons  and
addressee,  and  "  History  and  Characteristics  of  the

Befonned  1'rotestant  Dutch  Church"  (New  York.
1856);  "Practical  Catechetics"  (1880);  and  '•The

Huguenots  on  the  Hackensaek,"  a  paper  read  be-
fore the  Huguenot  society  of  America,  18  April,
lss.->  (New  Brunswick,  1886).  He  was  also  one  of
the  editing  committee  of  the  "Centennial  of  the
Theological  Seminary  of  the  Reformed  Church  in
America"  (New  York,  1885),  and  has  contributed
largely  to  the  "Christian  Intelligencer,"  and  to
other  magazines  and  reviews.

DEMAREST,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Bridge,  N.  J„  in  1 7«»:i ;  d.  in  1K37.  When  a  boy,
he  was  taken  prisoner  by  B  drunken  Hessian  trooper,
whom  lie  pushed  off  his  horse  while  fording  a  stream,
and  thus  escaped.  He  studied  under  Dr.  Solomon
Froeligh.  and  was  licensed  as  a  minister  in  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  in  1789.  He  owned  the  farm
at  Tappan  where  Maj.  John  Andre  was  buried.
In  August,  1821,  the  British  government,  at  the
request  of  Andre's  sisters,  sent  a  man-of-war  to
transfer  the  remains  to  England.  The  Duke  of
York,  uncle  of  Queen  Victoria,  was  on  board,  and
was  entertained  by  Mr.  Dcmarest,  who  afterward
received  from  the  duke  a  gold-lined  snuff-box,  made
from  the  cedar-tree  whose  roots  had  been  found
entwined  about  the  skeleton.  Andre's  sisters  sent
him  a  silver  communion  service,  designed  for  the
use  of  a  Roman  Catholic  priest,  under  a  mistaken
idea  that  such  was  his  character.  Mr.  Dcmarest
returned  the  service,  with  explanations,  and  it  was
replaced  by  a  large  silver  cup,  appropriately  in-
scribed. Mr.  Demarest  seceded  from  the  Reformed
church,  with  Dr.  Solomon  Froeligh,  in  1822,  and
was  suspended  in  1824. — His  grandson,  James,  b.
in  Williamsburg,  L.  I.,  28  June,  1832.  was  graduated
at  Union  in  1852,  and  at  New  Brunswick  seminary
in  1856.  He  has  held  pastorates  in  Hackensaek  and
Newark,  N.  J.,  Chicago,  111.,  and  Kingston  and
Fort  Plain,  N.  Y.,  and  has  published  numerous
sermons,  including  "  Duty  of  the  Reformed  Church
in  the  Future  as  foreshown  by  its  Course  in  the
Past"  (in  " Centennial  Discourses,"  1876).  Union
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1877.

DEMERS,  Jerome  (de-mers'),  Canadian  edu-
cator, b.  in  St.  Nicholas,  near  Quebec,  Canada,  1
Aug.,  1774;  d.  in  Quebec,  17  May,  1853.  He  was
educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  where  he  fin-
ished his  classical  course  in  1795,  and  his  theolog-
ical course  in  1798.  On  24  Aug.  of  the  latter  year
he  was  ordained  a  priest  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church.  He  became  director  of  the  Seminary  of
Quebec  on  10  Aug.,  1800,  and  was  its  superior  in
1815-21,  1824-'30,  and  1836-'42,  following  the  rule
of  the  seminary,  which  permits  the  same  person  to
hold  the  office  only  six  years  in  succession.  Father
Demers  became  vicar-general  in  1H25.  During  his
connection  with  the  seminary,  a  period  of  over
fifty  years,  he  taught,  successively  or  at  the  same
time,"  physics,  chemistry,  astronomy,  architecture,
philosophy,  and  theology.  He  was  distinguished
as  an  orator,  and  had  considerable  influence,  doing
much  to  promote  a  taste  for  natural  philosophy
and  the  fine  arts. He published  "  Institutiones


Philosophies?"  (Quebec,  1835),  and  left  manuscript
treatises  on  physios,  astronoany,  and  architectural

DEMERS,  M.,  K.  0.  bishop,  b,  in  Canada:  d.  in
Vancouver's  island  in  1871.  lie  went  to  the  North'
wesl  territory  in  1888,  and  was  engaged  in  mission-
ary duty  among  the  Indians  till  1847,  when  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Vancouver s  island.

DEMEINIEK.  or  DESMEIMER.  Jean
Nicolas  (day-tnen-vay),  French  statesman.  l>.  in
Nbzeroy,  Franche-Uomti,  i~>  March,  1751 :  d.  in
Pari-.  7  Feb.,  1*14.  He  was  deputy  to  the  stales-
general  in  17*9.  He  took  also  a  part  in  the  delib-
erations of  the  constituent  assembly,  which  dieted
him  to  serve  on  the  legislative  committee.  When
the  assembly  dissolved,  Deineunier,  foreseeing  the
reign  of  terror,  left  France  in  1791.  He  came  to
New  York,  where  he  remained  five  years,  and  on
hi-  return  was  made  a  senator  by  Consul  Bonaparte
in  1802.  Deineunier  is  the  author  of  "  Voyages  de
Vancouver"  :  M  Ksprit  des  usages  et  dee  ooutumes
des  ditlcrents  peuples"  (:i  vols..  L778-'80);  ~  K— ai
sur  les  Ktats-l'nis **  (1786) ;  and  "  I/Aiiierique  in-
dfoendante"  (4  vols.,  Ghent,  1790).

DE  MILLE,  James,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  St.
John,  N.  B.,  in  August,  1837;  d.  in  Halifax.  N'.  S..
28  Jan.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1854,  and  while  in  college  wrote  several  song-  that
are  st  ill  sung  by  students.  He  also  contributed  to
newspapers  in  St.  John  while  he  was  very  young.
He  held  the  chair  of  classics  in  Acadia  college  in
1860-'5,  and  that  of  history  and  rhetoric  in  Dal-
housie  college,  Halifax,  from  1865  till  his  death.
He  published  "  Helena's  Household  "  (New  York,
1858):  "The  Martvr  of  the  Catacombs"  (1858);
"Andy  O'Hara"  (1860);  "John  Wheeler's  Two
Uncles  "  (1860) :  "  The  Soldier  and  the  Spy  "  (1865) ;
"The  Arkansas  Ranger"  (1865);  "The  Dodge
Club"  (1866);  "Cord  and  Creese"  (1867);  "The
American  Baron  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Lady  of  the  Ice  "
(1870);  "The  Cryptogram"  (1871);  "A  Comedy
of  Terrors "(1871);  "An  Open  Question"  (1878);
and  "  The  Living  Link  "  (1874).  He  was  also  the
author  of  l)ooks  for  boys,  including  "  B.  O.  W.  C,"
"  Fire  in  the  Woods,"  "  Boys  of  Grand  Pre  School,"
"  Lost  in  the  Fog,"  "  Among  the  Brigands,"  "  The
Seven  Hills,"  "The  Winged  Lion,"  "The  Young
Dodge  Club,"  "  Picked  up  Adrift,"  and  "  Treasures
of  the  Sea."  In  1878  he  finished  a  treatise  on
rhetoric,  which  was  published  in  New  York.

DEMINO,  Henry  Champion,  lawyer,  b.  in
Middle  Iladdam,  Conn.,  in  1815:  d.  in  Hartford,  9
Oct.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1836,
and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1839.  He  then
opened  a  law  office  in  New  York  city,  but  devoted
himself  chiefly  to  literature,  being  engaged  with
Park  Benjamin  in  editing  the  "New  World,"  a
literary  monthly.  He  removed  to  Hartford  in
1847,  served  in  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature
in  1849-'50  and  1859-"61,  and  in  1851  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  senate.  He  was  mayor  of  Hartford
in  1854-'8  and  in  1860-'2,  having  been  elected  as  a
democrat.  Early  in  the  war  he  opposed  coercion,
even  after  the  fall  of  Sumter,  ana  when  asked  to
preside  at  a  war-meeting  on  19  April,  1861.  de-
clined in  a  letter  in  which  he  said  that  he  would
support  the  Federal  government,  but  would  not
"sustain  it  in  a  war  of  aggression  or  invasion  of
the  seceded  states."  When  Washington  was  threat-
ened, however,  he  favored  the  prosecution  of  the
war,  and  on  9  Oct.,  1861,  was  elected  by  acclama-
tion speaker  pro  tempore  of  the  state  house  of  rep-
resentatives, the  republican  majority  thus  testify-
ing their  approval  of  his  course.  In  September,
lsiii,  he  accepted  a  commission  as  colonel  of  the
••  charter  oak regiment  (the  12th  Connecticut),  re-


DKM


18Q


cruit.d aw^toially tot  Gon,  Batlorfi  New  Orleans

expedition.  After  the  passage  <>f  1 1  •■  -  f«>rt'  lu»
regiment  was  tin-  HrM  to  reach  New  Orleans,  uml
was  assig iw* I  bf  Qan.  Butler  tin'  post  of  tumor  nt
tin-  custom-bouse.  CoL  Darning  m  an  detached
clot \ .  sctiug  a-  mayor  <>f  tin-  « •  i t >-  troa  Ootobar,
till  February."  1888.  He  then  resigned,  re-
turned borne,  ami  in  April.  IMS,  wn  elected  to

-•publican, ami served two tiim-.
_-  a  member  of  the  committee  on  military  af-
aml  chairman  of  that  on  expenditure*)  in  the
department In  I860  he  whh  a  delegate  to  the
Jists'  convention  in Philadelphia,  ami  from
l  i ill  In-  death  was  l\  S.  collector  of  internal
revenue  for  hi^  dtftril  t. Mr.  Doming  WOJ  OM  <»f
the  nioM  eloquent  public  s|>cakers  in  New  Knglaml.
ntleman  of  line  culture  ami  of  refined  literary
He  published  translations  of  Kugcm-  Sues
••  Myal  eries  of  Paris "  ami  •'  Wandering  Jen  "(1840),
aoulogj  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  delivered  by  iuvita-
tiou  of  the  Conneotkml  legislature  in  IMS. M Life
of I  '  .rant  "  (Hartford, 1808),  and vari-

ous addresses,

UMIN6,  William,  the  first  maker  of  wrought -

iron  cannon.  Ii.  in  17:10;  <l.  in  Mifflin,  Oombanand

I'a..  19 DeO,  1810. lie was  employed in the

Revolutionary  army,  ami  contrilniteil  two  wrought  -

iron  cannon  of  curious  construction,  one  of  which

aptured  by  the  British  at  the  battle  of  the

Brandy  wine,  and  is  still  preserved  in  the  Tower
of  London.  ThtM  singular  pie.es  of  ordnance
are  described  as  being  "made  of  wrought-iron
staves,  booped  like  a  barrel,  with  bandi  <>f  the  same

material,  except inir  that  there  were  four  layers  of
staves,  breaking  joints,  all  of  which  were  finally
bovnd  together,  and  then  bond  and  breeched  like
other  cannon."  The  first  gun  was  made  at  Middlc-
l'a.,  the  ssoond  was  began  at  Mount  Holly
Springs,  l'a.,  bul  SS  the  patriotic  blacksmith  could
find  m>  one  to  assist  him,  on  account  of  the  heat,
which  is  said  to  have  nan  so  great  as  to  have
melted  the  lead  buttons  on  his  coat,  it  was  not  com-
pleted. The  British  are  said  to  have  offered  a  large
sum  of  ready  money  ami  a  stated  annuity  to  any
one  that  would  instruct  them  in  the  process  of
manufacture  ;  but  the  sturdy  artisan  was  not  to  l>e
seduced  from  hk  allegiance.  Although  he  had
striven  to  SBCTe  the  republic,  with  traditional  in-
gratitude it  refused  to  OOmpsntSte  him  until  near
the  dose  of  his  long  career.

DEMPSTER,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Florida,  Ful-
ton eo..  N.  V..  I  .Ian..  17JM;  .1.  in  Bvanston,  111..  08
Nov..  inw.  His  father,  Ibv.  .lames  Dempster,  was
bred  a  Presbyterian,  and  educated  at  the  I  nivcrsity
Of  Edinburgh,  but  became  an  associate  of  John
W slew  and  was  sent by  him to  tins  country  afl  I

sessionary. Be  died  while  John  was  ■  child,  and

the  bof  Iwcame  a  peddler  of  tin-ware,  but  after  his
conversion,  in  1812,  began  to  study  diligently.
He  entered  the  itinerant  ministry  of  the  Methodist
church  in  181(1,  and  SOOB  distinguished  himself  at
a  powerful  preaeher.  After  lab. ring  in  western
New  York  and  Canada,  he  went  as  a  missionary  t<>
Buenos  Ay  res  in  ls:;."i,  but  returned  in  lK-1'2.  ..ml
had  charge  of  churches  in  New  York  citv  for  three
In  lsJ7  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Biblical  institute  at  Concord.  N.  II..  DOW  the
ton university  theological SOhooL He  tilled the

Ohair  of  tl logy  there  till lN."il.  when he  founded

the  Qarrett  Biblical  institute  at  Kvanston,  HI.,  and
was  its  smior  professor  from  ls.V»  till  his  death.
Plans  for  establishing  institutes  in  Omaha  and
California  failed,  owing  to  the  financial  crisis  ,.f
Wesieyan  university,  Middletown,  dim..
gave  him  the  degree  ..f  D.  D.  in  IMS. Dr.  I>.  inp-


star  was  very  successful  aa  an  educator  of  young

in.  n. He  left mam  manuscript

bare  been  published  with  the  litis  "  1  .Ait  una  and

Addresses  *  .<  inctnnati,  181

HI  >l  I'M  Kit.  William  l(i.-hunl«..n.  musician,
b.  in  Keith,  Bootland,  in  I*<»!»:  d.  in  I>omlon
land.  7  March. 1871. He wax  apprenticed  t"  s
qnill-maksr  in  Aberdeen,  bul  -n,m  left  ii„.  trade

and  dOTOtsd bimssli  to  music. ||. aajns  to  th.

United  States  n  early  life,  bsoams  «  natui
citi/.n.  ami  remained  several  rears. \r.

his tune  was  s|M  nt ahOttl equally  00  either

the Atlantic. He  WW  ■ ISJOOSSJUl  OOfBBOSjr  and

public  singer.  Ins  roioi  being  *0TJ  sfhoUtS  in  j»r-

lor  singing,  though lacking  the  VoltHM  iinnHrr

for  a  large  hall. He  let  Temiyaoi

to music, which became p 'pular,  and  afterward

oompossd  iiiusji  f..r  most  of  thasonga  brtrodncod

in  Tennys..n*s  longer  poems,  which  watl  hil  favor-
ites f,,r  |,|s  concerts.  ||c  was  noted  among  his
friends  for  his  genial  spirit  ami  strict  morality.

DKN.U'T.  Peter  (duh-iio).  Canadian  K.C.'bidi-
op,  b.  in  Montreal,  90  July.  17i:t;  d.  m  Longneil,
17  .Ian..  1*»m».  lie  was  parish  priest  of  Longneil,
ami  vicar-general of  the  aiooese  of  Quebec,  During
the  invasion  of  <  anada  by  Arnold  and  Montgomery.
in  1  ??."».  he  was  zealous  in  preventing  the  Canadians
from  joining  them.  As  be  occupied  the  |-.-t  of
danger  on  the  route  from  the  t'nited  States  to
Canada,  the  British  authorities  suggested  his  pre-
sentation as  coadjutor  bishop  of  Quebec,  but,  feeling
that  his  presence  at  Longuei]  would  be  useful  to
them  in  case  of  another  invasion  from  the  United
states,  they  persuaded  him  t<>  reside  there.  Re
was  consecrated  at  Montreal  in  1794.  and  in  1797
Bishop  Hultert  resigned  the  sec  of  (^ueliec  in  his
favor.  Bishop  Denaul  was  accused  of  subservieooy
to  those  in  power;  but  on  s  noteworthy  occasion
he  showed  firmness  of  character.  As  soon  as  he
succeeded  to  the  bishopric  he  found  the  aid  of  a
coadjutor  necessary,  tioth  the  people  and  the
clergy  wished  the  curt  of  Quebec,  Joseph  Octavius
Plessis.  to  be  appointed.  The  Duke  of  Kent, father
of  Queen  Victoria,  was  then  holding  court  in  Que-
bec, and  at  the  same  time  carrying  <>n  an  intrigue
with  a  married  woman  in  the  neighboring  village
of  Beauport  The  parish  priest  of  this  town  se-
cretly favored  the  liaison,  ami.  to  reward  his  com-
plaisance, the  young  prince  used  every  effort  to
nave  him  appointed  coadjutor  bishop.  Bishop
Denaul  insisted  on  the  choice  of  Plessis,  who  had
been  elect.il  by  the  clergy,  and  declared  thai  they
neither  should  nor  would  hold  another  election.
In  presence  of  this  unexpected  resistance,  the  Cana-
dian government  withdrew  their  candidate,  and
Bishop  Denaul  then  retired  to  Longneil,  where  ha
siK-nt  the  remainder  of  hi*  life.

HKNU.KK.  Frank,  sculptor,  h,  in  Cincinnati.
Ohio,  in  1858.  He  vent  abroad  whOs  yung.
studied  in  the  Munich  academy  of  fine  arts,  and
received  there  in  1*71  a  silver  medal  for  bis  group
the  "Sleeping  Iicautv."  He  was  for  a  sh.-rt  time
an  instructor  in  modelling  in  the  Boston  inu-eum
art  school,  but  resigned  >'»  '*•*  •'"  sooonnl  of  fail-
ing h.alth.  and  removed  ho  CbringtOO,  Kv.,  and
afterward  to  Cincinnati.  Among  his  works  are
and  Melda"(1877X  ""  ideal  head  of  -  Ameri-
ca." and  several  portrait  busts.

DKNIN,  SiiHan.  actress,  l>.  in  Philadelphia,  IV.

22 March.  l*o">;  d.  in  Blufftoii.  Ind..  4 Deo,  ls7*».
When  v.rv  young  she  and  her  sister  Kate  took  the
part of  dancing fairies  at the National I
I'hiladelphia. Susan  afterward  Usame  a  (

in  New  York  ami  other  jwrts  ..f  the  country,  and

In  l^l'.i  made  her  first  ap|Harame  in  London, Her


140


DEN  In


DENISON


death  was  the  result  of  a  fall  on  the  stage  in  In-
dianapolis, lnd.  She  had  bees  married  four  times.
— Her  sister  Kate,  l>.  in  Philadelphia  in  l*:'.?.  was
also  a  |H)pular  actress.  They  resembled  Bach  Other
in  person,  manner,  and  ability,  and  for  a  time  WON

quite  |M)|iular  in  melodramatic  characters.

DKNIO.  Hiram,  jurist,  b.  in  Rom.-,  X.  Y.,  21
May.  1799;  d.  iii  I'tica.  N.  V..  5  Nov..  1871.  After
a  thorough  education,  be  began  to  study  law  in  his

seventeenth  year,  was  admitted  to  the  i>ar  in  1821,
and  began  practice  in  Home.  He  was  district  at-
torney in  is'j.")-';{|.  and  in  in-2<;  removed  to  I'tica.
He  was  circuit  judge  Tor  the  fifth  circuit  in  1K:!4-X
and  in  1830  formed  a  law  partnership  with  Ward
Hunt.  In  Jnne,  IK)."},  he  was  appointed  to  fill
a  vacancy  on  the  bench  of  the  court  of  appeals,  and
twice  afterward  was  elected  to  the  same  office,
serving  till  18(5(1.  He  had  also  been  bank  com-
missioner and  clerk  of  the  supreme  court,  and  from
1835  till  his  death  was  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  col-
lege, which  afterward  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  I).  Judge  Denio  was  a  democrat,  but  voted
for  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  supported  the  war
measures  of  the  government,  lie  was  considered
one  of  the  ablest  jurists  that  ever  sat  on  the  bench
of  the  court  of  appeals.  He  published  "  Reports
of  Cases  argued  and  determined  in  the  Supreme
Court  and  in  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of
Error"  (5  vols..  l846-'8),  and  with  William  Tracy
prepared  an  edition  of  the  Revised  Statutes  of  Xew
York  (2  vols.,  1852).

DKNIS,  Jean  Ferdinand,  French  explorer,  b.
in  Paris.  18  Aug.,  1798;  d.  in  1879.  He  travelled
several  times  through  America,  once  for  five  years,
1810  till  1821.  He  was  appointed  librarian  of  the
Ste.  Genevieve  library  in  Paris  in  1861,  and  held
this  place  till  nearly  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was
the  author  of  many  works  on  the  institutions  of
America,  the  most  notable  of  which  are  "  L'histoire
du  Bresil"  (1821);  "Buenos  Avres  et  le  Paraguay"
(2  vols..  1823) ;  "  La  Guyane  "  '(2  vols.,  1823) ;  "  Re-
sume de  i'histoire  du  Bresil,  suivi  du  resume  sur
l'histoire  de  la  Guyane"  (1825),  which  was  trans-
lated into  Portuguese  in  Rio  de  Janeiro ;"  Precis
de  l'histoire  litteraire  du  Bresil  et  du  Portugal "
(1832) ;  and  "  Le  Bresil  et  le  Portugal,"  published
in  the  collections  of  "  L'Univers  pittoresque".(1837
and  1846).  He  is  also  the  author  of  several  nov-
els, as  "  Ysmael-ben-Kaisar,  ou  la  decouverte  du
nouveau  monde"  (3  vols.,  1829);  and  "line  fete
bresilienne  celebree  a  Rouen  en  1850."  He  pub-
lished in  1854  a  new  and  revised  edition,  with  notes,
of  "  Les  voyages  de  Malouet  dans  les  forets  de  la
Guyane,"  and  was  a  contributor  to  the  Brazilian
review,  •'  Corographia  Brazilica."

DKNIS,  or  DKNYS,  Nicolas,  French  soldier,  b.
in  Tours.  France,  about  1600.  He  was  governor  and
proprietor  of  a  part  of  Acadia  and  Canada.  He  had
obtained  a  grant  of  the  country  between  Cape  Can-
so  and  Gaspe,  but  was  obliged,  after  making  impor-
tant establishments,  to  carry  on  warfare  for  terri-
torial rights  with  his  countrymen,  and  a  fire  com-
pleted his  ruin.  He  returned  to  France  about  1672,
and  published  "Description  geographique  et  his-
torique  des  cotes  de  l'Amerique  septentrionale,  avec
l'histoire  naturelle  an  pavs"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1672).

DKNISON,  Andrew  Woods,  soldier,  b.  in  Bal-
timore. Md..  18  Dec.,  1831 ;  d.  there.  24  Feb.,  1877.
In  1862  he  raised  the  8th  Maryland  regiment  for
the  National  army,  and  in  August  of  that  year
became  its  colonel,  serving  till  the  close  of  the
war.  He  commanded  the  Maryland  brigade  of
Robinson's  division  at  Laurel  Hill,  where  he  lost
an  arm,  and  was  again  wounded  at  White  Oak
Ridge,  near  Petersburg. He  was  brevetted  briga-


dier-general for  gallantry  in  the  Bret-named  battle
on  ;i  Aug.,  l^iil.  and  major-general  for  the  second,
::i  March,  1865,  (Sen.  Denieon  was  appointed  post-
master  of  Baltimore,  19  April,  1869,  and  held  the

office  till  his  death.

DKNISON.  Charles Wheeler,  author, b.  In

New  London.  Conn.,  11  Nov..  1809;  d.  14  Nov.,  1881.
Before  he  was  of  age  he  edited  a  newspaper  in
his  native  town,  lie  afterward  became  a  clergy-
man, edited  the  "Emancipator,"  the  first  anti-
slavery  journal  published  in  New  York,  and  took
part  in  other  similar  publications.  In  1858  he  was
IT.  S.  consul  in  British  Guiana,  He  -pent  some
time  anions  I  lie  operatives  of  Lancashire,  speaking
in  behalf  Oi  the  National  cause  during  the  Ameri-
can civil  war,  and  in  1867  edited  an  American
paper  in  London,  being  at  the  same  time  pastor  of
Grove  Road  chapel,  Victoria  park.  During  the
last  two  vears  of  the  war  he  served  as  post  chap-
lain in  Winchester,  Ya.,  ami  as  hospital  chaplain
in  Washington.  He  published  "The  American
Village  and  other  Poems"  (Boston,  1845) :  "Paul
St.  Clair,"  a  temperance  story  ;  ••  <  hit  at  Sea,"  po-
ems (London,  1867);  "Antonio,  the  Italian  Boy"
(Boston,  1873);  "The  Child  Hunters,"  relating  to
the  abuses  of  the  padrone  system  (Philadelphia,
1877);  and  a  series  of  biographies  published  dur-
ing the  war,  including  "  The  Tanner  Boy  "  (Grant) ;
"  The  Bobbin  Bov  "  (Banks) ;  and  "  Winfield ;  the
Lawyer's  Son"  (Hancock). — His  wife,  Mary  An-
drews, author,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mas-..  •„'•;'  May.
1826,  became  connected,  on  her  marriage  with  Mr.
Denison,  with  the  "Olive  Branch,"  of  which  he
was  assistant  editor.  She  continued  to  contribute
to  magazines,  and,  when  living  in  British  Guiana,
wrote  tropical  sketches  for  American  periodicals.
She  also  contributed  to  English  magazines  while
in  London.  Her  books  are  mostly  tales  of  home-
life,  and  include  "Home  Pictures,"  a  collection
of  sketches  written  for  periodicals  (New  York,
1858);  "Gracie  Amber"  (1857);  "Old  Hepsey,  a
Tale  of  the  South"  (1858);  "Opposite  the  Jail"
(1858);  "The  Lovers'  Trials"  (Philadelphia,  1865);
"Annie  and  Teely"  (1869);  "That  Husband  of
Mine,"  an  anonymous  book,  which  reached  a  sale
of  over  200,000"  copies  in  a  few  weeks  (Boston,
1874);  "That  Wife  of  Mine "(1877);  "Rothmell"
(1878);  "Mr.  Peter  Crewett "  (1878);  "His  Tri-
umph "(1883);  "What  One  Boy  can  Do  "(1885);
and  numerous  Sunday-school  books.

DKNISON,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  England  in
1613;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1682.  He
came  to  New  England  about  1631,  removed  from
Cambridge  to  Ipswich  in  1635.  and  was  a  military
leader  there.  He  was  a  commissioner  to  treat  with
the  French  commander  D'Aulny  at  Penobscot,  in
1646  and  1653,  and  was  subsequently  major-gen-
eral of  the  colonial  forces  for  ten  years.  He  rep-
resented Ipswich  several  years  in  the  general  court,
was  speaker  of  the  house  in  1649  and  in  1651—%
secretary  of  the  colony  in  1<>">:>.  justice  of  the  quar-
terly court  in  1658,  commissioner  of  the  united
colonies  in  1655-"62.  and  assistant  in  1653-'82.  He
was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  Massachu-
setts troops  in  1675,  but  was  prevented  by  illness
from  taking  the  field  in  the  Indian  war  of  that
year.  Gen.  Denison's  daughter  married  President
Bogem,  of  Harvard.  He  published  "  Ire n icon,  or
Salve  for  New  England's  Sore"  (1684).

DENISON,  Frederic,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ston-
ington,  Conn.,  28  Sept.,  1819.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1*17.  iWirlui  having  been  pa-tor  of
several  Baptist  churches,  Mr.  Dawson  served  dur-
ing three  years  of  the  late  war  as  chaplain  of  the
1st  Rhode  Island  cavalry  and  the  34  Rhode  Island


DEM


141


heavy  artillcrv.  Be  ha*  written  a  great  number
q|  poems  and  article-  fur  pffkMJkmlf,  end  il  Mlthor

of  tiir  following  worka :  ••  rbe  Supper  Institution,''
••'III.-  Sabbath  Institution,'1  "The  Evangelist, or
Life  and  Labon  of  Bev.  Jabei  S.  Swan"

•  I  list  on  of  the  Kiwi  Rhode  Island

dry";  '  Westerly  hik!  its  Witnesses  fur  Two
Hundred  and  Fifty  Years'*;  "  Pictuieeqjie  Narra*
m!  Shore**;  "Illustrated  New  Bed-
lard,  Marthas  Vineyard,  end  Nantucket**;  "His-
tory of  the  Third  abode  tsland  Ilcavv  Artillery
Regiment  ":  tui<l  "Picturesque  KIukIc  Island." — Hut
brother,  John  l.eihanl.  educator,  b,  In  Stoning*
Ion,  Conn-  1!»  .Sept.,  1880.  Hia  education  was  re-
eeivedat  toe  Connecticut  literary  institution  and
at  Worcester academy, and  he  established  the  Mys-
tic  river  academy. Settling  in  Norwich,  Conn,  in

>.  be  became  ■obeequentlr  nwrntary  and  b
tin-r  of  tbi Henry  Pill  puMlahing  company,  ami
president  of  the  Connecticut Baptist  education

society.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  at,  from
Brown  in  1850. He  is  the  author  of  a  M Pictorial

History  of  the  Wars  of the United  States."  ami

baa  edited  an  "Illustrated  History  of  the  New
World,"  in  English  ami  in  German.
DENISON,  George  Taylor,  Canadian  lawyer,

l».  in  Toronto,  17  July,  1N10;  <l.  80  -May,  1H?:{.
He  was  cdiicateil  at  I* |»|kt  Canada  college,  Toron-
to, studied  law,  ami  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1840. ||e  ^.rved  as  a  volunteer  in  the  rebellion  of

;.  participated  in  the  siege  of  Navy  Island,  ami
was  one  of  the  ollicers  that  obtained  the  informa-
tion that  led  to  the  capture  ami  destruction  of  the
steamer  "Caroline."  In  1840  he  was  appointed  to
the  command  of  a  cavalry  troop  (raised  by  his  fa-
ther. I.ieiit.-Col.  (i.  T.  Uenison).  now  known  as  the
governor-general's  Unly-j^nanl,  and  in  1856  took
an  active  jwrt  in  organising  the  militia  under  the
new  law  passed  that  year,  which  was  the  founda-
tion of  the  present  military  system  of  Canada.  He
orjriiiuzi.il  the  Toronto  field  battery,  and  in  1800,
at  the  request  of  sir  Kdmuml  Head,  the governor-

Ucncral,  organized  the  queen*!  own  rifles.  —  His
eon,  Qewfge  Taylor,  i».  in  Toronto.  :n  Aug.,  l^JU,

was  i-ducated  at  I'pjier  Canada  OoUogO,  and  is  an
1. 1..  I),  of  Toronto  university.  He  was  gazetted
to  the  active  militia  in  ls.V>  as  a  cornet,  was  made

a  major  in  1808,  ami  promoted  to  the  command  of

the  tfovernor-jjciierars  body-guard  in  BOO,  a  com-
mand which  he  still  (1KN7)  holds.  lie  was  ad-
mitted to  the  l»ar  in  1801,  and  in  186H  he  served
during  the  Fenian  raid,  commanding  the  outposts
on  the  Niagara  river,  in  the  autumn  of  that  year.
under  Co),  (now  Lord)  Wolseley.  In  1878,  and
again  in  ls7:{,  he  was  sent  to  (ireat  Britain  to  rep-
resent the  Ontario  government  in  emigration  mat-
ter-, in  1878  he  oontested  Aigoma  for  the  house

of  commons,  hut  was  defeated.  In  1*77  he  waf
appointed  police  magistrate  of  Toronto,  and  in
1885  served  in  the Kiel  rebellion  in  the  northwest.

In  1888  Col.  Denieon  was  appointed  an  original

member  of  the  English  literature  section  of  the
il  society  of  ( 'anada.  and  in  1885  was  elected  it-
lent.  He  is  the  author  of  ••  Manual  of  <>ut-
l«.-t  Duties  n  (Toronto,  1800);  •*  History  of  the  Fe-
nian Kaid"  (1800);  "Modern  Cavalry " (London,
England,  18081;  and  a  "  History  of  Cavalry  "(Lon-
don. is77).  The  two  hist  named  have  been  trans-
lated into  Russian,  German, and  Hungarian. The

"  History  of  Cavalry  "  was  awarded  the  fayQOO  ru-
hles  otTered  by  the  eiii|M'ror  of  Etoasla  M  a  prize
for  the  U-st  work  on  that  subject.  Col.  Denieon
visited  If u-.-i;i  on  the  (xsessJon  of  receiring  the
prize,  and  was  presented  to  t  he  Czar  and  <  zarina.
—Another  son.  Frederick  Charles,  loldiar,  b.  in


wa«  educated  at  I'pi.  r
(Canada  college,  etndied  law.  ami  was  adinitu
the  bar  in  1870. He  served  for  some  month,  i,
administrative  battalion  at N  „,„|

the  Mime  year  was  assarted  cornet  In  the  post  •

Ueneral's  body-guard,  serving  m  tt

the Niagara frontier  during tin Fenian mid in

lsi;«;. ||

on  tin-  Bed  river  expedition  <-f  1870,  end  r
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in 1884,  when  he
■died  from  Quebec  In  i  ommand  of  n  force  of  Cana-
dian royagenrs,  to  aid  la  the  campaign  m  theSou*

ilan  for  the  relief  of  (ieii.  Qonlon

aooomnaniad  Qen.  Bmia'i  column,  and  t.«>k  part
in  the  battle  of  KiHuN-an. The  aarvieai  anadared

liv  the  Canadian bOatlBSfl  van thought -> f*Js>

able  that  the]  received  the  thanks  of  the  iiiijM-rial
parliament,  and  their  oflicer  was  made  a OOOMHaV

ion of the order  of St.  Michael and Bl I
lie  is  a  fellow  of  the Royal historical

England,  and  is  the  author  of  the  u Historical
Becocd  of  the  Qovernor-Oaneral*!  Body-Guard/1
wil  h  it>  standing  orders.

DENNETT,  John  Kichard,  journalist.  I,,  in
Chatham,  New  Brun-wick.  in  1*:J7:  d.  in  West-
borough,  M.i"..  •.'<;  November,  1*7 1.  Hi-  Eamib
removed  to  Wbburn,  Kaaa,  while  I  turn,

and  he  was  lilted  for  college  in  the  Wolmrii  Mgh*
school,  and  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1808. While

in  college he was  editor  of  the  '•Harvard Mapt-

zine." His  class-day  poem,  far  aoperior  to  r
such  performances,  was  especially  nctirmd  by  Jamai
Russell  Lowell,  for  its  rare  jKH-tic  qualities, After
graduation  he  went  to  Beaufort.  S.  c,  to  superin-
tend a  plantation,  ami  remained  then-  until  after
the  civil  war.  when  he  travelled  extensively  through
the  southern  states  to  study  their  political  position
and  prospects. He  contributed  a  series  of  interest
inij  letters  to  the  New  York  "Nation"  upon  this
subject, and  on  returning  from  his  tour  he  became
one  of  its  editors. Besides  writing  frequently  for
the  ••  Nation."  Mr.  Dennett  was  assistant  prof,
of  rhetoric  at  Harvard,  and  discharged  tiled,
of  that  office  with  credit  until  compelled  to  n
on  account  of  failing  health.

DKNNT  K,  Josepu,  journalist,  1..  in  Boston,  •"«•
An-.  17iW:  d.  in  Philadelphia.  7  .Ian  .  1818,  He
eras  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1780,  and  studied  law
at  Charlestown,  N.  II..  when-  he  was  admitted  to
the  liar,  hut  ultimately  devoted  himself  to  litera-
ture. In  1795  he  published  a  serie*  of  essays  on
life  and  literature,  called  "The  Farrago.''  and
edited  in  Boston  "The  Tablet."  a  weekly  journal.
Ill  three  months  he  removed  to  Walpole,  N.  H.,
where  he  edited  "The  Fanners'  Wecklv  Museum."
which  attained  much  popularity  under liis  manage-
ment. II.  gathered  around  him  a  numUr  of
writers,  each  of  whom  contributed  to  a  sjocial  de-
partment. Among  his  compositions  was  "The  I^y
Preacher,"  a  series  of  i-sn-,  which  jrave  their  au-
thor reputation  ai  a  graceful  and  humorous  writer,
and  were  widely  copied.  In  175»s  the  publisher  DC-
came  liankrupt.  and  Heiinie  was  Persuaded  to  be>
...me  a  candidate  for  cone;r<'ss.  He  was  defeat,  d.
and  in  17!»'.i  w.nt  to  Philadelphia  to  Us-,  an  j.  rivat.-
tary  to  Thomas  I'lckeriny.  sit-ntary  of  state.
He  remained  here  a  few  months,  and.  after  editing
the  "  United  Si  tte,**  became  edHor of  the

elphia  in
This  wi
lv  quarto,  but  n  the  oourei  of  five  yean  it  lieoame
a  monthly  ootava Heiinie  nontlnnod  to  In-  itsi-dit-

or  until  lii*  death,  under  the  |>eii-name  of  -Oliver

Old  BehooL" The  atafl  of  aiiie  writers,  among

whom were Charles Brockdeu llrown  and  John


Portfolio"  in  Philadelphia  in  1N<M.  in  connection
with  Aslniry  Dickens. This  was  oriu'inalL  a  «•<  k-


142


DENNIS


DENONVILLK


Quincy  Adams  (whose  "Letters  from  Sile-ia"
were  originally  published  in  it),  maintained  the
"Portfolio's"  high  reputation  for  manv  year-.  It
was  said,  after  the  death  of  Rrockdcu  Brown,  that
Dennie  was  the  only  man  in  the  country  that  hum  It-
literature  a  profession.  His  appearance  was  de-
scribed by  Buckingham  in  this  manner:  "He  was
rather  above  the  average  height,  and  of  slender
frame ;  was  attentive  to  his  dress,  appearing  one
Mav  morning  at  the  office  in  a  pea-green  coat,
white  vest,  nankeen  small-clothes,  white  silk  stock-
ings and  pumps,  fastened  with  silver  buckles  which
covered  at  least  half  the  foot  from  the  instep  to  the
toe." He  wrote  very  rapidly,  and  deferred  the

g reparation  of  his  "copy  until  the  last  moment,
ne  of  the  best  of  his  lay  sermons  was  written  at
the  village  tavern,  where  he  and  his  friends  wen-
amusing  themselves  with  cards.  It  was  delivered
by  piece-meal,  at  four  or  five  different  times,  and
if  he  happened  to  be  engaged  in  a  game,  he  would
ask  some  one  to  play  his  hand  for  him  while  he
"gave  the  devil  his  due."  Dennie  founded  in
Philadelphia  the  "Tuesday  Club,"  which  included
most  of  the  contributors  to  the  "Portfolio."  His
work  was  confined  principally  to  periodicals,  but
two  collections  of  his  writings  were  published —
"The  Lay  Preacher,  or  Short  Sermons  for  Idle
Readers  "(Walpole,  N.  H..  1796),  and  a  volume  of
"The  Lay  Preacher,"  collected  by  John  K.  Hall
(Philadelphia,  1817).  He  aimed' to  unite  "the
familiarity  of  Franklin  with  the  simplicity  of
Sterne  "  in  these  ingenious  essays.

DENNIS,  George  R.,  senator,  b.  in  White  Ha-
ven, Somerset  co..  Md.,  8  April,  1822.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Polytechnic  institute  of  Troy,  N.
Y.,  and  entered  the  University  of  Virginia.  He  stud-
ied medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  was
graduated  there  in  1842,  and,  after  practising  for
several  years,  he  retired  and  has  since  devoted  his
attention  to  agriculture.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
National  convention  that  nominated  Mllmore  in
185(5.  and  to  the  Democratic  national  convention
in  1808,  serving  as  one  of  the  vice-presidents.  He
was  elected  to  the  Maryland  state  senate  in  1854,
to  the  house  of  delegates  in  1867,  and  to  the  senate
again  in  1871.  While  filling  this  office  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Maryland  as  a  Democrat,
serving  until  1873.

DENN1SON,  William,  war  governor  of  Ohio,
b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  23  Nov.,  1815;  d.  in  Co-
lumbus, 15  June,
1882.  His  father
was  a  prosperous
business  man,  and
had  him  prepared
for  college  in  the
best  schools  of  Cin-
cinnati. He  was
graduated  at  Mia-
mi in  1835,  stud-
ied law  in  Cincin-
nati, under  the
direction  of  Na-
thaniel Pendleton
and  Stephen  Fales,
and  practised  in
Columbus  until
1848,  in  which  year
he  was  chosen  to
the  state  legisla-
ture. About  this  period  Mr.  Dennison  became  in-
terested in  banking  and  in  railroad  affairs,  and
was  president  of  the  Exchange  bank  and  presi-
dent of  the  Columbus  and  Xenia  railroad  com-
pany. In  1856  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  fir-t  Na-


Ul '  Jr&u*^tffte


tional  convention  of  the Republican  partv. He
waeol n  governor ol  Ohio  in  lwio  by  the  Bepnb*

Means,  and  delivered  his  first  message  to  tl.<
eral  assembly  in  IStil.  At  hi-  suggestion  the  legis-
lature voted "$3,000,000  to  protect  the  state  -from
invasion  and  insurrection, '  and  conferred  power
upon  the  executive  to  raise  troops.  Gov.  Denni-
son  was  an  anti-slavery  man  and  an  ardent  admirer
of  President  Lincoln.  In  response  to  his  call  for
11,000  troops,  he  offered  30,000,  sending  agents  to
Washington  to  urge  their  acceptance,  lie  took
possession  of  the  telegraph  lines  and  railroads  in
the  name  of  the  state,  and  seized  money  in  tnui-
aitu  from  Washington  to  Ohio,  which  he  gave  to
the  quartermaster-general  to  clothe  and  equip  sol-
diers. Gov.  Dennison  was  a  delegate  to  the  Re-
pulilican  national  convention  in  1864,  and  was
elected  chairman.  He  was  appointed  bv  President
Lincoln  postmaster-general  in  1864,  and  continued
in  that  office,  under  President  Johnson,  until  his
resignation  in  1866.  Gov.  Dennison  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  Republican  convention  at  Chi-
cago in  1880,  and  was  leader  of  the  friends  of  Sena-
tor John  Sherman  during  the  struggle  for  the
nomination.  He  was  also  a  candidate  for  senator
in  that  year.  He  contributed  largely  to  Dennison
college,  Granville,  Ohio.

DENNY,  Thomas,  banker,  b.  in  Leicester,
Mass..  in  1804;  d.  in  New  York  city,  21  Oct.,  1874.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard,  with  honors,  in
1823.  studied  law  in  Boston,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  but  soon  removed  to  New  York  and  en-
gaged in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  1852  he  became
a  member  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  and  in  1858
formed  the  banking-house  of  Thomas  Denny  &
Co.  Mr.  Denny  took  deep  interest  in  the  promo-
tion of  education  and  philanthropic  and  Christian
effort,  ne  was  an  active  promoter  of  the  College
of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  of  the  Free  School
for  girls,  in  12th  street,  in  that  city.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Society  for  improving
the  condition  of  the  poor,  a  director  of  the  New
York  juvenile  asylum,  trustee  of  the  Society  for
the  relief  of  the  ruptured  and  crippled,  and  one
of  the  managers  of  tne  City  mission.

DENNY,  William,  deputy  governor  of  Penn-
sylvania, from  August,  1756,  till  October,  1759.
On  his  arrival  in  the  colony  he  was  warmly  wel-
comed: but  his  determination  to  obey  the  instruc-
tions of  the  proprietors  soon  rendered  him  un-
popular. He  had  frequent  disagreements  with  the
colonial  assembly,  but  his  need  of  money  finally
became  such  that  he  signed  a  bill  taxing  the  pro-
prietary interests,  which  action  led  to  his  recall.

DENONVILLE,  Jacques  Real  de  Br£say,
Marquis  de,  French  governor  of  Canada.  In  1685
he  succeeded  De  la  Barre  as  governor  of  Canada,
and  retained  that  office  for  four  years.  He  was  a
brave  soldier,  but  his  administration  of  the  duties
of  his  office  was  such  as  brought  the  French  colony
in  Canada  to  the  verge  of  ruin.  Acting  on  the  ad-
vice of  Louis  XIV.,  lie,  in  1687,  sent  forty-one  of
the  warriors  of  the  Five  Nations  across  the  ocean
to  be  chained  to  the  oar  in  the  galleys  of  Marseilles,
and  followed  up  this  act  of  cruelty  with  an  un-
provoked attack  upon  the  Senecas.  They  and
other  Indians  retaliated  so  successfully  that,  after
the  massacre  of  the  French  at  Lachine,  there  was
hardly  a  French  post  left  between  Three  Rivers
and  Mackinaw.  During  the  period  of  his  governor-
ship he  found  a  most  determined  opponent  to  the
French  claims  of  territorial  extension  in  Gov.
Dongan,  of  New  York,  who,  in  opposing  Denon-
ville  and  the  French,  was  acting  contrary  to  the
instructions  he  had  received  from  King  Charles


i»i:vrox


and  .lames.  It  wu  Donoimll.-  who  recommended
the  purchased  New  York  b)  the  Preneh.

hi  \  i . i  n  derich I ..  r,  b.  in  Cumber-

land,  M.I..  in I7n«»;  d. in Washington, I  >.  «

He  was  trained  in  commercial  pursuit-.
ami  became  it  merchant  in  Pittsburg  ami  -ul.-c-
quentl]  in  St.  Look,  accumulated  wealth,  and  had
a  wiil»-  refutation  f..r  hospitality,  lb-  wa-  tli-
father  of  Mr-  !it. In  politios  Mr.  Dent

.1  rigid  ami  aggressive  democrat,  his  views  co-
imiding  with  the  Benton-Jackson  school,  and  be
held  theae  opinions  tenaciously  to  the  last  <>f  his
life.  .Inlin  W.  Pomey,  in  his  ••  Aneodotei  <>f  I'ui*-
lie  Men,"  refers  to  him  as  a  very  interesting  old
gentleman,  kind,  humorous,  ami  genteel,  indicating
aii  independent  spirit  in  his  views,  and  exhibiting
nderfully  retentive  memory  f«T  byHgonc  daja,
Mr.  Deul  was  a  member  of  hi>  son-in-law  "s  hnneo

hold  after  (ien.  tJrant beoemc  commander  of  the

National  armies,  ami his  farm.  "White Haven,"

St. Louis.  beoaflM  the  (ieneral's  pCOPWiy, —

Hi-  -on.  Frederick  Tracy,  soldier.  l>.  in  White

Haven.  St.  Louis  co..  HO,  17  Dee..  1880,  ||,
graduated  at  the  C.  S.  military  academv  m
1H4:1.  made  brevet  id  lieutenant,  and  served  on
frontier  duty  and  in  garrison  prior  to  the  Mexi-
can war,  which  he  entered  in  1><47.  lie  WM  en-
gaged in  the  stage  of  Veni  Cruz,  the  capture  of
San  Antonio,  and  the  luittlcsof  ( 'huruhusco.  where
he  WSJ  severely  wounded,  and Molino  del  Key.  re-

nstving  for  gallant  and  meritorious  oondnoi  the

l.re\et-of  l>t  lieutenant  ami  captain.  He  served
thereafter  on  the  Pacific  railroad  survey,  on  fron-
tier duty  in  Idaho,  in  removing  the  Seminole  In-
dians, and  at  various  points  in  Texas,  Virginia,
and  Washington  territory,  until  he  joined  the
Yakima  expedition in 1806b He participated in

the  Bpofcanc  expedition  in  Washington  territory,
l>eing  engaged  in  the  combat  of  "  Four  Lakes"  in
J,  in  that  of  Spokane  Plain  in  the  same  year,
and  in  the  skirmish  on  that  river.  After  frontier
duty  at  Fort  Walla  Walla  he  became  a  member  of
the  Snake  river.  Oregon,  expedition,  to  rescue  the
survivors  of  t  he  massacre  of  Salmon  Fall  (1H«><>).  at
which  time,  1863.  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of
major,  and  was  in  command  of  a  regiment  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  in  18<>3.  in  New  York  city
called  to  suppress  anticipated  riots,  from  .Septem-
ber, 1863,  till  January.  is»»4.  serving  as  a  member
of  the  military  commission  for  the  trial  of  state
pri-oiurs  from'Januarv  till  March.  1S<>4,  Incoming
then  a  -tatT  oAoet  With  Lieut. -(Jen.  Grant,  baring
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  Aide-de-camp  dur-
ing (irant's  whole  time  as  lieutenant-general,  he
was  present  in  the  battles  and  military  operation!
of  the  Richmond  Campaign,  and  as  military  eoin-
niamler of  the  city  of  Richmond,  and  of  the  garri-
son of  Washington.  I>.  ('..  in  1808,  and  on  the  -talT
of  the  general-in-chief  at  Washington  after  1866,
as  colonel,  aide-de-camp,  and  secretary  to  Pre-i-
dent  Grant  daring  his  first  term.  For  his  gallant
and meritorious  BSlvioas in the  field during the

civil  warhewasbesretted  brigadier-general  I'.s.  a.

and  brigadier-general  oi  volunteer-. Be  was  trane-

ferred  to  the  14th  infantry  in  1866,  WBB  mad.-  lieu-
teiianl-colonel  of  the  Il'Jd  "infantry  in  1887,  OOsOnsl
of  the  1-t  artillery  in  1881,  and  at  his  own  request.
after  forty  years  of  service,  was  retired  in  December,
—  Hi-  lin.ther.  Louis,  lawyer,  l>.  in  St.  Louis
in  MB;  d.  in  Washington,  I>.  ('..  89  March.  1874.
received  a  liberal  education  in  his  native  citv.  and
.-•d  law.  About  I860  he  went  to  California,
where  he  engaged  in  business,  afterward  holding
the  office  of  judge.  In  1862  he  returned  to  St.
Louis,  and  from  1861  till  !*•:?  was  engaged  in  cot-


I  ton-planting  in  Hknunsnpl  and  hatMma^ Be

afterward  practi^-d  |aw in  Washington. During
the  reeonstruotion  period  be  drifted  into  soul
poiMoa,  having  removed  lo  Min-d-nippi,  and  in  1H69

nominated  for  governor  of  that  Mate  bi
National  union  republicans, s  nee  ;  died

on  the  basis  or  equal  right*,  general  aim
r- ciliation;  but  be  (fid n«-t  receive  the  «iip|x,rt

of  the  adiiniii-t ration  in  the  oanTasi Prior  to  bis

nomination, President <iratit wrote to him  : "I

would  regret  to  we  yoa  run  for  an  oenes,  and  \*-
defeated  by  my  aet;  but,  at  matter-  now  i.

mu-t  throw  the  Weigh!  of  my  iiitluence  iii  favor  of
the party  opj>o-,-d to  you."  '  Judge I>.  til
defending  hi-  party. Although the  demo

gave  their  vote-  to  Sir.  Dent,  he  received  Onll  half

I  as  many  as  Gov.  Alcorn,  the  regular  republican
nominee. After  tin-  he  settled  in  Washington.

DKNT.  tieorgc.  iiiciulier  of  congress,  l>.  m  Mary-
land alx.ut  I7<>0.  He  received  a  classical  education.
He  was  a  representative  in  congress  from  Mary-
land from  1788  till  1*01.  and  WSS  slootftd  Ic—po
rary  -(Maker  during  the  illness  of  S|K<aker  Davton,
80  April.  1788.  President  Jefferson  appointed  him
in  1801  c.  s.  marshal  f'»r  the  Potomac  district

DKNT.  John  Charles,  Canadian  journalist, h.
in  Kendall,  England,  8  Nov..  isji  :  d.  in  Toronto,
Canada.  87  Sept..  \hhh.  [|e  went  early  to  Canada,
studied  law.  and  practised  a  short  time  in  Ontario,
after  which  he  returned  to  England,  became  a  jour-
nalist, and  was  on  the  -tatT  of  the  London  ••  Tele-
graph." He  returned  again  to  Canada,  was  for
three  years  employed  on  the  Boston  "Globe/1  ami
subsequently  was  on  the  staff  of  the  Toronto
"Globe."  He  edited  the  •* Canadian  Portrait  Gal*
lerv  "  ( 1SN0),  and  is  the  author  of  ••Canada  since
the Union of 1«41  " (1SS1); "The Storv of the

l*p|M-r  Canada  Rebellion"  (1885-'6\  eta

DENT,  John  Herbert,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1788;  d.  in  St.  Bartholomew's  pariah,  Mary-
land. :il  .Inly.  1888.  He  became  a  midshipman,  i<>
March.  17!»N.  under  Truxtun.  in  the  frigate  "Con-
stellation," ami  was  on  board  when  she  captured
the  French  frigate  "  insurgents,"  1  Feb..  1798.  He
was  appointed  a  lieutenant.  11  July.  1788,  and  was
in  the  same  ship  when  -he  took  the  French  fri.
"La  Vengeance,"  1  Feb..  1800.  He  was  in  eons*
mand  of  the  schoonen  •■  Nautilus  "  and  ••  Scoui]
in  Preble's  squadron,  during  the  Tripolitan  war.
and  tiHik  part  in  the  attacks  on  the  city  of  Tripoli
in  1804.  He  wa-  commissioned  a  matter  com-
mander. 5  Sept..  1N04.  and  a  captain, 86  Deo,  181 L
DENTON,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  York-hire.
England,  in  1680;  d.  in  Essex,  England,  in  1668.

lie  was  graduated  at Cambridge  in 1668,  and  wa*

for  seven  yean  Presbyterian  minister  of  Colev
chapel,  parish  <>f  Halifax,  in  the  north  of  Kuglami.
The  act  of  uniformity  compelled  him  to  n-limpii-h
hi-  charge  ami  to  emigrate  to  America,  where  he
arrived  in  1686^  in  company  with  .John  Winthrop
and  Sir  Richard  SaltonatalL  He  t'trst  want  to
Watertown,  Mas-.:  then  in  WM  he  U-gan  tlie  s«-i-
tlement  of  Wet  her-lield.  In  lt>41  his  name  ap|>ears
among  the  early  settleri  of  Stamford,  and  in  1644
he  is  recorded  a-  one  >.f  the  original  proprietors  of
Hempstead.  L. I.,  where  he  e-tabli-hed  a I'r> -l-y-

terian  church  in  1844  In  1668  he  returned  to
England,  where  ksremsinsd  until  his  death. Be

WlbtS  "S>lil<Mpiia  Sa<n«."  which  was  much  praised
bv  his  contemporaries. —  1 1 1-  son.  Daniel,  wrote
■  \  Brief  Description  of  New  York"  (London,
1670),  which  was  republished  in  New  York  in  II
with  note-  iiy  Gabriel  Pniasan.  Thi-  booh  i-  sns>
l  to  be  the  first  printed  desoripfjon  in  Bk^hnn
of  New  York  and  New  Jersey.


144


DENVER


DEPEW


DENVER,  James  W„  i » .1  it i«-i.-m.  b.  in  Win-
chester, Va.,  In  1MK  He  received  a  public  school
education,  emigrated  in  ohildhood  with  his  per
rents  to  Ohio,  removed  to  .Missouri  in  1841,  when
he  studied  liiw,  and  WM  admitted  to  the  l»ir.  He
was  appointed  captain  of  the  12th  infantry  in
March,  1M47,  and  served  in  t Ins  war  with  .Mexico

till  its  close  in  July,  lH-i.s.  Removing  to  Cali-
fornia in  L850,  he  was  app>inted  a  member  of  a
relief  committee  to  protect  emigrants,  and  was
chosen  a  state  senator  in  1888,  While  a  member
of  this  body  in  1852,  he  had  a  controversy  with
Edward  Gilbert,  ex-member  of  oongreea,  in  regard
to  some  legislation,  which  resulted  in  a  challenge
from  Gilbert,  that  was  accepted  by  Denver.  Rifles.
were  the  weapons,  and  Gilbert  was  killed  by  t  he
second  shot.  In  1853  Mr.  Denver  was  appointed
secretary  of  state  of  California,  and  from  1855  till
1S")7  served  in  congress.  He  was  appointed  by
President  Buchanan  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs,
but  resigned,  and  was  made  governor  of  Kansas.
Resigning  this  poet  in  1858,  he  was  reappointed
commissioner  of  Indian  affairs,  which  office  he  held
till  March,  1859.  In  1861  he  entered  the  National
service,  was  made  brigadier-general,  served  in  the
western  states,  and  resigned  in  March,  18G3.  After-
ward he  settled  in  Washington,  D.  C,  to  practise
his  profession  as  an  attorney.  John  W.  Forney,
in  his  "Anecdotes  of  Public  Men,"  says:  "Gen.
Denver,  while  in  congress,  as  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  the  Pacific  railroad,  in  1854-'5,  presented
in  a  conclusive  manner  the  facts  demonstrating  the
practicability  of  that  great  enterprise,  and  the  ad-
vantages to  be  derived  from  it."
DE  PALM,  Joseph  Henry  Louis,  baron,  di-

Slomatist,  b.  in  Augsburg,  Germany,  10  Mav,  1809 ;
.  in  New  York,  21  May,  1876.  'His  father  was
Colonel  and  Adjutant-General  Baron  Johau  de
Palm,  prince  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  his  mother
the  Countess  Freyen  von  Seibolsdorf  of  Thune-
feldt.  The  Baron  de  Palm  was  for  a  long  time  in
the  German  diplomatic  service,  and  was  also  cham-
berlain to  the  king  of  Bavaria.  Jn  1862  he  came
to  the  United  States  and  spent  some  time  among
the  Indians  in  the  northwest,  and  subsequently  he
resided  in  New  York,  where,  a  short  time  before
his  death,  he  joined  the  Theosophical  society,  to
which  he  left  his  property.  In  accordance  with
his  own  wishes,  his  bodv  was  burned.

DE  PAUW,  John,  'lawyer,  b.  in  Kentucky;  d.
in  Indiana  in  1838.  His  father,  Charles,  a  native
of  Ghent,  French  Flanders,  accompanied  Lafayette
to  America,  and  fought  in  the  war  of  the  Revolu-
tion. When  the  son  had  reached  manhood  he  re-
moved from  Kentucky  to  Washington  county,  Ind.,
and,  as  agent  for  the  countv,  surveyed,  plotted,
and  sold  the  lots  in  Salem.  He  was  by  profession
an  attorney-at-law,  l)ecame  a  judge,  ana  was  also
a  general  of  militia.  —  His  son,  Washington
Charles,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Salem,  Ind.,  4  Jan.,
1822 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  5  May,  1887,  by  the  death
of  his  father  was  thrown  entirely  on  his  own  re-
sources at  the  age  of  sixteen.  When  nineteen  years
of  age  he  entered  the  office  of  the  county  clerk,
and  became  subsequently  clerk  of  circuit,  probate,
and  common  pleas  courts,  resigning  in  February,
1856.  He  afterward  engaged  in  nulling,  and  dealt
extensively  in  grain.  He  declined  the  nominations
for  lieutenant-governor  and  governor  of  Indiana.
After  ten  years'  study,  and  the  expenditure  of
$ 500,000,  Mr.  De  Pauw  succeeded  in  making  plate-
glass  equal  to  any  in  the  world,  and  thereafter
engaged  in  its  manufacture  in  New  Albany.  Ind.
He  became  wealthy,  and  used  his  means  freely  to
enlarge  the  city  of  New  Albany. He  established


C4lolmaju<*m"1.  ^cjuuur.


and  largely  endowed  De  Pauw  universitv,  Green-
oastle,  Ind..  to  which  healso  bequeathed  $1,500,000,

De  PaUW  female  college,  at New  Albany,  and  also

expended  large  sums  in  building  ohuronea  and  an-
dowing benevolent  institutions  throughout  Indiana
and  the  adjoining  states. He  gave  largely  for  the

support  of  superannuated  clergymen  of  the  Meth-
odist church.  During  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life
his  benefactions  amounted  to  more  than  $500,000,
DKPEW.  Chauncey  Mitchell,  lawyer,  b.  in
I'cekskill,  X.  V.,  23  April,  1834.  He  is  of  French
Huguenot  descent,  and  was  born  in  the  old  home-
stead that  has  lieen  in  the  possession  of  his  family
for  over  200  years.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
is.")*;,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  la-
gan his  active  work  at  an  exciting  period  in  our
political  life.  He
served  in  the  New
York  assembly  in
1861-'2,  and  dur-
ing the  second  ses-
sion was  chairman
of  the  ways  and
means  committee,
and  also  acted  as
speaker  of  the  as-
sembly during  a
portion  of  the
time.  He  can-
vassed the  state
for  Mr.  Lincoln
in  1860,  and  has
taken  part  in  al-
most every  sub-
sequent political
contest.  In  1863
he  was  elected  sec-
retary of  state,  but  declined  a  re-election  in  1865.
He  has  held  various  other  offices,  including  those
of  tax  commissioner  of  New  York  city  and  minister
to  Japan,  which  he  resigned  very  soon,  to  devote
himself  to  his  profession.  In  1866  he  was  appointed
attorney  for  the  New  York  and  Harlem  railroad
company,  and  when  the  Hudson  river  road  was
consolidated  with  the  New  York  central,  in  1869,
Mr.  Depew  was  again  made  the  general  counsel  of
the  consolidated  company.  He  was  candidate  for
lieutenant-governor  of  the  state  on  the  Liberal
Republican  ticket  in  1872,  but  was  defeated.  In
1874  he  was  the  choice  of  the  legislature  for  regent
of  the  State  university,  and  was  also  one  of  the
commissioners  to  build  the  capitol  at  Albany.
During  the  memorable  contest  in  the  assembly,
after  the  resignation  of  Senators  Conkling  and
Piatt  from  the  IT.  S.  senate,  and  in  the  election  of
the  successor  to  Mr.  Piatt,  Mr.  Depew  was  a  candi-
date for  eighty-two  days,  receiving  over  two  thirds
of  the  republican  vote,  but  retired  from  the  con-
test, that  the  election  of  Warner  Miller  might  be
assured.  On  the  reorganization  of  the  manage-
ment of  the  New  York  central  railroad  in  1882,
Mr.  Depew  was  made  second  vice-president,  and  on
the  death  of  James  Rutter,  14  June,  1885,  was
elected  to  the  presidency.  He  is  also  president  of
the  West  Shore  railroad  company.  Mr.  Depcw's
successful  directorship  of  railroads  is  largely  due
to  the  fact  that  he  is  master  of  all  the  detai
taining  to  the  road  and  its  policy,  and  zealously
supervises  its  interests.  He  is  president  of  the
Union  league  club  of  New  York,  and  of  the  Yale
alumni  association  of  that  city.  He  has  been  suc-
cessful as  a  lecturer,  while  his  ability  as  an  after-
dinner  speaker  has  won  his  most  popular  reputa-
tion. Among  his  more  notable  public  addresses
are  those  on  the  unveiling  of  the  statue  of  Alexan-


in: PKYSTKK


I>K I


14A


der  Hamilton,  on  (In-  centennial  of  tin-  formation
of  t  rk  State  constitution,  on  the  life  and

of  Uarfleld,  <>n  tin-  unveiling  "f  the  Bar-
tholdi  statue  of  liilxTlv,  ami  OB  the  Md  anniver-
sary «>f  the  Young  lien's.  Christian  associat  i- >n.
gajre  him  the  degree  <>f  LI*  I >.  in  1887.
HI  I'KYSTKR,  Johannes,  merchant.  >>.  In
Haarlem,  Holland, aboal  1<MM>;  d.  in  New  Amster-
dam (now  thfl  city  <>f  New  York)  about  16Mb The

name  was  originally  ■palled  "  IVijster."  "  IVister.''
or  "  Pester."  He tame  of  ■  French  Huguenot  fam-
ily that  took  refuge  in  the  United  Provmoee  about
thi-  t i in*-  <>f  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew. He

grated  to  this  country  on  aeoounl  <>f  religious
peraaoution.  Daring  the  brief  period  in  l678-'4
in  winch  tin-  Dutch  regained  possession  of  New
Ncthcrlaiid.  ha  tiM.k  a  prominent  part  in  the  con-
duct of  public  affairs,  and  he  was  one  of  the  last

ika  tlic  oath  <>f  allegiance  to  the  British  crown
on  tin*  final  cession  of  the  province  to  that  power.
Notwithstanding  this,  he  still  continued  active  in
municipal  affairs,  under  Knglish  supremacy,  at  dif-
ferent times  serviii;,'  as  alderman  aim  deputy  mayor,
luit  refusing  the  mayoralty  on  account  of  his  ig-
norance of  English.  At  the  time  of  his  death  ho
was  one  of  the  wealthiest  citizens  of  the  province,
of  his  sons  (besides  Abraham,  mentioned  below),
Johannes  filled  the  mayor's  chair;  Isaac  was  a
member  of  the  provincial  legislature;  and  Corn k-
i.ii's  was  the  first  chamberlain  of  the  city  of  New
York,  besides  acting  in  various  other  public  capaci-
ties.— Abraham,  chief  justice,  and  eldest  son  of
the  preceding,  b.  in  New  York  city,  8  July,  1658;
d.  there,  10  Aug.,  1728.  He  was  a  merchant,  and
aimisscd  much  wealth.  He  was  mayor  of  New
York  in  1691-'5,  and  subsequently  became  chief
justice  of  the  province  and  president  of  the  king's
council,  in  which  latter  capacity  he  acted  (in  1701)
as  governor.  He  was  also  appointed  colonel  of  the
forces  of  the  city  and  county  of  New  York,  and
treasurer  of  the  provinces  of  New  York  and  New
Jersey.  The  mansion  erected  by  him  in  1695,
which  at  one  time  was  the  headquarters  of  Wash-
ington, remained  standing  until  1856.  It  occu-
pied the  site  now  partly  covered  by  the  buildings
nmbared  178  and  180  Pearl  street.  The  bell
presented  by  him  to  the  Middle  Dutch  church,  in
Nassau  street,  a  short  time  before  his  death,  now
hangs  in  the  Collegiate  church,  on  Fifth  avenue
and  29th  street,  and  is  in  constant  use.  His  aLdeel
son,  Abraham,  was  treasurer  of  the  province  from
1781  till  1767. — A  re  nt  Schuyler,  soldier,  grand-
eon  of  Col.  Abraham  Schuyler,  b.  in  New  York  city,
27  June,  1736;  d.  in  Dumfries,  Scotland,  in  No-
vember, 1832.  He  entered  the  8th  regiment  of
foot  in  1755,  served  in  various  parts  of  North
America  under  his  uncle,  Col.  Peter  Schuyler,  and
-commanded  at  Detroit.  Mackinac,  and  various
places  in  Upper  Canada  during  the  American
Revolutionary  war.  The  Indian  tribes  of  the  north-
west were  then  hostile  to  the  British,  but  De  Pey-
ater,  by  his  tact  and  the  adoption  of  conciliatory

-  ires,  entirely  weaned  them  from  the  colonial-.
Having  risen  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  com-
manded his  regiment  many  years,  he  retired  t.i
Dumfries,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.  Dur-
ing thfl  Prench  revolution  he  had  a  large  share  in
enlisting  and  drilling  the  1st  regiment  <»f  Dumfries
volunteers,  one  of  the  original  members  of  which
was  UoU>rt  Burns,  who  dedicated  to  him  his  beam
>n  ••  Life."  and  with  whom  he  once  carried  on  a
etical  aontlWetSJ  in  the  coluiiin-  of  the  Dum-
•lournal."  His  nephew,  ('apt.  Arknt
tn  Da  Peystkr,  an  American  navigator.
several  times  around  the  globe,  and,  in  a  pas-

VOL.  U. — 10


sage from the  western  eoant of America |

.  utta.  dieenrered  m  the  Bouta  r

MMiiiicn leiandk which  but hi-,  name.—  Abra-
ham.-"Idicr.  nephew  of  Aretil Schuvler  H

stir.  b.  in  New  York  city  in

N.  B.,  about  1799. He  entered  the  British  service.

and rose  to  1m-  captain in the 4th.  or  "  K
American  regiment,  ranking  in  the  loyal  mi
colonel. Hcwasoriginally  MOOnd  in  command nt  the
bnttk  of  King's  Mountain,  S.  C.  (?  <  K-t ..  1780
eucceeded  to  the  command  on  the  death  of  M
gajMM. Capt.  D<-  IVvsti-r  had  1n-.ii  psJd  off  on  the
moniingof  theengagemeiit.and,  when  he  WM
by  a  bullet,  its  OOOBM  was  Stopped  by  a  doul>|iM>n
among  the  coin  in  his  vaet-pa  kit. lb- was.  h
wounded  and  taken  prisoner. At  the  close  of  the
war  in  11K\  he  WM  placed  on  thfl  half-pay  li-t.  re-
tired  to  St.  John,  N.  B..  ami  was  <>ue  of  thegi
of  that  city. He  also  acted  as  treasurer  of  tl
ince.— Frederick,  soldier,  brother  of  the  pp-c. -ding,
b.  in  New  York  city. While  Mill  a  minor  he  com-
manded  a  company  raised  for  the  protection  of  his
uncle,  William  Axtell,  a  member  of  the  eonnefl.
He  was  subsequently  a  captain  in  the  New  York
(loyalist)  volunteers. While  he  was  swimming  a
river on horseback in South Carolina, a  bullet
passed  through  Ix.th  of  his  legs  and  killed  the  tone.
At  the  storming  of  Port  Montgomery  in  1777.  a  de-
tachment of  his  regiment  was  the  first  to  enter  the
works. Like  his  brother  Abraham,  be  settled  in  St.
John,  N.  B.,  after  the  war,  ami  received  the  grant
of  a  city  lot. In  1798  be  Barred  as  a  magistrate  in
the  countv  of  York. He  afterward  returned  bo
the  United  States.— James,  soldier,  brother  of  the

S receding,  h.  in  New  York  city  ;  d.  in  battle  in  Plan-
ers, 18  Aug.,  17!»:{.  He  war  captain-lieutenant,  or
lieutenant  commanding  the  colonel's  company,  bn
the  4th,  or  "  King's"  American  regiment,  entering
the  service  when  nineteen  years  of  age.  In  17>">  he
was  com  missioned  1st  lieutenant  in  the  Koval  artil-
lery, commanded  by  his  brother-in-law.  Col.  James.
At  that  time  be  had  the  reputation  of  beingone  of
the  handsomest  men  in  the  British  army.  He  was
killed,  near  Menin,  during  the  campaign  in  Flan-
ders. The  month  previous  be  had  a  remarkable  es-
cape from  death  at  the  siege  of  Valenciennea,  being
buried  alive  by  the  explosion  of  a  mine. — Fred-
eric, Jr.,  lawyer,  son  of  Frederick,  b.  in  New  York
city.  11  Nov..'  17!>t»:  d.  in  Tivoli.  N.  Y.,  17  Aug,
1882,  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1M6,
and  admitted  to  thfl  bar  in  1819.  In  1880  he  had
been  appointed  master  in  chancery,  and  held  the
office  until  1K17.  when  his  inherited  fortune  had
been  so  largely  increased  by  judicious  Investments,
that  be  waa  compelled  to  resign  his  office  and  de-
vote himself  to  the  management  of  his  estate.  He
was  at  various  periods  a  trustee  of  the  Bible  soci-
ety, and  served  00  the  boardl  of  management  of
many  charitable  and  educational institution-.  l>e-

sjdee  giving  liberally  to  their  support. He  was  at

different  times  president  of  the  New  York  histori-
cal society,  a  founder  and  director  of  the  Home
for  incurable-,  and  vice-president  of  the  8
for  the  prevention  of  crueltv  t<>  children,  founder
of  the  .Soldiers'  home  erected  by  tin-  (imnd  Aniiv
Of  the  Republic,  and  a  trustee  of  the  New  York
society  library.  In  is<i7  he  received  the  degree  of
I.I..  D.  from  Columbia,  and  in  1*77  was  i
an  honorary  fellow  of  the  ltoval  historical  society
of  Great  Britain.  Several  of  his  addresses  have
boon  published  in  jMunphlet-form. — John  Watts,
son  of  the  preceding,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city.
9  March,  1*21. II  ated  at  Columbia,  but

\\a-  not  graduated  mi  account of  his  health. Iii
1845  he  was  eleeU-d  to  the  coh.nwlcy  of  the  111th


146


I»K ITV


DERBY


regiment  of  New  York  militia,  and,  on  the  mili-
tary reorganization  oi  the  state,  he  was  mimed
to  tin'  command  of  the  22d  district,  and  in  1*~>1
was  promoted  lirigadier-general.  In  1855  he  was
appointed  adjutant -general,  which  office  he  soon
resigned,  but  In  April,  1806,  was  brevetted  major-
genetsL  Gen.  De  Peyster  assisted  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  present  police  force  of  the  city  of  New
York,  and  is  the  author  of  a  series  of  reports  in
favor  of  a  paid  fire  department,  with  fire-escapes
and  steam-engines  (1852-'3).  He  has  been  a  vo-
luminous contributor  to  |>eriodical  literature,  be-
sides writing  numerous  works  on  military  topics.
Among  the  latter  are  "Life  of  Field  -  Marshal
Torstenson"  (1855):  "The  Dutch  at  the  North
Pole"  (1857);  "Caurausius,  the  Dutch  Augustus"
(1858) :  "  Life  of  Baron  Cohorn  "  (1860) ;  and
■  Personal  and  Military  History  of  Gen.  Philip
Kearny"  (1869). — John  Watts,  Jr.,  soldier,  son  of
the  preceding,  b.  in  New  York,  2  Dec.,  1841 ;  d.  there
12  April,  1873.  In  March,  1862,  he  left  the  law-
school  of  Columbia  college  and  joined  the  staff  of
Gen.  Philip  Kearny  as  volunteer  aide,  participating
in  the  battle  of  Williamsburg.  He  for  a  time
commanded  a  company  of  New  York  cavalry,  was
afterward  major  of  the  1st  New  York  artillery,  and
still  later  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Peck.  He
was  then  prostrated  by  fever,  and,  after  a  severe
illness  of  several  months,  returned  to  the  field  in
the  winter  of  1863.  For  his  zeal,  capacity,  and
energy,  displayed  in  the  Chancellorsville  cam-
paign and  in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  he  was
promoted  to  be  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel.  He
remained  with  the  armv  until  midsummer  of  the
same  year,  when  his  increasing  weakness  com-
pelled him  to  resign.

DE  PU  Y,  Henry  Walter,  lawyer,  b.  in  Pompey
Hill,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1820 ;  d.  2  Feb.,  1876.
He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
New  York.  He  was  private  secretary  to  Gov.
Horatio  Seymour  during  his  term  of  1853-'4,  and
subsequently  served  as  U.  S.  consul  at  Carlsruhe,
and  as  secretary  of  legation  at  Berlin  in  1854,
which  place  he  resigned  to  take  part  in  the  political
struggle  of  1860.  From  President  Lincoln  he  re-
ceived the  appointment  of  secretary  of  the  state  of
Nebraska,  organized  that  territory,  and  served  as
the  first  speaker  of  its  legislature.  He  was  also
Indian  agent  to  the  Pawnees,  under  President  Lin-
coln, and  devoted  much  time  and  energv  to  reform
the  Indian  service  of  the  government.  For  several
years  he  edited  and  published  a  newspaper  in
Indianapolis,  Ind.,  in  support  of  the  liberal  party,
being  a  warm  friend  of  Gov.  Chase.  He  was  a
constant  contributor  of  political  articles  to  the
press,  the  author  of  several  popular  poems,  and  of
the  following  works :  "  Kossuth  and  his  Generals,"
with  a  brief  history  of  Hungary  (New  York,
1851) ;  "  Louis  Napoleon  and  his  Times,"  with  a
memoir  of  the  Bonaparte  family  (1853) ;  "  Ethan
Allen  and  the  Green  Mountain  Heroes  of  '76,"
with  the  early  history  of  Vermont  (1853);  and
"  Threescore  Years  and  Beyond  "  (1873).

DEQUEN,  or  DE  KEN,"  Jean,  missionary,  b.  in
France  early  in  the  17th  century ;  d.  in  Quebec  in
1659.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1635,  and  labored  in
Quebec.  He  was  superior  of  the  Jesuits  of  Canada
from  1656  till  his  death,  which  was  occasioned  by
his  devotion  to  the  sick  during  a  season  of  pesti-
lence. He  was  the  author  of  the  "  Relation  de  la
Nouvelle  France  "  for  1656.

mi!  lUi.  \  \  Pierre  Angnste  Charles  Bon-
risgav,  fifth  governor  of  Louisiana,  b.  in  France ;
d.  in  "New  Orleans,  6  Oct.,  1829.  Compelled  to
leave  France  during  the  Revolution,  he  first  went


to  Santo  Domingo,  and  thence  to  the  United  States,
living  for  awhile  in  Pittsburgh,  I'enn..  where  he
married  the  sister  of  ( 'hevalier  de  Loskd  Here-
moved  to  Missouri  and  to  Florida,  and  finally  set-
tled in  Louisiana.  In  1803  he  acted  as  Mayor
BorseVs  secretary,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  the
same  year  his  linguistic  acquirements  led  Gov.
Claiborne  to  appoint  him  interpreter  of  languages
for  the  territory.  During  Gov.  Claiborne's  ad-
ministration in  January.  1805,  the  petition  of  "the
merchants,  planters,  and  other  inhabitants  of  Ixm-
isiana,"  signed  by  Destreleau,  Sauve,  and  Derbigny,
their  delegates,  was  read  and  referred  in  the  l
senate.  The  delegates  in  this  memorial  energetic-
ally insisted  on  the  rights  of  the  inhabitants  of
Louisiana  to  be  promptly  admitted  into  the  con-
federacy as  citizens  of  a  sovereign  state.  But,  not-
withstanding their  zeal  and  the  ability  displayed
by  them,  Derbigny  and  his  coadjutors  were  not
successful  in  their  efforts.  In  March,  however,  an
act  was  approved  "providing  for  the  government
of  the  territory  of  Orleans."  The  three  agents  set
forth  their  views  in  a  sensational  pamphlet,  hav-
ing been  convinced  that  the  government  was  un-
candid  to  the  agents  and  unjust  to  the  inhabitants
of  Louisiana.  Mr.  Derbigny  afterward  held  other
offices  in  the  state,  such  as"  clerk  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  secretary  of  the  legislative  council,
member  of  the  lower  house  of  the  first  state  legis-
lature, and  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  He  de-
livered the  first  fourth-of-July  oration  made  in  the
territory,  and  was  appointed  in  1820,  with  Living-
stone and  Moreau,  to  revise  the  laws  of  Louisiana ;
in  the  same  year  receiving  the  first  license  to  run
a  steam  ferry  across  the  Mississippi  at  New  Or-
leans. As  a  personal  friend  of  Gen.  Lafayette,  he
was  his  representative  in  legal  and  business  affairs
in  Louisiana  until  his  death,  when  Lafayette's
power  of  attorney  was  transferred  to  the  son,
Charles  Derbigny.  In  1828,  when  Gov.  Johnson's
term  of  office  expired,  he  was  succeeded  by  Pierre
Derbigny,  the  first  year  of  whose  administration
was  marked  by  the  visit  to  New  Orleans  of  Gen.
Jackson,  who  had  been  invited  by  the  legislature
to  participate  in  the  celebration  of  the  anniversary
of  his  victory  of  8  Jan.,  1815.  Gov.  Derbigny  was
killed,  soon  after  the  expiration  of  his  first  year  as
state  executive,  by  being  thrown  from  his  carriage.

DERBY,  James  Cephas,  publisher,  b.  in  Little
Falls,  N.  Y,  20  July,  1818.  He  was  educated  at
the  grammar-school  in  Herkimer,  N.  Y.  He  was
apprenticed  to  the  book-selling  business  in  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  in  1833,  and  afterward  was  in  business  on
his  own  account,  both  there  and  in  New  York  city.
Among  the  American  authors  whose  works  he  pub-
lished were  the  Cary  sisters,  B.  P.  Shillaber,  b.  G.
Goodrich,  Henry  Wikoff,  Henry  Ward  Beecher,
Augusta  J.  Evans,  Thomas  Badey  Aldrich,  and
Marion  Harland.  He  retained  for  years  the  friend-
ship of  such  men  as  William  H.  Seward,  Alexan-
der H.  Stephens,  and  Horace  Greeley.  He  is  him-
self the  author  of  "  Fifty  Years  among  Authors,
Books,  and  Publishers  "  (New  York,  1884).

DERBY,  Richard,  merchant,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1712;  d.  there  9  Nov.,  1783.  In
1 736  he  was  master  of  the  sloop  "  Ranger,"  sail-
ing from  Salem  for  Cadiz  and  Malaga,  and  in
1742  master  and  part  owner  of  the  "  Volant."
bound  for  Barbadoes  and  the  French  island-.  In
1757  Capt.  Derby  appears  to  have  retired  from
the  sea,  relinquished  his  vessels  to  his  sons  John
and  Richard,  and  become  a  merchant  of  Salem.
His  vessels  were  exposed  not  only  to  the  dangers
of  the  sea  but  also  to  the  French  and  English
cruisers. During  the French  war, 1756-'63,  he


DEBBY


147


owned  several  ships  ami  hrigantincs.  Hi  took  a
led  part  iti  leaking  redress  from  tin-  British
ministry  for  wrongs  <l<>n«-  t<>  American  shipping
by  English  privateer*  From  17»ii»  till  l?v:i  M
was  a  memlier  of  the  general  court,  in  1774.  177H.
nml  1777  a  member  of  the  governor's  council. In

17?  J '">. liis son Billiard whs  a  dolojnte U)  the

rinrial congress. In tin- narrative  of  the
h  of  Leslie  to  Balam  it  is  related  that  ('apt.
t'V  was  owner  of  some  of  the  cannon  that  CoL
-mil  to  seize. Meeting  the  old  gentle-
man  before  bii  DOOM  in  Salem,  he  demanded  the
surrender  of  tin-  cannon,  and  "urged  him  to  de-
Iiv.t  them  up  without resistance." Derby's  reply
was  as significant as that of the old Sjmrt.ni  :

"Find  them,  if  you  oan!  take  them,  if  you  can!
they  will  never  l>c  surrendered!"  Mis  widow
banded  the  Derby-  academy,  at  Bingham.  His
■Ideal  ton,  Kit-hard,  was  an' ardent  patriot;  and
another  of  his  sons,  John  Derby,  was  an  owner
of  the  ship  "Colombia,"  which,  on  her  second
voyage,  discovered  Colombia  river.  By  a  remark-
able concurrence  of  events,  and  bv  the  uncom-
mon speed  of  two  ship-,  owned  bv  his  father  and
brother,  be  carried  to  England  the  first  news  of
the  Iwttle  of  lA'xinjrton.  returned  to  Beieffl  with
the  tlrst  intelligence  of  the  effect  it  produced  in
London,  which  he  laid  before  Gen.  Washington,
at  Cambridge,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  brought
to  America  from  France  the  first  news  of  peace.
— His  son,  Ellas  Hasket.  merchant,  l>.  in  Salem,
Mass..  HI  Aug.,  17:5!>:  d.  there,  8  Sept.,  1799.  In
early  life  he  kept  the  books  and  conducted  the  cor-
respondence of  his  father,  and  he  seems  to  have
been  the  accountant  of  his  family.  From  1760
till  1775  he  not  only  took  charge  of  the  books,
wharves,  and  other  property,  but.  imbibing  the  spirit
of  his  father,  and  acquiring  through  him  ana  his
captains  a  knowledge  of  commerce,  he  engaged
extensively  in  trade  with  the  English  and  French
islands.  He  made  important  improvements  in  ship-
building, and  warmly  espoused  the  cause  of  the
eoloni-ts.  He  loaned  the  government  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  supplies  for  the  armv,  furnished
boats  for  the  troops,  furnished  the  French  fleet
with  coal,  and  was  the  leader  in  building  a  frigate
for  the  nation.  He  was  also  extensively  and  suc-
cessfully engaged  in  privateering  against  Rritish
commerce.  As  the  war  progressed,  ne  established
ship-yards,  studied  naval  architecture,  and  built  a
class  of  vessels  superior  in  size,  model,  and  speed  to
any  previously  launched  in  the  colonies,  which
were  able  to  cope  with  a  British  sloop-of-war.  He
united  with  his  townsmen  in  the  equipment  of  158
private  armed  vessels  fitted  out  at  Salem,  mounting
more  than  2,000  guns.  In  1784  he  opened  the  trade
to  St.  Petersburg,  and  from  1785  till  1799  there  is

rd  of  his  sending  at  least  87  different  vessels
on  125  voyages,  of  which  45  were  to  the  East  Indies
or  China.  In  1791  he  embarked  in  the  regular
trade  with  India,  and  is  called  the  father  of  Amer-
ican commerce  with  that  country.  After  this  hi-
ships  made  many  voyages  to  foreign  ports.  Be
first  displayed  the  American  flag  before  the  fortress
of  Calcutta,  and  his  were  the  first  American  ships
that  carried  cargoes  of  cotton  from  Bombay  to
China.  In  179m.  under  President  John  Adams,
a  navy  was  begun,  and  Mr.  Derby  contributed
810,000  of  the  $75,000  raised  by  citizens  at  once.

establishment  was  the  result  of  Mr.  Derby-
advice  to  the  president  and  congress,  which  holly
in  June  passed  an  act  authorizing  the  president
to  accept  -in  h  vessels  as  citizens  might  build  for
the  national  service,  and  to  issue  a  six-|H-r-cent
Stock  to  indemnify  the  subscribers. Though  the


war  MffOMty  impaired  the  trade  and  fortunes  of
ship-owner-.  \.t  at  Mr.  Derby's  death  he  left  an
e-tate  that  exceeded  fl.OOOJWb,  Mppoted  to  I*  the
largest  fortune  m  this  country  during  the  hut  cen-
tury: but  he  had  contributed  »till  more  to  the
gfOWth  of  hi-  town. state,  and  the  eOUNm  of  his
country.  Hi-  mansion,  which  he  had  occupied
a  few  months  pwrlOM  to  big  death,  required  an
ex|Hii-i\e -tyleof  living,  and  in  consequence  many
of  the  buildings  and  gardens  were  clow**]  for  years
after  his  death,  and  finally  BH  wav  to  the  Salem
square  and  market-sjiace  that  now  bear  the  name  of
Derby.— Mi-  eldest  son,  Ellas  Ha-k.  t.
chant,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass..  in  Jan..  17'Mi;  d.  m  Lon-
donderry, N.  II..  it!  s-pt..  ls-^i.  ii, ,  lather  >tl

high  appreciation  of  Jus  services,  asha\  inc.  bl  two
im|M.rtant  voyages,  contributed  largely  to  his  f,,r-
tiin. — the  one  to  the  isle  of  France, 'the  other  to
Naples.  \-\,r  ten  years  after  his  father's  death  he
occupied  the  paternal  mansion,  hut.  finding  his  for-
tune impaired  by  the  requirements  of  its  luxurious
appointment-  and  the  adver-c  e0UM  of  trade,  he
resumed  business.  On  one  voyage  from  Ixnidoo  to
Lisbon  Be  found  that  large  loan  of  merino  •heap
had  crossed  the  mountains  to  escajM-  the  French
armies,  and  determined  to  take  a  flock  to  the  Daitsd
States.  L'ntil  this  |>crit»d  the  exjM.rt  of  tin  |
had  been  prohibited  in  Spain,  The  w<ml  of  this
country  was  so  coarse  that  an  English  traveller  had

f.iedicted  it  would  never  rival  England  in  cloth.
Jen.  Derby  embarked  with  a  flock  of  1,100  meri-
nos of  the Montaroo breed,  and  in  181 1  landed  them
in  New  York,  whence  they  were  sent  to  his  farm,
"Ten  Hills."  near  Boston.  During  the  war  bt
tablished  the  first  broadcloth  loom  ever  erected  in
the  state.  He  remained  a  year  in  the  i-le  of  France
in  charge  of  his  father's  vessel,  and  was  the  first  to
display  our  ensign  in  the  ports  of  Bombay  and
Calcutta,  establishing  the  trade  in  those  parts.
After  a  residence  of  three  years  in  India,  the  ie-ult
of  one  of  his  voyages  was  a  profit  of  $100,000  to
his  father.  Boon  afterward  lie  sent  a  ■hipon  the
first  voyage  from  the  United  States  to  Mocha,  in
the  Bed  Sea.  The  children  of  the  senior  Elias
Hasket  completed  the  Derby  wharf  in  Salem, extend-
ing it  2,000  feet  into  the  harbor,  contributed  largely
to  the  construction  of  a  bridge  and  avenue,  and
levelled  and  improved  the common.  Bo  reprised  an
honorary  degree  from  Harvard  university  in  1KK1. —
Hi-  eldest  son.  Elias  Hasket,  lawyer,  1>.  In  Salem,
Mass..  24  Sept..  1S(»:{;  d.  in  Boston.  Mass..  ;tu
March,  1H80,  was  graduated  with  high  honors  at
Harvard  in  1884,  studied  law  with  Daniel  Wclwter,

began  practice  in  Boston  in  1887, and  attained  rep-
aration as  a  railroad  attorney.  Before  legislative
committees  he  encountered  successfully  the  ablest
counsel  of  the  state,  and  secured  the  extension  of
many  Important  lines  of  road.  To  his  unremitting
efforts  was  largely  due  the  construction  and  com-
pletion of  the  Boosac  tunnel.  He  was  also  zealous
in  his  efforts  to  secure  the  const  ruction  of  iron-clad
vessels  during  the  civil  war. and  was  active  in  pro-
moting the  commercial  interests  of  Boston.  As
I'.S.  commissioner  in  1887,  Mr.  Derby  transmittal
to  Sex-.  .Seward  an  exhaustive  repafi  on  the  rclsti"iis
of  the  United  States  with  the  British  provinces
and  the  condition  of  the  question  of  the  fisheries.
It  was  largely  through  his  efforts  that  the  iw  ->f
jute  was  introduced  into  the  I'nitcd  States,  lb-
was  the  author  of  "  Two  Months  Abroad  "  (Boston.
1M44):  "Catholic  Letters"  (Boston,  1856);  "The
Overland  Boute  to  the  Pacific,"  and  numerous
articles  in  periodicals  and  newspapers,  some  of
them  under  the  pen-name  of  M  Massachusetts."—
(••urge,  sanitarian,  nephew  of  Elias  Hasket,  Jr.,


148


DERBY


DE ROSSET


b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1819;  d.  in  Boston,
Ma--..  80  June,  1*74,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1888  in  the  collegiate  department,  and  in  IHA'.i
in  the  medical  school,  and  began  practice  in  Bos-
ton, giving  much  attention  to  sanitary  science.
He  had  acquired  a  lucrative  practice  and  a  wide
reputation  by  his  writings  on  sanitary  subjects  be-
fore he  entered  the  army  in  November,  1861,  at
which  time  ho  was  commissioned  surgeon  in  the
2;id  Massachusetts  volunteers,  serving  for  four
years,  and  holding  several  important  offices,  among
tin-in  those  of  medical  inspector  of  the  Department
of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  and  surgeon-in-
chief  of  divisions,  finally  attaining  the  rank  of
brevet  lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers.  His  ser-
vices were  regarded  as  most  valuable,  not  only  to
his  regiments  but  to  the  health  and  sanitary  con-
dition of  the  army,  and  the  government  gave  him
the  last-named  commission  when  his  health  had
compelled  him  to  leave  the  army.  After  the  war
he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Soldiers'
hospital  at  Augusta,  Me.,  but  he  returned  to  Boston
in  1866,  was  appointed  one  of  the  surgeons  at  the
City  hospital,  and  early  set  about  the  establishment
of  a  state  board  of  health,  of  which  he  was  secre-
tary and  executive  officer  from  January,  1866,  until
his  death. In  1872  he  was  appointed  to  the  new

{>rofessorship  of  hygiene  at  Harvard  medical  col-
ege.  His  eight  health  registration  reports  were
published,  and  gave  rise  to  new  views  and  reforms
in  sanitary  science.  He  published  a  series  of  ar-
ticles in  the  annual  report  of  the  Massachusetts
board  of  health,  which  brought  him  to  the  notice  of
sanitarians  at  home  and  abroad.  He  issued  a  trea-
tise on  "  Anthracite  and  Health  "  (Boston,  1868).—
George's  half-brother,  John  Barton,  author,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Boston  in  1867,
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1811,  studied  law  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  and  began  practice  in  Ded-
ham.  In  the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  lived  in
Boston,  where  he  held  a  subordinate  office  in  the
custom-house,  and  afterward  became  a  familiar
object  in  State  street,  gaining  a  precarious  living
by  selling  razors  and  other  small  wares,  and  amus-
ing himself  by  writing  poetry.  He  published
'•Musings  of  a  Recluse"  (Boston,  1837);  "The
Sea"  (1840);  and  "The  Village"  (1841).— John
Barton's  son,  George  Horatio,  soldier,  b.  in  Ded-
ham,  Mass.,  3  April,  1823 ;  d.  in  New  York,  15
May,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in
1846,  and  made  brevet  2d  lieutenant  of  ordnance.
He  was  transferred  in  1846  to  the  corps  of  topo-
graphical engineers,  and  later  in  the  same  year
served  as  assistant  on  the  survey  of  New  Bed-
ford harbor,  Mass.  In  the  war  with  Mexico  he
served  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  was  severely
wounded  in  the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and  for  gal-
lant and  meritorious  conduct  in  that  battle  was
brevetted  1st  lieutenant.  After  his  official  duties
as  assistant  in  the  topographical  bureau  in  Wash-
ington, he  conducted  various  surveys,  1847-'8,  and
also  explorations  in  Minnesota  territory,  1848-'9,
and  in  the  Departments  of  the  Pacific  and  Texas,
1849-52.  He  had  charge  of  the  survey  and  improve-
ments of  San  Diego  harbor,  California,  1853-'4,
was  on  the  staff  of  the  commanding  general  of
the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  and  of  military
roads  in  the  same  division  in  1854-'6,  and  was  coast
surveyor  and  light-house  engineer  in  1856-'9.  He
rose  to  the  rank  of  captain  of  engineers,  and  for
two  years  was  employed  by  the  government  in
erecting  light-houses  on  the  Florida  and  Alabama
coast.  In  the  discharge  of  his  duty  in  Florida
he  suffered  a  sunstroke,  which  affected  his  sight
and  caused  softening  of  the  brain,  from  which  he


died  after  his  removal  to  New  York.  Under  the
pen-name  "John  Phoenix"  he  wrote  a  series  of
sketches  and  burlesques,  which  were  published
with  the  title  of  "Phoenixiana"  (New  York,  1866V
He  was  also  the  author  of  "  The  Squibob  Papers  "
(1859),  under  which  name  other  of  his  articles  were
published  after  his  death.

DE  ROSSET,  Armand  John,  physician,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  17  Nov.,  1767 ;  d.  there.  1  April,
1859.  He  was  the  son  of  Moses  John  De  Ro-
of London,  and  Mary  Ivie,  a  native  of  the  West
Indies.  In  1784  he  was  matriculated  at  Princeton.
At  the  close  of  the  first  session  of  his  collegiate
course,  a  fellow-student,  Robert  Goodloe  Harper,
observing  his  rigid  economy  and  close  attention  to
duties,  and  his  determination  to  remain  at  the  col-
lege during  vacation,  for  want  of  funds  to  defray
the  expenses  of  the  journey  home,  offered  to  be  his
teacher  in  the  studies  of  the  next  year.  The  offer
was  gladly  accepted,  and  at  the  opening  of  the
next  session  De  Rosset  was  promoted  to  an  ad-
vanced class,  completing  his  course  in  three  years.
While  at  the  medical  college  he  enjoyed  the  friend-
ship of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  with  whom  he  held  a
long  correspondence,  many  copies  of  the  letters  of
the  latter  being  still  in  the  possession  of  the  family.
He  was  appointed  by  the  president  of  the  United
States  to  be  post-physician,  which  office  he  held  for
many  years.  During  two  or  more  terms  he  served
in  the  town  government.  His  writings  were  con-
fined to  communications  to  medical  publications,
no  copies  of  which  are  known  to  exist.  A  pam-
phlet, "De  febribus  intermittentibus,"  a  Latin
thesis,  delivered  at  his  graduation,  was  published
in  1790. — His  son,  Moses  John,  physician,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  11  Jan.,  1796;  d.  there,  30
June,  1826,  was  graduated  at  the  New  York  medi-
cal college  in  1817  or  1818.  He  was  associated  in
practice  with  his  father  from  1818  until  his  death.
— His  daughter,  Mary  Jane,  married  the  Rev.
Moses  Ashley  Curtis,  the  botanist. — His  son,  Ar-
mand John,  physician,  b.  in  Wilmington,  6  Oct.,
1807,  attended  the  medical  college  of  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1826-'7,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1827.  He  practiced  his  profession  in  Wilmington
from  1828  till  1837,  when  he  engaged  in  mercan-
tile affairs,  which  he  relinquished  a  few  years
since. — His  grandson,  Moses  John,  phvsician,  b.
in  Pittsboro,  N.  C,  4  July,  1838 ;  d.  in  Wilming-
ton, 1  May,  1881,  in  youth  showed  remarkable
aptitude  for  languages  and  mathematics.  He
passed  three  years  in  Geneva  at  the  famous  school
of  Diedrich,  and  spent  six  months  in  Cologne  to
perfect  himself  in  German.  He  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  New
York  in  1859,  was  appointed  resident  physician  at
Bellevue  hospital,  New  York,  and  entered  upon
the  duties  in  1859.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  assistant
surgeon,  and,  after  serving  through  Stonewall  Jack-
son s  valley  campaign,  was  promoted  to  full  sur-
geon, and  assigned  to  duty  in  Richmond.  Subse-
quently he  was  detached  as  inspector  of  hospitals
of  the  Department  of  Henrico.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  moved  to  Baltimore,  where  he  was  appointed
adjunct  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Maryland.  He  was
also  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  dental  college  in
that  city.  He  here  prepared  himself  for  practice
in  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear,  and  in  1873  removed
to  Wilmington,  N.C.,  and  devoted  himself  to  this
specialty,  and  became  a  contributor  to  the  "  North
Carolina  Medical  Journal."  He  removed  I
Antonio,  Texas,  on  account  of  hisjiealth,  but,  find-


[>!•: IMTTKNBI l«i


DESAt  I .\


L40


lag  m>  relief,  returned  to  Wilmington  in  s< j

: During  bis  residence  in  Baltimore  he
published  »  translation  of  Boucbsj  mual

mil  of  Therapeutics,  Materia  Medica,  Phar-
macy, and  Toxleotogi f"r 1867." Hii  writingi

chiefly  contributions  to  medical  Kaimaw.  lils.
last  regular  paper being  communicated t<>  tin*

ii-ri<  an  Journal  <>f  the  Medical  Sciences"  for
entitled  "The  Muscle  of  Accommo-
dation, and  its  Mods  of  Action."  Be  deriaad  a
new  and  efficient  fonn  of  inhaler  for  an.rMli.sja,
and  a  new  form  of  oanula  scissors  for  operating
within  the  eye.  1 1 «-  demonatrated  by  froaen  sec-
tion that  after  the  extraction  of  the  lam  the  Ian*

tiiular  fossa  disap|H«ars.  and  the  anterior  surface
of  the  vitreous  beootnei  convex.

DB  BOTTENBURG,  Baron,  British  soldier,  b.
aUuit  l?.'»»i;  (1.  in  England  in  1899. After aarring

in  the  British  army  in  different  parts  of  the  world
and  attaining  tin-  rank  of  brigadier-general  in
May.  1H10,  he  was  transferred  to  the  staff  in  Cana-
da. He  took  command  of  the  garrison  of  (Quebec,
and  the  same  vear  was  promoted  to  major-general.
At  the  beginning  Of  the  American  war  in  1819  he
was  assigned  to  the  Montreal  district,  look  com-
mand of  the  fore*  in  Upper  Canada  in  1813,  and
was  appointed  also  administrator  of  that  province.
In  l*14-'5  ha  commanded  the  left  division  of  the
army  in  Camula,  and  in  September  of  the  latter

Sir  returned  to  Kngland. — His  son.  who  l>ccnme
ron  De  Rottenburg  at  his  father's  death,  was  b.
about  1807.  He  entered  the  British  army  as  a  cor-
net in  1825,  and  in  1837  served  in  Canada  during
the  rebellion,  and  received  the  brevet  rank  of  ma-
jor. Subsequently  he  served  in  the  46th  foot,  and
was  nominated  as  assistant  adjutant-general  in
Canada.  In  July,  1855,  he  was  appointed  adju-
tant-general of  the  militia  of  Upper  Canada,  which
rank  ne  retained  until  June,  1858,  when  he  was
appointed  to  the  lieutenant-colonelcy  of  the  100th
regiment  (Canadian),  recently  organized  and  em-
bodied in  the  British  army.

DE  Rl'SSY,  Louis  G.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
in  1796 ;  d.  in  Grand  Ecore,  La.,  17  Dec.,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academv  in
1*14.  and  made  3d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillery.
Hit  Barred  in  the  war  of  1812-'5,  with  Great  Brit-
ain, as  acting  assistant  engineer  in  erecting  tempo-
rary defences  for  New  York  city  and  it  -  environ-.
and  was  in  garrison  in  New  York  harbor  in  1H1">  •'..
when  he  was  made  battalion  adjutant  of  artillery.
In  1819  he  became  topographer  of  a  commission  to
establish  the  northern  boundary  of  the  United
States  under  the  treaty  of  Client.  He  U-came  cap-
tain of  the  3d  artillery  in  1896,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  was  made  paymaster  and  major.  In  1849
he  was  dropped  from  the  army,  and  became  a
planter  at  Natchitoches,  La.  In  1846  he  Barred  in
the  Mexican  war  at  Tampico,  and  became  colonel
of  the  1st  Louisiana  volunteers.  He  completed
the  defences  of  the  place,  opened  a  new  channel  to
Tamessie  river.  hehi  various  civil  offices,  and  WBJ
engaged  in  the  light  at  f*allanoaa  river  and  in  the
skirmish  of  Tantayuka.  He  was  a  civil  engineer
from  1*4*  till  1961,  employed  in  making  improve-
ments hi  navigation,  and  from  1861  till  1808  WBSa
member  of  the  Louisiana  house  of  representatives.

and  from  1861  till  1*.V.  of  the  senate.  He  was
major-general  of  Louisiana  militia  from  1*48  till
1861,  when  he  entered  the  Confederate  armv. — His
brother,  Keiir  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Havti.  W.  I..
H  !'■*•..  1789;  d.  in  San  Franciso
He  was  a  son  of  Thomas  de  Euasy,  of  St.  Halo,
DOB,  who  cam.-  to  New  York  in'  1791,  and  re-
moved to  Old Point Comfort.  Ya.,  where  he  re-


side.! many  year.. The  BM  wjw  graduated  at  the

A, military academy in I*
lieutenant  of  engineers. He  served  in  the  war  of
1819  '•">.  with  Great  Britain,  as  nasi
in  eonetroctlng  defences  i

ells llarln.r.  N.  Y..  and  participated in  OBI  0MB-
pahrneon  the  St.  Lawrence  and  Lake  Champk
In  1H14  he  was  brcvetted  captain  for  gallant  eon-
duct  at  the  battle  of  Plattaburg. II. m

engineer  of  (ien.  Macomb's  arm\  in  1^14.  and  cap-
tain of  ti„-  earpi  ,,f  engineers  m  i*r>.  Be  was
assistant  engineer  in  the  construction  of  the  fort
at  RottSS'l  1'oifit.  N.  Y..  in  1HHJ.  suj-Tintcnding
engineer  of  the  repaJn  and  construction  ..f  fortifi-
cations j,,  .\,.w  V,,rk  harbor  in  l*i\  and  of  defen-
sive w..rks  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1891.  In
18M  bBWaabreTOtted  major.  He  was  supcrintend-
ent  of  the  I'.  S.  military  academy  from  1KW  till
1«3H,  and  lieuteiianl  -colonel  OCenginaarj  from
1898  till  1899.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  was  ordered  to  the  defence  of  the  Pacific  coast,
and  oorsatrneted  the  fortifications  of  flan  Pram

harl>or.  He  wits  also  president  of  the  U.anl  of
engineers  for  devising  projects  and  alterations  in
the  land  defences  of  San  Francisco.  In  1*415  he
was  lirevetted  major-general  in  the  V.  S.  army  for
long  and  faithful  service. —  Banff,  ion,  ttiintavna
Adolplius,  soldier.  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  :i  Nov.,
ISIS;  d.  in  Detroit.  Mich..  99  Mav.  1891,  having
been  three  years  at  West  point,  was  appointed  from
Virginia  in  the  4th  V.  S.  artillery.  He  served  in  the
Mexican  war,  having  Inch  hrevctted  1st  lieutenant
'•  for  gallant  ami  meritorious  conduct  "  at  ObHttO-
ras  and  ChurubUBCO,  anil  captain.  13  Sept..  1*47,
for  gallantry  at  Chapulteneo.  He  was  regimental
quartermaster  from  1847  till  1857.  and  stationed  at
Fort  Monroe  in  1848.  Be  was  mads  l-t  lieutenant,
16  May.  1849  :  captain.  1?  Am:..  1*">7  :  bn-vct  major.

25  June.  1869,  for  bravery  displaced  in  the  action
near  Fair  Oaks,  \'n.;  brevet  uontenant<olonol,  for
the  same  cause  in  the  liattle  of  Malvern  Hill,  and
hrevet  colonel,  1?  March.  1868.  He  was  promoted
to  be  brigadier-general  <rf  volunteers.  '2-1  Mav.
ISM;  hrevet  colonel.  13  Manh.  1866  (for  scrvi.  I
the  war  of  the  rebellion);  and  imvet  brigadier-
general,  for  the  same  cause,  on  the  same  day.  Be
was  mastered  out  of  the  volunteer  ssrTioB,  i;t  Jan..
1866:  promoted  to  i>c  major  in  the  regular  army,

26  Jnlv.  1866; lieutenant-colonel.  25  Aug..  18
colonel  80  June.  1889;  and  was  retired  by  oj>era-
tion  of  law.  3  Nov..  1HS2.

DESANDKOriN.  Viscount,  Prenefa  engineer,
b.  12  Dec,  1740. lie  aooompanJed  htontoalm  to
Canada  in  May.  175<i,  B8  captain  of  the  POjal
gineers.  and  became  his  aide  and  military  secretary.

He  was  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Tioonderoanana

in the sultseo.uent ojHTations  in Camula. From

1780 till  \:xi  he  was  chief  enginear  in  jfcoebanv

beau's  armv  in  thlfl  country,  was  brigadier-general
of  infant rv.  ."»  I>.-<\.  17*1.  and  chef  de  brigade  of

tl ngineer  corps. In  17*!»  he  was  a  chevalier  of

Malta,  and  a  member  of  the  National  assembly
from  Calais  and  An  Ires.

DE8AULNIER8,  Lonis  Lfn  I...  I  .niadimn
physician,  b.  in  Yamachiche.  i»n>vince  of  t^ii-
Ki'l-Vb..  I*.1:?.  He  was  educated  at  Nicole!  ~nni-
narv.  and  at  Harvard,  when-  he  was  graduated  in
lie  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  \nlunt.-crs  of
thecoiilitv  Of  St.  Maurice,  ami  SJSJ  elected  to  the
Canadian' assembly  for  this  constituency  in  1854,
:ng  from  that  time  till  1867,  and  again  from
im;i  till  i*i»7.  in  1896  baieaianad  to  accept  the
offloe  of  liawjector  of  prawnaand  ■BTfaunafor  the
province  of  Quebec, Bewa*  the  Domin-

ion parliament  in  1*7*.  and  again  in  1889.


150


DE  SAUSSURE


DESCHAMPS


DE  S.U'SSIRE,  Henry  William,  jurist,  b.  in
PoooteUgo,  s.  c,  it;  Aug..  l  ?<>:{;  d.  In  Charleston,
29  March,  1839.  He  was  descended  from  an  an-
cient family  of  Lorraine,  Prance.  His  grand  fat  ber,
II knky,  emigrated  to  South  Carolina  in  1730,  and
Daniel,  his  father,  took  an  active  part  in  the  Revo-
lution, and  was  president  of  the  state  senate  in
1790-'l.  Henry  William  served  as  a  volunteer
during  the  siege  of  Charleston  in  1780,  and  passed
two  months  in  a  prison-ship.  He  was  then  sent
to  Philadelphia  to  lie  exchanged,  studied  law  with
Jared  Ingersoll,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Philadelphia  in  1784,  and  in  1785  to  that  of  Charles-
ton. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  South  Carolina  con-
stitutional convention  of  October,  1789,  and  in  1791
was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  In  1794  Presi-
dent Washington  appointed  him  director  of  the
U.  S.  mint.  When  dining  with  him  on  one  occa-
sion, Gen.  Washington  said :  "  I  have  long  desired
to  see  gold  coined  at  the  Mint,  but  your  predecessor
found  insuperable  difficulties.  I  should  be  grati-
fied if  it  could  be  accomplished."  The  director  re-
plied, "  I  will  try  " ;  and  a  few  weeks  afterward  he
carried  to  the  president  a  handful  of  gold  eagles,
the  first  gold  coined  at  the  Mint  of  the  United
States.  He  resigned  the  office  in  November,  1795,
and  received  from  Washington  an  autograph  letter
regretting  his  determination  to  retire,  and  express-
ing "  entire  satisfaction  "  with  his  administration.
He  then  returned  to  the  practice  of  the  law  in
South  Carolina,  and  was  elected  a  chancellor  of  the
state  in  1808.  Prom  1809  till  1829  the  number  of
decrees  in  the  circuit  court  of  equity  and  the  court
of  appeals  was  2,888,  and  of  these  Chancellor  De
Saussure  delivered  1,314.  In  1837  his  health  be-
came impaired,  and  he  resigned.  Gov.  Butler,  in
communicating  to  the  legislature  the  resignation
of  the  chancellor/said :  "  He  has  occupied,  and  now
occupies,  a  striking  position  to  the  people  of  the
present  generation.  He  is  the  last  of  the  Revolu-
tionary patriots  who  has  held  office  under  the  au-
thority of  the  state."  He  published  "Reports  of
the  Court  of  Chancery  and  Court  of  Equity  in  South
Carolina  from  the  Revolution  till  1813  (4  vols.,
Columbia,  S.  C,  1817-'9 ;  revised  ed.,  2  vols.,  Phila-
delphia).— His  grandson,  Wilmot  (Hbbes,  lawyer,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  23  July,  1822 ;  d.  1  Feb.,
1886.  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in
1840,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  for  ten  years,  was  in
command  of  the  state  troops  that  took  possession
of  Fort  Moultrie  when  Ma].  Anderson  evacuated
it  in  December,  1860,  as  lieutenant-colonel  was  in
command  of  the  artillery  on  Morris  Island  during
the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  in  April,  1861.
and  was  treasurer,  and  subsequently  adjutant  and
inspector-general,  of  South  Carolina.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  state  society  of  the  Cincinnati,  the  St.
Andrews  society,  the  Charleston  library  society,
the  St.  Cecilia  society,  and  the  Huguenot  society
of  South  Carolina.  His  published  addresses  in-
clude "  The  Stamp-Act  of  Great  Britain,  and  the
Resistance  of  the  Colonies,"  showing  that  South
Carolina,  on  26  March,  1776,  adopted  a  constitution
by  which  the  roya\  government  ceased  to  exist  there;
"  The  Causes  which  led  to  the  Surrender  of  Corn-
wallis  at  Yorktown  " ;  "  The  Centennial  Celebration
of  the  Organization  of  the  Cincinnati "  ;  "  Memoir
of  Gen.  William  Moultrie  "  ;  and  ■  Muster-roll  of
the  South  Carolina  Soldiers  of  the  Continental
Line  and  Militia  who  served  during  the  Revolu-
tion." He  also  prepared  an  address  on  the  celebra-
tion by  the  Huguenot  society  of  America  of  the  bi-
centennial anniversary  of  the  revocation  of  the  Edict
of  Nantes  (New  York,  1885).


DES  BARRES,  Joseph  Frederick  Wallet,
English  soldier,  b.  in  1722 ;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S..  M
Oct.,  1824.  He  came  of  a  French  family  that  fled
t <  >  England  on  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.
After  studying  under  the  Bernoullis,  he  entered
the  Royal  military  college  at  Woolwich,  and  after
graduation  embarked,  in  March,  1756,  for  America,
as  lieutenant  in  the  60th  foot.  He  commanded  for
a  time  a  corps  of  field  artillery,  which  he  had  him-
self recruited  in  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland,  and
in  1757  led  a  volunteer  detachment  against  Indians
who  had  attacked  Schenectady,  captured  the  chiefs,
and  won  them  over  to  the  English. He  distin-

Eiished  himself  as  an  engineer  at  the  siege  of
ouisburg,  in  1758,  and  at  the  siege  of  Quebec  was
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Wolfe.  That  officer  received
his  mortal  wound  while  Des  Barres  was  making  a
report  to  him,  and  fell,  dying,  in  the  arms  of  his
aide.  In  1760,  and  afterward,  Des  Barres  con-
ducted the  engineering  operations  for  the  defence
of  Quebec  and  the  reduction  of  Fort  Jacques  Cartier
and  other  French  strongholds,  thus  completing  the
conquest  of  Canada,  He  afterward  made  designs
and  estimates  for  fortifying  Halifax,  and  in  1762
was  directing  engineer  and  quartermaster-general
in  the  expedition  for  retaking  Newfoundland,  re-
ceiving public  thanks  for  his  services.  He  was
then  sent  to  New  York  to  report  on  the  expediency
of  establishing  a  chain  of  military  posts  through
the  colonies,  and  from  1763  till  1773  was  engaged
in  surveying  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  returned
to  England  in  1774,  was  thanked  by  the  king  for
his  services,  and  was  selected  by  Lord  Howe  to  pre-
pare charts  of  the  North  Atlantic  coast.  Having
adapted  the  surveys  of  Holland,  De  Brahm,  and
others  to  nautical  purposes,  he  published  them
under  the  title  "  The  Atlantic  Neptune  "  (2  vols.,
1777).  He  was  made  governor  of  Cape  Breton  in
1784,  and  given  the  military  command  of  that  and
Prince  Edward  Island,  founded  the  town  of  Sydney,
and  opened  and  worked  the  valuable  coal-fields  at
the  entrance  of  the  river.  In  this  office  he  was  also
engaged  in  aiding  the  royalists  of  the  United
States,  and  removing  them  from  the  country  after
the  Revolution.  He  was  made  lieutenant-governor
and  commander-in-chief  of  Prince  Edward  Island
in  1804.  Even  in  his  ninety-fifth  year  he  was  lithe
and  active,  and  planned  a  five  years'  tour  in  Eu-
rope. He  was  Capt.  Cook's  teacher  in  navigation.
He  wrote  a  work  on  "  Cape  Breton,"  which  was
printed  privately  (London,  1804),  but  afterward
suppressed. — His  grandson,  William  Frederick,
Canadian  jurist,  b.  at  the  Elysian  Fields,  Cumber-
land, Nova  Scotia,  14  Feb.,  1800;  d.  in  Halifax,
N.  S.,  16  June,  1885,  was  educated  at  the  old
Halifax  grammar-school,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1821.  He  settled  at  Guys-
boro',  and  soon  attained  a  leading  place  in  his  pro-
fession. From  1836  till.  1848  he  represented  Guvs-
boro'  in  the  Nova  Scotia  assembly,  and  held  the
office  of  solicitor-general  in  Howe's  government.
In  1848  he  was  appointed  a  puisne  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Nova  Scotia,  retaining  his  seat  on
the  bench  till  1881.  He  was  the  first  liberal  in
politics  appointed  to  a  supreme  court  judgeship  in
Nova  Scotia.

DESCHAMPS,  Isaac,  jurist,  b.  in  1723:  d.  11
Aug.,  1801.  He  was  of  Swiss  extraction,  and  in
early  life  settled  in  Nova  Scotia.  In  1754  he  was
clerk  at  Fort  Edward  (Windsor),  and  aided  in  sup-
pressing the  disturbance  of  the  Acadian  French  m
that  year.  He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly  in
1761,  and  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for
Kings  count  v.  In  1768  he  was  judge  or  Prince
Edward  Island,  and  from  1770  till  1785  of  the  su-


DKSHA


DE  S.MKT


1M


preine  court  "f  Nova  Scotia. He  was  clerk  of  the
aaseml-h  in  1772,  andap|»ointcd  cotiuuillor  in

Dl  Ml  \.  J<NM  I'll. "Idier.  h.  in  IVtnis\  Uania.  '.»

Doc-..  I788j  'I.  m  Georgetown.  K\..  18  <»«t..  1848.

II.  remored  to  Kentucky  in  i?*i,  served  in  the  b>

ilian «ur» under  Gens. Wavne  ami Harrison in
Land fought  at  tin-  battle  of  the  Thames  in
:  as  a  major-general, lie  was  at  one  time  a
■ember  "f tha Kentucky  hajjalatnra.  and  was
ted  to  congress,  serving  from  ','fi  <  M..  1*0?,  till
Man  h. 1818. Ha  was  governor  of Kentucky
from  1894  till  is-.>s._iii^  brother,  Robert,  soldier.
b.  in  IVni)N\  lvania  ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala..  8  Pah.  1849,
removed  to  Tennessee in  early  life,  served in tin-
war  of  1812  as  captain  of  the  24th  infantry,  was
hnvcttcd  major  for  services  in  the  attempt  to  cap-
ture  Fort Mackinaw.  4  Aiilt..  1*14.  ami promoted
brigadier-major  in  the  following  October. From
8  Pec..  1887,  till  8  March,  1831,  he  was  a  represen-
tative in  congress  from  Tennessee. He  afterward
Uvame  a  merchant  in  Mobile,  Ala.

DKSHOX,  (teorge,  missionary,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  :i<>  Jan.,  1888,  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,  being  class-
mate and  room-mate  of  Gen.  Grant.  He  had  stood
next  to  the  head  of  his  class,  and  after  graduation
was  for  some  time  instructor  in  mathematics  and
ethics.  He  reached  the  rank  of  captain  in  the
army,  but  left  it  on  his  conversion  to  the  Catholic
faith  in  1851.  He  studied  theology  in  Cumberland,
Md.,  and  was  ordained  priest  in  1855.  Having
joined  the  Redemptorist  order,  he  was  sent  on  sev-
eral missions,  and  was  very  successful  in  making
converts.  He  took  a  leading  part  in  founding  the
congregation  of  St.  Paul,  of  which  he  has  since
been  a  member.  He  has  superintended  the  erec-
tion of  the  church  of  St.  Paul,  New  York,  which
is  the  largest,  save  one,  in  the  United  States,  at-
tending to  all  the  engineering  work  himself.
Father  Deshon  is  the  author  of  a  "  Guide  for  Catho-
lic Young  Women  "  (New  York,  1860),  which  has
had  the  most  extensive  circulation  of  any  Catho-
lic book  ever  published  in  this  country.

HKSIKKK.  sister  superior,  b.  in  Janaph,  Bel-
gium, in  1815;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  in  1879.  She
received  a  thorough  education  in  her  native  place,
and  entered  the  congregation  of  Sisters  of  Notre
Dame  at  Namur.  After  taking  her  vows  in  1845,
she  came  to  the  United  States,  and  was  stationed
at  Cincinnati  until  1852,  when  she  was  sent  to
Lowell  to  found  a  convent  and  schools  for  Catholic
girls.  During  the  twenty-seven  years  that  she  re-
sided in  Lowell  she  erected  four  large  brick  edi-
lices  for  the  accommodation  of  her  pupils.

HF.SJARMNS,  T.  C.  Alphonse,  Canadian
journalist,  b.  in  Terrebonne,  province  of  Quebec,
6  May.  1  —  *  1 .  He  was  educated  at  Masson  college
and  at  Nicolet  seminary,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1862,  and  practised  in  Montreal  until  1868,
when  he  abandoned  law  for  journalism,  and  be-
came one  of  the  editors  of  "  L'Ordre."  In  1872
he  was  appointed  editor  and  one  of  the  directors  of
"  Le  nouveau  monde,"  retaining  this  connection
for  four  years.  In  1882  he  was  elected  president
of  I.ie  credit  foncier  du  bas  Canada,  in  1883  di-
rector of  the  Richelieu  and  Ontario  navigation
company,  and  in  1885  vice-president  of  the  Mon-
treal and  Western  railway  company.  He  took  an
active  part  in  organizing  the  Canadian  papal
zouave  contingent,  which  went  to  assist  the  doim?
in  lKtW.  ami  in  1872  was  created  a  knight  of  the
order  of  Pius  IX.,  in  recognition  of  this  and  other
services  to  the  church.  He  was  one  of  the  author-
of  the  "  Programme  Catholique  "  (1871),  prop
as  a  basis  upon  which  the  opposing  sections  of  the


aoaaarvathra  party  might  agree. He  was  first  re-

turned  to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  Horhelaja,
proi  inee  of  Quel*-, .  in  1.471,  was  re-elected  in  1878J
and  by  acclamation  in  1888.

DE8MET,  Peter  John,  BjiaaJoMtj,  »•.  11.  T.  r-

monde.  Belgium,  Ill  I)....  l^u  :  ,|.  j,',  >
Mo.,  in  May.  I*72.  He  studied  in  the  I
seminary  of  Mechlin,  and  while  there  he  fell  called

to  devote  himself  to  the  c. .11  Version  of  the 111.!

Whan  Blahop  Narhu  riatted  BHgHm  i"  -an  h  of

missionaries,  j),.  Sniet.  with  five  nlliai  etmlaula,  ml
unteered  to  aceoui|>auv  him. The  govanUMOl  Rare

orders  to  stop  thetll,  but they  esea|„,l Ip.lll  thcofll-

earn  and  ■flan  from  Amsterdam  n  1881. Aft

short stay  in Philadelphia, I).-  Sim  the

.l.siiit  novitiate  at  Whitemarsh.  Md.  BarahafeOoft
the  Jesuit  habit,  but  after  two  years  the  hows.,  was
dissolved,  and  he  was  al-otit  to  return  to  Itclgium,
when  he  was  invited  by  BJahop  Dttboorg  |o  Fh-ris-
sant,  where  he  conmlcicd  his  education  ami  took
his  vows.  In  1888  Da  went  to  St.  Loufe  and  took
I»rt  in  establishing  the  University  of  St.  Louis.  m
which  he  was  afterward  professor.  In  1KJM  he  was
sent  to  establish  a  mission  among  tin-  I'ottawatta-

mieson  Supir  creek. He  built  eohapeLand  baafcla

it  the  log-huts  of  himself.  Father  Yernydt.  and  a  lav
brother.  He  erected  a  school,  which  was  soon  crowd-
ed with  pupils,  and  in  a  short  time  converted  most
of  the  tribe.  In
1840  he  begged
the  bishop  of
St.  Louis  to  per-
mit him  to  la-
bor among  the
Flat  heads  of  the
Rocky  mount-
ains. When  it
was  represented
tohimthat  there
was  no  money
for  such  an  ex-
pedition, he  said
that  sufficient
means  would
assuredly  come
from  Europe,
and  set  out  on
30  April,  1840,
from  Weatport.
with  the  annual

caravan  of  the  American  far  company,  whose  des-
tination was  Green  River.  He  arrived  on  14  July
in  the  camp  of  Peter  Valley,  when-  alniut  1.600  In-
dians had  assembled  to  meet  him.  They  had  re-
tained traditions  of  the  French  missionaries  of  two
centuries  ln-fore.  and  DeSmet  found  it  easvtocon-
vert  them.  With  the  aid  of  an  interpreter,  he  trans-
lated the  Lord's  prayer,  the  creed,  and  the  command-
ments into  their  language,  and  in  «  fortnight  all  the
Flat  heads  knew  these  prayers  and  commandment*,
which  were  afterward  explained  to  them.  Datttafj
his  journey  iwek  to  St.  Louis  he  was  on  aafaaal
occasions  surrounded  by  war-parties  of  the  Itlack-
feet,  but  as  soon  as  they  recognized  his  black  gown
and  crucifix  tiny  showed  the  greatest  veneration
for  him.  He  thus  laid  the  foundation  of  the  ex-
traordinary influence  that  he  aftcrwanl  •  xercised
over  the  Indians.  In  the  spring  of  1H41  he  set  out
again,  with  two  other  missionaries  and  three  lay
UlDllieri,  all  expert  mechanics,  ami.  after  passing
through  several  trilies.  crossed  the  Platte  and  met
at  Fort  Hall  a  I  tody  of  Flat  heads,  who  had  come
M<Hi  miles  t,.  escort  the  missionaries.  On  24  Sept.
the  |>arty  reached  Hitter-nn.t  river,  when-  it  was
decided  to  form  a  permanent  settlement. A  plan


^j/.^r^zu-y}


152


DESNOYERS


DE  SOTO


for  a  mission  village  was  drawn  up,  a  cross  planted,
ami  the  mission  of  St.  Mary's  begun.  The  lay  bro-
thers built  a  church  and  residence,  while  De  Smet
went  to  Colville  to  obtain  provisions.  On  Ml  re-
turn, the  Blackfeet  warriors  went  on  the  winter
chase,  and  he  remained  in  the  village  familiarizing
liiin-elf  with  the  language,  into  which  he  translated
the  catechism.  He  then  resolved  to  visit  Port  Van-
couver, hoping  to  find  there  the  supplies  necessary
to  make  St.  Mary's  a  fixed  mission.  On  his  way  he
visited  several  tribes,  and  taught  them  the  ordinary
prayers  and  rudiments  of  religion.  After  a  narrow
escape  from  drowning  in  Columbia  river,  he
reached  Fort  Vancouver,  but  was  deceived  in  his
hope  of  finding  supplies,  and  on  his  return  to  St.
Mary's  he  resolved  to  cross  the  wilderness  again  to
St.  Louis.  There  he  laid  the  condition  of  his  mis-
sion before  his  superiors,  who  directed  him  to  go  to
Europe  and  appeal  for  aid  to  the  people  of  Belgium
and  Prance.  He  excited  great  enthusiasm  for  his
work  in  those  countries,  several  priests  of  his  order
asked  permission  to  join  him,  and  the  Sisters  of  the
Congregation  of  our  Lady  volunteered  to  undertake
the  instruction  of  the  Flathead  children.  He  sailed
from  Antwerp  in  December,  1843,  with  five  Jesuits
and  six  Sisters,  and  reached  Fort  Vancouver  in
August,  1844.  He  was  offered  land  on  the  Willa-
mette river  for  a  central  mission,  and  at  once  began
to  clear  ground  and  erect  buildings.  The  work  ad-
vanced so  rapidly  that  in  October  the  Sisters,  who
had  already  begun  their  school  in  the  open  air,
were  able  to  enter  their  convent.  In  1845  he  began
a  series  of  missions  among  the  Zingomenes,  Sin-
poils,  Okenaganes,  Flatbows,  and  Koetenays,  which
extended  to  the  water-shed  of  the  Saskatchewan
and  Columbia,  the  camps  of  the  wandering  Assini-
boins  and  Creeks,  and  the  stations  of  Fort  St.  Anne
and  Bourassa.  He  visited  Europe  several  times  in
search  of  aid  for  his  missions.  Indeed,  he  calcu-
lated that  his  journeys  up  to  1853,  by  land  and
water,  must  have  been  more  than  five  times  the  cir-
cumference of  the  earth.  The  ability  and  influence
of  Father  De  Smet  were  cordially  acknowledged
by  the  government  of  the  United  States,  and  his
aid  was  often  sought  in  preventing  Indian  wars.
Thus  he  put  an  end  to  the  Sioux  war,  and  in  Ore-
gon he  induced  the  Yahamas  and  other  tribes,
under  Kamiakim,  to  cease  hostilities.  He  was  chap-
lain in  the  expedition  to  Utah,  and  opened  new
missions  among  the  tribes  in  that  territory.  Dur-
ing his  last  visit  to  Europe  he  met  with  a  severe  ac-
cident, in  which  several  of  his  ribs  were  broken,
and  on  his  return  to  St.  Louis  he  wasted  slowly
away.  Father  De  Smet  was  made  a  knight  of  the
order  of  Leopold  by  the  king  of  the  Belgians.  His
best-known  works,  which  have  been  translated  into
English,  are  "The  Oregon  Missions  and  Travels
over  the  Rocky  Mountains,"  "  Indian  Letters  and
Sketches,"  "  Western  Missions  and  Missionaries,"
and  "  New  Indian  Sketches."

DESNOYERS,  Peter,  pioneer,  b.  in  France,  21
April,  1773;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  6  March,  1880.
He  came  to  this  country  in  early  life,  and  settled
first  in  Gallipolis,  Ohio,  and  then  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.
Later  he  removed  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  where  he  re-
sided until  his  death.  Congress,  in  1807,  gave  him
a  tract  of  land  on  Detroit  river,  in  return  for  his
loyalty  to  the  United  States.  He  subsequently
became  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  territory  of  Michi-
gan, and  in  1839  state  treasurer.  Prom  his  long
residence  in  Detroit,  he  came  to  be  regarded  as
one  of  the  most  influential  men  of  the  city,  as  well
as  a  leading  spirit  among  the  French  population.

DE  SOLA,  Abraham,  clergyman,  b.  in  London,
18  Sept.,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York,  5  June,  1882. He


was  called  to  the  ministrv  of  the  Portuguese  syna-
gogue in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1846,  soon  identified
himself  with  the  various  literary  and  scientific
bodies  of  his  adopted  country,  and  was  appointed
in  is."):!  professor  of  Hebrew"  and  oriental  litera-
ture at  Metiill  university.  He  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1858,  and  was  elected  president  of
the  Natural  history  society  of  Montreal.  In  1878
Dr.  De  Sola  opened  the  session  of  the  U.  S.  con-
gress with  prayer.  He  labored  by  pen  and  in  the
pulpit  to  promote  the  welfare  of  his  co-religionists,
and  was  an  eloquent  expounder  of  conservative
Judaism.  His  published  works  include  "Scripture
Zoology,"  "  The  Sanitary  Institutions  of  the  He-
brews, "Mosaic  Cosmogony,"  "Sinaitic  Inscrip-
tions," "  Notes  on  the  Jews  of  Persia,"  and  minor
writings  on  Jewish  history  and  literature.

DE  SOTO,  Fernando,  Spanish  discoverer,  b.
in  Jerez  de  los  Caballeros,  Estremadura,  Spain,
about  1496 ;  d.  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  20
June,  1542.  He  was  the  descendant  of  a  noble  bat
impoverished  family,  and  was  indebted  to  Pedra-
rias  Davila  for  the  means  of  pursuing  a  course  at
the  university,  where  he  distinguished  himself  in
literary  studies  and  in  athletic  performances.  In
1519  he  accompanied  Davila,  who  had  been  made
governor  of  Darien,  on  his  second  expedition  to
America,  during  which  he  showed  great  ability
and  determination  of  character,  especially  as  an
opponent  of  the
oppressi  ve  meas-
ures of  his  supe-
rior officers.  He
served  on  the  ex-
pedition to  Nica-
ragua in  1527
under  Hernan-
dez, who  after-
ward perished
by  the  nand  of
Davila  in  con-
sequence of  not
heeding  his  ad-
vice. In  1528  he
withdrew  from
the  service  of  his
patron  and  ex-
plored the  coasts
of  Guatemala
and  Yucatan  for
upward  of  700
miles  in  search
of  a  strait,  which
was  supposed  to

connect  the  two  oceans.  Later  he  joined  Pizarro
in  his  expedition  to  Peru,  with  the  promise  of
being  made  second  in  command.  In  1533  he  was
sent  with  fifty  horsemen  and  a  few  targeteers
to  explore  the  highlands  of  Peru.  He  penetrated
through  a  pass  in  the  mountains,  and  discov-
ered the  great  national  road  that  led  to  the  Peru-
vian capital.  De  Soto  was  sent  by  Pizarro  as
ambassador  to  visit  the  Inca  Atahualpa,  after
whose  capture  he  expostulated  with  his  chief  for
treacherously  refusing  to  release  the  Peruvian
monarch,  but  in  vain,  although  an  immense  sum
had  been  paid  for  his  ransom.  He  was  prominent
in  the  engagements  that  completed  the  conquest
of  Peru,  and  was  the  hero  of  the  battle  that  re-
sulted in  the  capture  of  Cuzco.  Subsequently  De
Soto,  who  had  landed  in  America  with  nothing  of
his  own  save  his  sword  and  target,  returned  to
Spain  with  a  fortune  of  $500,000,  which  enabled
him  to  marry  the  daughter  of  his  old  patron  Davila,
to  whom  he  had  long  been  attached,  and  to  main-


IT SOTO


DKSH;


um


tain  "all  the  state  tlmt  tin-  house  of  a  nobleman

iv.iuirvtli."' 'I'lir tale-  of returned adventurers

totwtd  H  belief  in  Spain  tlmt  tin-  treasures  "f  the

northern  In misphere  woulil  bt  found  t<>  rival  in

value  tin-  riches  of  Peru;  ami  He  Soto,  |aj  In-  de>

in  glory  and  RHM I'izarro

in wealth,  sought |MTiiii— i->n from  Oniric-  V.  t<>

conquer  l''l>>ri«lii  at bk  own  expense, Tin-  privi-

wae  readily  oonoeded,  and  lfc-  Botowat  made

ernorof  Cuba. Volunteers  lor  tin-  expedition

assembled  in  mat  numbers,  t *•  »t  1>  from  Spaio  and

Portugal,  and De  Soto  selected  from  the  "flower

of  the  |N'iiinsiihi "  only  those  who  won  in  the
"bloom  of  Ufa,"  and,  with  11  force  <>f  <hm)  men,  M
ecclesiastics,  and  20  officers,  sailed  early  in  April
fnun  San  Loear.  The  fleet  soon  reached  Santiago
aha,  and  then  stopped  at  Havana,  where  the
women  were  to  remain  until  after  the  conquest.
Leaving  his  wife  in  command,  he  crossed  the  gulf
of  M. -\ii-o  and  anchored  in  the  bay  of  K-niritu
BantO  (now  Tampa  barton  86  May.  l.->:i!>.  When
the  soldiers  were  landed,  I)e  Sotx>,  confident  of
success,  sent  his  ships  back  to  Cuba,  and  at  the
head  of  his  followers  began  the  long  search  for
gold.  His  forces  were  greater  in  numbers  and  more
perfect  in  equipment  than  those  that  had  triumphed
over  the  empires  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  Everything
was  provided  that  former  experience  could  sug-
gest; chains  for  captives,  the  implements  of  a
urge,  weapom  of  all  kinds  then  in  use,  blood-
hounds as  auxiliaries  against  the  natives,  ample
stores  of  food,  and  finally  a  drove  of  hogs,  which
would  soon  swarm  in  the  favoring  climate,  where
the  forests  furnished  them  with  abundant  suste-
nance. To  the  greed  for  wealth  religious  zeal
was  added,  priests  with  their  assistants  accompa-
nying the  expedition.  Ornaments  for  the  service
of  the  mass  were  provided,  and  every  festival  was
to  be  kept,  every  religious  practice  observed.  The
route  was  through  a  country  already  made  hostile
by  the  violence  of  the  Spanish  invader,  Narvaez,
and  the  Indians,  in  their  efforts  to  rid  themselves
of  the  Spaniards,  continually  lured  them  onward
by  stories  of  wealth  in  regions  still  remote,  which
receded  as  the  expedition  advanced.  They  marche<  1
northward  at  first,  and  then  passed  into  the
country  of  the  Appalachians,  where  they  spent  the
winter.  Juan  Ortiz,  who  had  been  captured  by
the  Indians  from  Narvaez,  and  enslaved  by  them,
could  give  no  account  of  any  land  where  gold  or
silver  was  to  be  found.  An  exploring  patty  dis-
covered Ochus,  the  harbor  of  Pensaeola,  and  a
message  was  sent  to  Cuba,  desiring  that  in  the  fol-
lowing year  supplies  might  be  sent  to  that  place.
Meanwhile,  discontent  had  arisen  among  the  Span-
iards, and  when  they  ap|iealcd  to  De  Soto  to  return.
he  refused,  saying:  "I  will  not  turn  back  till  I
have  seen  the  poverty  of  the  country  with  my  own
eyes." In  March,  1540,  they  resumed  their  march.

St'K -ceding  in  a  northeasterlv  direction,  and  on  18
<t.  reached  the  village  of  "Manila  or  Mobile,  on
Alabama  river,  where,  in  an  engagement  with  the
natives,  the  Spaniards  lost  more  than  so  men  and  4'J
horses,  and  it  was  claimed  that  2,500  Indians  were
killed.  Ships  had  meanwhile  arrived  at  Ochus
but  He  Soto  proudly  refused  to  send  back  any  mes-
tage  of  his  fortunes.  He  then  went  to  the  north-
west, ami  passed  his  second  winter  in  the  country
of  the  Cliickasaws.  In  the  spring  of  1541  he  made
a  demand  on  the  chief  of  these  Indians  for  200
men  to  carry  the  burdens  of  the  company.  The
chief  hesitated,  and  in  the  night  fired  the  village
where  the  Spaniards  were  encamped.  Forty  of  He
-  perished  In  the  flames,  ami  all  the
baggage  was  destroyed. A  delay  of  some  weeks


eii-ii.,1.  .hiring  which  forges  were  erected,  swords
newly  tempered,  and  ashen  lance*  m*l
!>•  Soto  resumed  his  march  in  a  northwc-
direction,  and,  after  journeying  for  -even  days
through  a  vfldentafj  of  forest  and  marahes,
mashed  the  Mississippi  river.  A  month  was  spent
on  the  banks,  Bonetruoting  barges  large  enough  to
hold  three  aofsamon  sash,  and  then  the  army
passed  over  to  ths  Warfare  side ;  I  hward

to  l'acaha.  where  he  remained  ten  davi,  ami  th.  n
marched  successively  south we-t  and  northwest  till
he  reached  the  highland- of  White  ri\er,  win.  hum,
the  we-tern  limit  of  the  expedition.  Turning
south,  he  proceeded  on  hi-  journey,  passing  be  the
hot  -prings  of  Arkansas,  winch  his  coin |«n ions  at
fir-t  sup|M>scd  to  |H-  the  fabled  fountain  of  v.. nth,
and  BUSK  hi-  third  winter  in  Autiaimjue,  00
Washm  river.  In  the  following  spring  He  Soto
determined  to  descend  tin-  river  to  it-  junction.
Be  finally  reached  the  Mississippi  again,  and  while
descending  its  lianks  was  stricken  with  malignant
lever.  Worn  OOl  l>y  long  disapj>ointmcnts,  and
his  pride  changed  to  a  wasting  melancholy,  he
realized  that  death  was  near  at  hand.  He  gathered
his  followers  around  him.  and.  after  appointing
Luis  de  Moscoso  his  successor,  snooBBlbsa  to  the
disease  on  the  following  day.  The  news  of  his
death  was  carefully  kept  from  the  Indians,  by
whom  he  was  regarded  as  possessing  -u|<crnatural

K>wers, and  at  midnight, Wrapped  in  his  mantle,  the
»dyof  the  great  discoverer  was  lowered  Into  the
waters  of  the  river  he  had  discovered.  Hi-  follow-
ers, reduced  to  half  their  original  numliers,  passed
the  ensuing  winter  in  the  country  of  the  Natchi-
toches, and  in  the  spring  returned  to  the  Mississippi,
where  they  built  -even  frail  boats,  in  which  they
drifted  down  to  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  and  then  fol-
lowed the  shore  to  the  Mexican  town  of  J'anueo,
where  they  dispersed.  De  Soto's  wife  expired  in
Havana  three  days  after  hearing  of  his  fat-
"Life,  Travels,  and  Adventures  of  Ferdinand  de
Soto.'hy  Ijamlwrt  A. Wiluu-r (Philadelphia,  1868);
"Narratives  of  the  Career  of  Hernando  de  Soto
in  the  Conquest  of  Florida,  as  told  be  a  Knight  of
Flva-.  and  in  a  Relation  by  Liuvs  Hernandez  de
Hied ura,  factor  of  tin*  FxiN-dition,"  tran-latcd  by
Buckingham  Smith  (New  York.  1866),  being  num-
ber five  of  the  Bradford  club  series;  and  Ban-
croft's "History  of  the  United  States"  (voL  L,
New  York.  16

BFSl'ARB,  John,  British  soldier,  h.  in  1745;
<1.  in  Oswestry.  Fngland.  68epL,  1888.  Hs entered
the  army  es  ensign  of  the  18th  toot  in  !?•»<».  and  be-

came  lieutenant  in  17t'»1.>.  After  earring  in  Ger-
many, he  came  with  the  royal  fusiliers  to  Quebec
in  March,  177:5.  was  taken  prisoner  at  St.  Johns  in

November,  1 77.5.  and,  after  being  exchanged  in

December,  177<>,  Ix-caine  captain  in  March.  1777.
He  then  Joined  the  army  in  New  York,  and  wee  at
the  capture  of  Fort  Montgomery.  In  June.  177s.
he  WSS  UOIIIIIllmloiied  major  of  a  corps  raJaM  by

Lord  Bawdon,  and  in  Deeeeaber,  177K,  u-came

deputy  adjutant-general.  He  was  present  at  the
capture  of  Charleston  and  in  the  cauqiaign-  of
Oornwsihs  that  ended  with  the  surrender  at  York-
town.  Subsequently  he  served  on  the  staff  of  the
iirmv,  being  made  colonel  in  Augu-t.  17'.'">.  and
major-general  in  17W.  From  ls«Nitil!  1893
governor  of  Cape  Hretou.  ami  in  1814  was  made
full  general,  (Jen.  Despard  was  in  twentv-four  en-
gagements, and  was  three  times  shipwrecked.
DESPBEZ-4  KASSIKK.  Jesn  F.tienne  Phlli-
renoh  general.  1>.  in  OlaesJer.  IS  Jan..  1788;
d.  in  Ornex  Sboul  INM.  He  early  entered  the
French  army,  and  Ix-came  m  17*1 7  a  captain  in  the


"A


154


DBSSALINES


DETMOLD


Roval  I>t ox-Font  regiment,  with  which  he  served
in  Germany  until  the  peace  of  1703.  After  attain-
ing the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  he  served  in
this  country  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  distin-
guishing himself  at  Yorktown,  where  "his  regiment,
having  captured  two  howitzers,  obtained  by  the
exploit  the  title  of  "  Royal."  In  September,  1792,
he  was  made  lieutenant-general  and  given  com-
mand of  the  advance  guard  of  the  armv  of  the
centre,  which  repelled  the  Prussians  at  the  camp
of  La  Lune.  He  was  suspended  as  a  nobleman  in
1793,  but  was  afterward  restored  and  employed  in
the  army  of  Italy,  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  of  the
Rhine.  He  was  deprived  of  his  command,  20  Oct.,
1795,  and  then  retired  to  his  estates  in  Ornex.

DESSALINES,  Jean  Jacques,  Havtian  empe-
ror, b.  in  Guinea,  Africa,  in  1758;  d.  in  Hayti.  17
Oct.,  1800.  He  was  brought,  when  young,  to  Cap
Francais  (now  Cap  Haytien),  where  he  was  pur-
chased by  a  French  planter,  whose  name  he  subse-
quently assumed.  In  1791  he  left  his  master  and
joined  the  insurgent  army  under  Biassou.  In  the
servile  war  that  followed  he  distinguished  himself,
and  became  adjutant-general  of  Jean  Francois,  the
negro  commander.  Later  he  sided  with  Toussaint
L'Ouverture  when  the  latter  left  his  Spanish  allies
and  joined  the  French.  In  the  campaign  that  fol-
lowed, having  attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-gen-
eral, he  led  the  forces  against  the  mulatto  chief
Rigaud.  His  success,  with  the  promptness  and
energy  evinced  in  this  movement,  recommended
him  to  Toussaint,  who  afterward  invariably  sent
him  where  the  utmost  severity  was  considered
necessary.  His  name  spread  terror  wherever  he
went,  and  thousands  of  mulattoes  were  slaughtered,
drowned,  or  shot  by  his  orders.  At  the  same  time
he  led  a  most  dissolute  life,  and  enriched  himself
by  extensive  robberies  perpetrated  in  the  guise  of
legal  confiscations.  In  1802  he  conducted  a  gue-
rilla war  against  Gen.  Leclerc,  who  had  been  sent
to  Hayti  by  Napoleon.  His  obstinate  defence  of
St.  Marc  against  Gen.  Boudet  was  characteristic.
When  unable  to  hold  the  town  any  longer,  he
burned  it,  setting  fire  to  his  own  palace,  and
butchered  all  the  white  inhabitants  of  the  place,
and  also  those  he  met  with  on  his  retreat.  Later
he  submitted  to  Gen.  Leclerc,  after  the  affair  at
Crete-a-Pierrot.  Peace  having  been  established,
he  was  made  governor  of  the  southern  portion  of
the  island,  with  the  rank  of  general.  Here  he
plunged  into  the  deepest  debauchery,  but  affected
much  zeal  for  the  French.  He  treated  the  van-
quished negroes  with  the  same  cruelty  that  he  had
shown  to  the  whites,  and  when  Toussaint's  nephew
rose  against  the  French,  Dessalines  cruelly  mur-
dered him  in  cold  blood,  with  300  of  his  followers.
His  loyalty  to  the  French,  however,  was  of  short
duration,  for  afterward,  when  yellow  fever  attacked
the  French  army,  numbering  among  its  victims
Gen.  Leclerc,  Dessalines  became  commander-in-
chief  of  the  negro  forces.  Gen.  Rochambeau  suc-
ceeded to  the  command  of  the  French,  and  at  once
adopted  retaliatory  measures  against  their  insur-
gents, lie  tortured  to  death  the  negro  general,
Maurepas,  with  his  entire  family.  A  terrible  retri-
bution was  determined  npon.  Dessalines  erected
500  gibbets,  and  hanged  half  a  i-egiment  of  French
that  he  had  captured  by  a  bold  countermarch.  A
war  of  extermination  followed,  and  in  December,

1803,  aided  by  an  English  squadron,  the  French
were  compelled  to  evacuate  the  island. On  1  Jan.,

1804,  he  was  appointed  governor-general  of  Hayti
for  life.  For  a  few  months  he  ruled  in  a  spirit  of
moderation,  and  put  into  force  several  wise  and
just  measures  toward  a  healthy  reorganization  of


the  commonwealth :  but  his  brutal  nature  prevailed
over  his  judgment,  and  shortly  afterward  he
ordered  a  genera]  massacre  of  the  white  residents,
who  had  remained  under  a  promise  of  protection.
In  April.  1804,  he  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt
to  conquer  the  Spanish  portion  of  the  island,  and
after  his  return  DeCMM  mure  frantic  than  ever.  I  It-
had  himself  crowned  as  emperor  of  I  Iayt  i  on  8  Oct,
1804,  in  imitation  of  Napoleon,  under  title  of  "  Jean
Jacques  I.,"  and  proclaimed  a  new  constitution,
which  concentrated!  all  real  power  in  his  own  hands.
Subsequently  his  extravagance  deranged  thefinan-
ees,  his  dissoluteness  corrupted  the  morals  of  all
classes,  his  cruelty  increased,  and  he  put  to  death
every  one  against  whom  he  was  suspicious.  His
despotism  soon  caused  an  insurrection,  and  in  1806,
while  endeavoring  to  repress  it,  he  fell  into  an  am-
buscade, and  was  assassinated  by  two  of  his  officers,
Christophe  and  Petion,  of  whom  the  former  became
president  of  Hayti.  In  a  slender  and  hideous
frame  Dessalines  united  the  wildest  passions  of  the
ferocious  savage  with  extraordinary  shrewdness,
an  undeniable  keenness  of  judgment,  and  a  clear
statesmanlike  knowledge  of  the  men  and  things
with  whom  he  had  to  deal.  However  abominable
his  character  may  appear,  it  is  nevertheless  true
that  he  understood  the  means  of  accomplishing  the
independence  of  Hayti  better  than  even  Toussaint
himself.  He  left  Hayti  a  ruined  and  desolate,
though  independent,  state.  See  "  Vie  de  J.  J.  Des-
salines," by  Louis  Dubroca.

DESTREHAN,  Jean  Noel,  senator,  b.  about
1780.  He  was  a  citizen  of  Louisiana,  and  in  1805
one  of  the  authors  of  a  pamphlet  attacking  the  ter-
ritorial government.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
convention  of  1811,  and  voted  with  the  minority
against  the  application  of  Louisiana  for  admission
into  the  Union.  Notwithstanding  this,  he  was
appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  seven  to  draft  a
constitution  for  the  new  state.  In  1812  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  but  resigned  the  office
before  taking  his  seat.

DETMOLD,  William  Lndwiir.  surgeon,  b.  in
Hanover,  Germany,  27  Dec.,  1808.  His  lather  was
court  physician  to  the  king  of  Hanover.  William
received  his  medical  degree  from  the  University  of
Gottingen  in  1830,  and  enlisted  as  surgeon  in  the
royal  Hanoverian  grenadier-guard.  He  came  to  the
United  States  on  leave  of  absence  in  1837.  and
sent  his  resignation  from  New  York. He  became

f>rofessor  of  military  surgery  and  hygiene  at  Co-
umbia  in  1862,  and  was  made  professor  emeritus  in
1866.  Dr.  Detmold  introduced  orthopedic  surgery
into  the  United  States,  and  during  the  civil  war
acted  as  volunteer  surgeon  in  Virginia.  He  intro-
duced a  knife  and  fork  for  one-handed  men,  which
was  put  by  Surgeon-General  Barnes  on  the  supply
list,  under  the  name  of  "  Detmold's  knife."  Among
his  numerous  contributions  to  medical  literature  is
"  Opening  an  Abscess  in  the  Brain,"  in  the  *'  Jour-
nal of  the  Medical  Sciences  "  for  February,  1850. —
His  brother,  Christian  Edward,  engineer,  b.  in
Hanover,  2  Feb.,  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2  July,
1887,  was  educated  at  the  military  academy  in  his
native  city,  and  came  to  New  York  in  1820,  with
the  intention  of  entering  the  Brazilian  army.
But  unfavorable  accounts  of  the  condition  of  that
country  induced  him  to  remain  here,  and  he  became
well  known  as  an  engineer.  In  1827  he  made  many
surveys  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  vicinity,  and  in
1828  made  the  drawings  for  the  first  locomotive
built  by  the  Messrs.  Kemble  in  New  York.  In
1833-'4  he  was  in  the  emplov  of  the  U.  S.  war  de-
partment, and  superintended  the  laying  of  the  foun-
dations of  Fort  Sumter  during  theillness  of  the  en-


U0


•  r  iti  charge  <>f  tin-  work. Afti-r  making  sur-
veys f"r  reilraeda  in  rerioet  part*  of  the  country,

he  bsoems  interested  in  the  manufacture  of  iron,
and  introduced  Beveral  improvements,  including
tlic  utilization  of  the  waste  gams  frmu  blast  ami
other  furnaces.  In  IM."*  '52  he  encaged  in  thi-
mauufacture  in  Maryland,  and  then  built  the  Niw

York  "Crystal I'uiiuv." Ha  ■ftanrard  beoama

8 resident  of  the  New  Jemej  BUM  company,  built
leir  works  at  Newark,  and  originated  and  lUOOaaS-
fully  developed  the  inanufactiire  of  "spiogel"  iron
from  the  residue  o|  the  ziur  on,  He  then  aug
in  i oal-mining.  hut  failing  health  forced  bin  I
to  Burope,  where  he  lived,  most  of  the  time  in
Paris,  till  his  return  to  New  York  in  1885.  He
published  a  translation  of  the  prin<i|>al  historical,
|K>litieal.  and  diplomatic  writings  of  Machiavelli
(4  v.»]s..  Boston,  1888).

DKTRK,  William,  missionary.  I>.  in  France  in
1884;  d.  in  Booth  America,  lie  entered  the  Jesuit
order,  and  obtained  permission  from  his  Mijieriors
to  devote  himself  t<>  the  Indian  missions,  lie  was
sent  to  Suit  h  America  either  in  1701  or  1706,  where
hit  zeal  and  ability  attracted  attention,  and  he  was
made  superior-general  and  visitor  of  all  the  mis-
BJOOJ  on  the  Amazon  for  over  an  extent  of  b>on
than  :!.ikh)  miles.  As  soon  as  he  had  made  himself
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  Inca,  or  (^uichua,  the
most  common  language  in  that  country,  he  suc-
ceeded in  translating  the  catechism  into  eighteen
languages  spoken  by  the  tribes  under  his  jurisdic-
tion. He  was  appointed  rector  of  the  College  of
Cuenca  in  1727.  lie  is  said  to  have  died  at  an  ad-
vanced age,  but  the  date  is  not  given.  He  sent  to
Buops  the  celebrated  map  of  the  Amazon,  drawn
by  Father  Fritz,  whodied  in  his  arms.  He  left  an
interesting  "  Relation,"  written  in  1731,  giving
curious  details  about  the  savage  tribes  that  dwell
on  the  Iwinks  of  the  Amazon.  Ft  is  inserted  in  the
888  volume  of  the  "  Ijettres  edifiantcs."

I>K  TROBRI  AND,  Philippe  Regis,  soldier,
b.  in  the  Chateau  des  Rochettes,  near  Tours,  France,
4  June,  1H16.  His  full  name  and  title  were  Philippe
Regis  Denis  de  Keredern.  Baron  deTrobriand  ;  but.
on  becoming  an  American  citizen,  he  modified  the
name  and  dropped  the  title.  His  early  education
was  for  a  military  career.  He  studied  at  the  Col-
lege Saint  Louis  in  Paris,  the  college  of  Rouen,
where  his  father  was  in  command,  and  the  college
of  Tours;  but  the  revolution  of  1830  changed  his
prospects,  and  he  was  graduated  at  the  Universitv
of  Orleans  as  bachelier-es-lettres  in  1834,  and  at
Poitiers  as  licencie-en-droit  in  1838.  He  came  to
the  L'nitcd  States  in  1841,  edited  and  published
the  ••  Revue  du  nouveau  monde"  in  New  York  in
lH49-'50,  and  was  joint  editor  of  the  "Courrier  des
Etats -Cnis  •  in  1854-'61.  On  28  Aug.  of  the  last-
named  vear  he  entered  the  National  army  as  colonel
of  the  56th  New  York  regiment  He  was  engaged
at  Yorktown  and  Williamsburg,  commanded  a  bri-
gade of  the  8d  army  corps  in  1888-1*  and  was  at
Fredericksburg.  Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg,
lb  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in
January.  1MI54,  nnd  commanded  the  defences  of
New  York  city  bom  May  till  June  of  that  year.
As  commander  of  a  brigade  in  the  M  army  corps

hi  una  at Dean Bottom,  Petatahmg,  Hatcher's

Run.  and  Five  Forks,  and  was  at  the  head  of  a
division  in  the  OpomtJOM  that  ended  in  fjaoli  OUT

render.  For  his  bOTriOM  in  this  campaign  he  was
etted  major-general  of  volunteers  on  9  April.

1865. He  entered  the  regular  armv  as  colonel  of

the  :Ust  infantry  00  88  July,  I860,' was  hrevctted
.dier-gcneral.  I'.  S.  army,  8 March, 1887, and

commanded  the  district  of  Dakota  in  August  of


that  rear. He  ww  transferred  to  the  l.'Uh  infantry
on  15  March,  1869,  and  commanded  the  di»<
Montana,  and  afterward  that  of  Jirwi.
was  retind  at  bhi  own  requi  tint  of  age,

March,  1879,  and  is  now  (lHH7)a  rmfdanl  of
lb-  ha.-  ptil.li-li.il  -Ijm  gentihv
homines de 1'..iicM." a  BOVel 1 1
"(J/iatre  an-de  campagno  a  1'arme,-  du  Potomac"
(8  voU.,  Paris  el  llruxelles,  I

DKIXPONTS.  Christian,  (int.  ,|e  Forbaeh
ties.  b.  in  Deuspont*. liavaria, :

Itceallie  colonel of the Royal Dcti\ Pont «  Planch

regiment  In  i77o,  served  with  Boabumesea  m  um

country  in  l?H<»-*:i.  and  was distinguished  at  York-
town.  He  afterward  commanded  the  Bavarian
corps  at  Hohenlinden  in  1808,  and  leostvod  the
grand  cross  of  the  order  of  Maximilian  Joseph  f'-r
his  gal  Ian  try. —  His  brother.  William,  b.  1m  June,
1754;  d.  -lxteeii  vears  bofoN  his  brother,  became
lieutenant-colonel  of  his  brother's  regiment,

1778, end  was  wonnded  ■  the  etteeh  on  there-

doubt  at  Yorktown.  on  the  night  of  14  <>.t..  1>|.
For  his  mrfiOM  there  he  WOI  made  by  the  king  of
France  a  chevalier  of  the  militarv  "order  of  St.
Louis,  «nd  was  mentioned  particularly  in  Baron
Yiomesnil's  reporl  t<»  BoobembseU,  He  afterward
held  the  honorable  post  of  commander  of  the  |*I-
ace  guard  at  the  Bavarian  court.  OoL  Trumbull'*
painting  of  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis,  in  the  ro-
tunda of  the  eepitol  at  Washington.  contains  H
jKtrtrait  of  Count  des  Deuxnonts.  He  left  in  manu-
script "Mes  cainimgnes  d  Amerit|ue,"  which  was
found  on  a  Paris  booVettl]  in  1K<»7  by  Dr.  Samuel
Abbott  (ireen.and  pnbliehed  by  him,  with  an  Kng-
lish  translation  ana  notes  (Boston,  ivi

DE  VACA,  Cabeza. Sea  Cabbj  m  Yaca.

DEVKNS.  Charles,  jurist,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass..  4  April.  1*20;  d.  in  Boston.  7  Jan..  188L
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1N3N.  etudted  in
the  law-school  at  Cambridge,  and  practised  from
1S41  till  1849.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  from  that  county  in  1*48  and  1H49.  From
1849  till  ls.V{  he  held  the  office  of  V.  S.  marshal
for  the  district  of  Massachusetts.  During  this
period  Thomas  Sims  was  remanded  as  a  fugitive
slave,  end  Mr.  DsveUB,  in  obedience  to  what  beCOO-

sidered  the  exigenciea  of  his  office,  oansed  the  pro-

cess  to  Ih'  executed.  After  the  rendition  he  en-
deavored, through  the  Rev.  L  A.  Grimes,  m  i*-V>,
to  obtain  the  freedom  of  Sims,  offering  to  |iav  what-
ever Mini  was  oeoeaaary  for  the  purpose,  but  the
effort  was  fruitless.  At  a  later  |>criod.  hearing
that  Mrs.  Lydis  Maria  Child  was  making  applica-
tions for  money  to  purchase  the  freedom  of  Sims,
Mr.  Devcns  addressed  her  a  letter  requesting  there-
turn  of  the  sums  she  had  collected  for  this  purpose,
and  that  she  allow  him  the  privilege  of  i>aying  the
whole  stun.  To  this  Mrs.  Child  assented  ;  but.  lie-
fore  the  affair  could  bl  arranged,  the  war  rendered
negotiation  impossible.  Sims  was  eventually  lilwr-
ated  b\  the  urogram  of  the  National  ones

pecuniarily  aided  by  Mr.  Devens  in  establishing
hims.-lf  in' civil  life,  and  at  a  lotOT OOfiod epnointad
by  him.  while  attorney-genend  of  the  I'nit^i  Statea,
to  an  appropriate  place  in  t he  department  ofnetfee.
In  lH-">4  Sir.  D.veits  resumed  the  pniotitv  of  law  in
tOK  On  1»  April.  1H01,  he  SjOSeptsd  the
ofiosof  major,  commanding  an  independent  Iwt-
talion  of  ntles.  with  which  he  served  three  months
and  in  .lulv  was  ap|H>iute<l  SolOBSJ  of  the  b*»th
Massjichuset'ts  volunteers.  With  this  regiment  he
served  until  April.  1888, end W0J  woun«l<-<l  in  the
battle  Of  Bell's  Stuff, He  was  mmlo  brigadier-gsn-

ere]  in  mmended  a  hrignda  auitng  tim

I'.ninstilar  cam|>aign,  was  disabK'd  by  a  wound  at


156


di:\  i:i;i:r.\


DEVTN


Fair  Oaks,  and  was  in  the  kittles  of  Antietam  and
Fredericksburg.  In  1st;:!  he  commanded  a  division
in  the  11th  corps  at  the  battle  of  chancel  lorsville.
where  he  was  severely  wounded.  Returning  to  the
field  in  the  spring  of  1864,  he  was  ■ppofirted  to
the  command  of  a  division  in  the  18th  army  corps,
reorganized  as  the  8d  ilivision  of  the  24th  corps,
and  his  troops  were  the  first  to  occupy  Richmond
when  it  was  evacuated  by  the  Confederates.  Gen.
Devens  was  brevetted  major-general  for  gallantry
and  good  conduct  at  the  capture  of  Richmond,  and
remained  in  the  service  for  a  year  after  the  ter-
mination of  hostilities,  his  principal  duty  being  as
commander  of  the  district  of  Charleston,  which
comprised  the  eastern  portion  of  South  Carolina.
In  June,  1866,  at  his  own  recmest,  he  was  mustered
out  of  service,  and  immediately  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  in  Worcester.  In  April,  1867,
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  justices  of  the  superior
court  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1873  was  made  one
of  the  justices  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state.
In  1877  he  became  attorney-general  in  the  cabinet
of  President  Hayes.  On  his  return  to  Massachu-
setts in  1881  he  was  reappointed  one  of  the  jus-
tices of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  in  which
office  he  continued.  His  only  publications  were
his  legal  opinions  and  addresses  on  public  occa-
sions. Of  nis  addresses  the  most  important  were
those  at  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  battle  of
Bunker  Hill,  at  the  dedication  of  the  soldiers'
monuments  in  Boston  and  Worcester,  on  the  deaths
of  Gen.  Meade  and  Gen.  Grant,  and  as  presiding
officer  at  the  250th  anniversary  of  Harvard.

DEVEREUX,  John  Henry,  railroad  manager,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  April,  1832  ;  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  17  March,  1886.  He  was  educated  in  the
Portsmouth.  N.  H.,  academy,  and  in  1848  went  to
Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  served  as  construction
engineer  on  several  railroads.  He  removed  to  Ten-
nessee in  1852,  and  became  prominent  in  railroad
affairs  there.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  offered  his  services  to  the  government,  and
aided  the  Union  cause  as  superintendent  of  mili-
tarv  railroads  in  Virginia.  He  resigned  in  1864,
and  returned  to  Cleveland,  where  he  became  one  of
the  foremost  railroad  men  in  the  west.  He  was
chosen  president  of  the  Cleveland,  Columbus,  Cin-
cinnati, and  Indianapolis  railroad  in  June,  1873,
of  the  Atlantic  and  Great  Western  in  1874,  and
of  the  Indianapolis  and  St.  Louis  in  1880,  being
receiver  of  the  last-named  road  from  May  till
September,  1882.  In  1877  Gen.  Devereux,  by  his
personal  courage,  prevented  800  of  his  men  from
joining  in  the  railroad  riots.  He  was  prominent
in  the  councils  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.

DEVEREUX,  Thomas  Pollock,  lawyer,  b.  in
Newbern,  N.  C,  17  Dec.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Connemara,
Halifax  co.,  N.  C,  24  March,  1869.  He  was  a
great-grandson  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1813,  and  studied  at  the  Litchfield,
Conn.,  law-sGhool,  but  did  not  practise  till  pecun-
iary losses  forced  him  to  do  so.  He  was  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  North  Carolina  under  the  ad-
ministrations of  John  Quincy  Adams  and  Andrew
Jackson,  and  in  1826  was  appointed  reporter  for
the  State  supreme  court.  The  death  of  an  uncle
left  him,  in  middle  life,  the  care  of  a  large  estate,
and  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  daysVon  his  plantation,
but  served  for  some  time  as  chairman  of  the  Hali-
fax county  court.  He  published  "  Reports  of  the
North  Carolina  Supreme  Court,  1826-'34  "  (4  vols.,
Raleigh,  1829-'36),  "  Reports  in  the  Superior  Court,
1834-*40 "  (4  vols.,  1837-40),  and  " Equity  Reports,
1826-'40  "  (4  vols.,  1838-'40).  In  the  preparation
of  some  of  these  he  was  assisted  by  W.  II.  Battle.


DEVILLE.  Edward  Gaston.  Canadian  sur-
veyor. 1>.  in  La  Charite  Sur  Loire  Nieviv.  France.
in  1849.  He  was  educated  at  the  naval  school,
Brest,  and  afterward  joined  the  French  navy,  and
had  charge  of  extensive  hydrographic  surveys  in  the
South  Sea  islands,  Peru,  and  elsewhere.  He  r<^
tired  from  the  navy  in  1874  and  went  to  Canada,
and  soon  after  his  arrival  there  entered  the  service
of  the  Quebec  government,  where  he  remained
until  1879  as  inspector  of  surveys  and  scientific  ex-
plorer. He  was  commissioned  as  provincial  land
surveyor  in  1877;  as  Dominion  land  and  topo-
graphical surveyor  in  1878 ;  in  1881  he  became  in-
spector of  Dominion  land  surveys,  and  in  1885  was
appointed  surveyor-general  of  Canada.  He  is  a
fellow  of  the  Royal  astronomical  society  and  of
the  Royal  society  of  Canada.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Astronomic  and  Geodetic  Calculations,"  and  of
several  scientific  papers.

DE  VILLIERS,  Charles  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  1826.
He  had  been  an  officer  in  the  French  army,  and
afterward  became  colonel  of  the  11th  Ohio  volun-
teers. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  the
United  States  he  was  taken  prisoner,  17  July,  1861,
and  sent  to  Richmond.  About  the  middle  of  Sep-
tember following  he  eluded  the  guards  and  escaped.
Under  the  guise  of  a  mendicant  Frenchman,  aged,
infirm,  and  nearly  blind,  he  succeeded  in  obtaining
the  commandant  s  permission  to  go  to  Fort  Mon-
roe, under  a  flag  of  truce,  that  he  might  embark
"for  his  dear  old  home  in  France."  After  two
weeks'  delay  the  supposed  Frenchman  was  assisted
on  board  a  transport  at  Norfolk  and  taken  to  the
Union  boat.  When  safely  under  his  own  flag,  he
cast  off  his  pack,  green  goggles,  and  rags,  thanked
the  officers  for  their  politeness,  shouted  a  loud
huzza  for  the  stars  and  stripes,  and  gave  them  the
pleasing  information  that  they  had  just  parted
with  Col.  De  Villiers,  of  the  11th  Ohio.  He  ar-
rived safely  in  Washington,  rejoined  his  regiment,
and  was  made  brigadier-general,  10  Oct.,  1861.  He
had  been  the  military  instructor  of  Col.  Elmer  K
Ellsworth.  He  received  his  discharge  from  the
army  on  23  April,  1862,  and  returned  to  France.

DEVIN,  Thomas  C,  b.  in  New  York  city  in
1822  ;  d.  there,  4  April,  1878.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  followed  the  trade  of  a
painter,  and  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st
New  York  militia  regiment.  Just  after  the  battle
of  Bull  Run,  Mr.  Devin  accosted  Thurlow  Weed,
at  that  time  a  stranger  to  him,  and  said  that  he
wished  authority  to  raise  a  cavalry  company  for
immediate  service.  Mr.  Weed  telegraphed  to  Gov.
Morgan  for  a  captain's  commission  for  Mr.  Devin,
obtained  it,  and  in  two  days  the  company  had  been
recruited  and  was  on  its  way  to  Washington.  At
the  end  of  the  three  months  for  which  he  had  en-
listed he  entered  the  service  again  as  colonel  of  the
6th  New  York  cavalry.  His  command  was  at-
tached to  the  cavalry  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Po-
tomac, and  participated  in  all  the  battles  fought  by
that  corps  from  Antietam  to  Lee's  surrender.  At
Five  Forks  he  commanded  his  brigade,  and  carried
the  Confederate  earthworks.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  15  Aug.,  1864,  for
bravery  at  Front  Royal,  where  his  command  cap-
tured two  stands  of  colors,  and  where  he  was
wounded ;  and  major-general,  13  March,  1865,  for
his  services  during  the  war.  He  entered  the  regu-
lar army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  8th  cavalry,
28  July,  1866,  commanding  the  district  of  .Mon-
tana. On  2  March,  1867,  he  was  brevetted  colonel,
U.  S.  army,  for  gallantry  at  Fisher's  Hill,  and
brigadier-general  for  services  at  Sailor's  Creek.  He
then  commanded  the  district  of  Arizona,  and  on


m:\i\k


DEW


95  Jinn-.  1877,  became  colonel  <.f  tin-  !M  onvalry.

t,  in  11  conversation  with  Thurlow  \\
called  Gen.  Devin,  next  to  Gen.  Sheridan,  the  best
aeralry  officer  hi  the  National  army.

I > l  \  l  n  i  I  human,  Canadian  anrreyorvh  in
tin-  (..imtv  West  meat  h. Ireland,  in  18881 Ho  waa

tdnoatad  in  Fox's  wnglitaai'i  academy,  and  in  the

<•«  .r|»»  of  Royal  engineers,  and.  after  l>cing  <-in|»l<  >\  «<1
on  tin-  ordnance  survey  of  Inland,  emigrated  to
ila.  Ho  became  connected  with  the  surveying
department  in  Canada  in  ixpi. and  was  deputy  sur-
r-general  In  l&IS-^.  In  1H45)  he  constructed
for  the  government  a  imipof  Canada  from  Lake  Su-
perior to  Nova  Scot  in  (new  od..  including  .Manitoba,
[879),  and  al^i  oouatruotad  the  first  ajeoTogjeal  map
of  the  Hndaon  bey  territory  before  the  Canadian
government  obtained  control  of  it.  Me  was  elected
a  P.R.G.  &  of  London  in  1888,  and  F.  <i.  S.  of
London  in  18ol.  and  lias  also  been  elected  a  cor-
mding  member  of  the  Geographical  society  of
Berlin  and  of  the  American  geographical  and  sta-
tistical society.  He  is  the  author  of  a  Held-lxxdc,
exclusively  used  in  Canadian  and  other  surveys.

DE  VlS'NE,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  London-
derry, Ireland,  1  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  Morrisania.
V  V..  It)  Feb.,  lKW.  His  family  emigrated  to  the
United  States  liefore  he  was  a  vear  old,  scttlinjer  in
Charleston,  Montgomery  Co.,  }f ,  Y.,  where  he  lived
till  eleven  years  of  age.  In  1819  he  became  a  min-
ister of  tin-  Methodist  Episcopal  chnrch,  and  filled
appointments  in  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  for  five
years.  In  1825  his  dislike  of  slavery  caused  his
transfer  to  the  New  York  conference,  in  which
connection  he  remained  until  his  death.  He  was
a  frequent  contributor  to  the  religious  press,  and
published  in  book  form  "The  M.  10.  Church  and
Slavery"  (Boston,  1844);  "Recollections  of  Fifty
V.ars'in  the  Ministry"  (1869):  and  the  '•  Irisli
Primitive  Church"  (1870). — His  son,  Theodore
Low,  printer,  1>.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  25  Dec.,
is*2s,  left  school  at  fourteen  years  of  age,  and  in
1844-'8  worked  as  a  printer  in  the  office  of  the
Newburgh,  N.  Y.,  "  Gazette."  He  went  to  New
York  in  1849,  entered  the  employ  of  Francis  Hart.
and  in  1859  became  his  partner.  Mr.  Hart  died
in  1877.  and  in  1N83  the  firm  name  became  Theo-
dore L.  De  Vinne  and  Company.  In  his  own  office,
and  as  a  member  of  the  Tvpotheta\  the  Grolier
club,  and  the  Authors'  club,  Mr.  De  Vinne  baa
been  active  in  efforts  to  improve  typography.  His
style  of  book  composition  and  his  press- work  of
wood-cuts  have  given  him  a  wide  reputation  in
this  country  and  abroad.  He  has  printed  "St.
Nicholas"  since  its  beginning  in  1878.  and  the
**  Century "  since  1874.  In  1886  he  removed  ton
new  building  in  Lafayette  place  specially  designed
by  him.  He  has  contributed  to  current  literature
on  books  and  printing,  and  has  published  the
■  Printers'  Price  List,"  an  office  manual  (New  York.
1871);  "  Invention  of  Printing"  (1876);  and  "  His-
toric Types"  (1886).

DE  VkIKS.  David  Picterssen,  colonist.  Bred
in  17th  century.  Several  of  the  directors  of  the
New  Amsterdam  chamber  of  the  West  India  com-
pany took  measures  to  secure  for  themselves  a  share
of  the  privileges,  which  they  offered  to  enterpris-
ing capitalists  in  the  charter  <>f  Htt!*.  A  few  days
before  the  passing  of  the  charter  the  agents  of  Sam-
uel Sodyn  and  Samuel  Blicuunacrt  DOVgttl  from
th>'  Indians  the  tract  of  country  on  the  southwest
side  <if  S.tith  River  bay,  which  purchase  was  rati-
fied by  the  director-general  and  council  at  |
Amsterdam  on  10  .luiv.  1880.  The  possession  of
these  desert  tracts  of  land  would  !«•  ..f  no  profit
unless  means  were  adopted  to  cultivate  them,  and.


in  order  to  accomplish  this,  a  number  at  aaaonin-

yOM  wen-  formed,  consisting  of  wealthy  man.
■aeh  iruild  was  under  the  authority  ..f  H  |«troon.

iber, who,  an  association  was  fore
planting  a  colony  on  the  South  rivi
wen-  Godyn,  Bkrmtnacrt,  Van  Banned*
and  other-. <>n  IJ  |).<  ..  168ft  two  Teasels,  with  a
numl»rof  emigrants  and  a  largr  Mock  of  cattle,
were  sent  out by  De  Vries,  under  the  command  of
Peter  Heye*.  to  occupy  Um  new  possessions  on  the
Delaware. The smaller  of  these  vessels  was  cap-
ture. I  by  the  Dunkirk  privateers  In-fore  it  had  left
the  Duteh  waters;  the  other.  "The  Walru-
rytng  eighteen  guns.arrived  safely  m  the  Delaware,
and  a  settlement  was  made  on  U  i  short

distance  from  the  mouth  of  the  riv.-r.  The  IftUa
fort,  flanked  bv  palisades,  was  nam.il  F.-rt  fjs>
landt.  and  the  land- wen-  called  by  the  |>octjc  name
of  ••Swanendal."  The  chief  purpose  in  acquiring
these  lands  was  to  cultivate  grain  and  toUu-co  and
to  engage  in  the  whale-fishery. 1 1  eyes,  however,

did  nothing  toeetahueh  the  whale-fishery, and  re-
turned to  Holland  on  81  Bent.  1881,  leaving  iloaset
in  charge  of  the  colony,  which  con-i-ted  ..f  about
thirty-two  men.  Then-suit  of  this  expedition  was
a  disapiM.intineiit  to  the  atoekholdl IB,  who  had  an-
ticipated ■  large  profit  from  the  enterprise,  ami  it
was  therefore  decided  that De  Vries  should aOa>

inand  a  eBoond  expedition,  and  htftMna  patroon  of

the  colony.  With  a  large  vessel  and  a  yacht  he
set  sail,  24  May,  1688. At  the  moment  of  ■tart-

inn  he  received  news  that  the  settlers  of  Swanen-
dal hail  been  massacred  l>\  the  Indians  ami  all
their  possessions  destroyed.  <»n  B  Deo,  be  reached
the  Delaware,  and  the  cry  of  "Whale  mar  the
ship  !  "  stimulated  their  hopes,  soon  to  be  dis|»elled,
for  the  sight  of  the  settlement  of  Swanendal  pre-
sented a  melancholy  spectacle.  The  ground  was
decorated  with  the  skulls  and  bones  of  theoolo-
1 1 i — t  — .  and  the  heads  of  horses  and  cattle  were  scat-
tered over  the  plain.  They  succeeded  in  communi-
cating with  the  Indians  on  the  following  day.  and
invited  them  to  a  "nice  talk."  The  savages  came
with  their  chief,  and  by  the  free  use  of  presents  and

pacific  policy  De  Vriee gained  their  confidence  and
concluded  a  treaty  of  peace. Encouraged  by  their

friendly  disposition.  De  Vriea  moved  up  the  river
to  Fort  Nassau  in  quest  <>f  prorations.  Here  he
met  savage  Indians,  who  had  massacred  the  English
settlers  from  the  Virginia  colony.  Derirottl
ing  the  country,  De  Vries  sailed  for  Virginia,  where
he  was  heartily  welcomed  by  the  governor,  who
was  much  surprised  to  know  thai  the  Duteh  had  a
colony  on  the  Delaware.  De  Vries  returned  to
Swanendal.  and  found  that  his  party  had  only  taken
seven  whales,  which  yielded  but  little  oil.  Conclud-
ing that  this  enterprise  wee  not  profitable. he  gath-
ered up  his  e fleets,  and,  taking  his  party.  -
for Holland  on 14 April.  Mi,  leaving  DO  Run

prana  In  the  raUeyof  the  IVlaware.  lie  published
••  Voyages  fr«.in  Holland  to  America.  fn>m  1632  till
184V1  which  ana  tranalated  from  the  Dutch  by
Henry  C.  Murphy  (New  York.  U

DrlW,  Thomas  Roderick,  educator,  b.  in  King
and  l^uccn  county.  \'a..  "i D  0.  in Paris

Frame.  •>  Auir..  l*l<*>.  He  was  graduated  at  Will-
iam and  Mary  in  lN-^O,  and  afterward  travelled  two

ream  in  Bnrope.  In  1887  be  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  history,  metaphysics,  and  |«>litical  econo-
my in  William  and  Mary,  of  which  college  he  was
made  president  in  1888.  He  held  Una  Oafica  until
his  d.ath.  which  occurred  while  he  was  travelling
in  Europe  With  his  bride.  His  published  works
are:  -  The  Policy  of  theGorerninenl  "  (1888

Eaaey  in  Favor  <'>f  Slavery  "  |  1833),  which  produced


158


I)K WALDEN


DEWEY


an  extraordinary  effect  upon  the  public  mind,  and
for  ii  while  set  at  rest  the  subject  of  emancipation
in  Virginia;  "A  Digest  of  the  Laws,  Customs,
Manners,  and  Institutions  of  Ancient  and  Modern
Nations"  (New  York,  1853).  This  is  a  treatise  on
the  history  of  the  world  from  its  earliest  period  to
the  first  French  revolution.  He  also  published
"Lectures,"  on  "Usury,"  "History,"  "The  Char-
acteristic Difference  of  Man  and  Woman,"  etc.,  and
contributed  to  the  "  Southern  Literary  Messenger."

1)E  WALDEN,  Thomas  Blaides,  actor.  l>.  in
London,  England,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
26  Sept.,  1873.  He  appeared  at  the  Haymarket
theatre,  London,  in  1841,  and  made  his  first  appear-
ance on  the  American  stage  at  the  Park  theatre,
New  York, in  1844,  as  Belmour  in  " Is  he  Jealous?"
After  achieving  moderate  success  upon  the  stage,
he  began  to  adapt  and  to  write  plays,  of  which  he
left  more  than  one  hundred.  In  1857  he  abandoned
his  profession  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,
but  without  success.  He  was  a  chaplain  in  the
volunteer  army  of  the  United  States  during  the
civil  war.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Upper  Ten
and  the  Lower  Twenty,"  played  at  Burton's  thea-
tre, New  York ;  "  The  Seven  Sisters " ;  "  Sam,'
written  for  F.  S.  Chanfrau ;  "  Kit,"  altered  for  Mr.
Chanfrau ;  "  The  Jesuit,"  plaved  at  the  Bowery
theatre  in  1854;  "The  Bell-Ringer  of  Boston";
"  The  Hypochondriac,"  and  several  adaptations
from  the  f  rench  for  Matilda  Heron.

DEWART,  Edward  Hartley,  Canadian  clergy-
man, b.  in  county  Cavan,  Ireland,  in  1828.  When
six  years  old  he  came  with  his  parents  to  Canada,
the  family  settling  in  the  county  of  Peterborough,
Ontario.  He  was  almost  wholly  self-educated,  with
the  exception  of  two  sessions  passed  in  the  Toronto
normal  school.  In  1851  he  began  preaching  as  a
probationer  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  church,
and  after  completing  four  years  in  this  service  was
ordained  a  minister.  In  1856  he  was  appointed
superintendent  of  St.  Andrew's  circuit,  on  the  Ot-
tawa river.  Subsequently  he  preached  in  the  Old-
town  circuit,  and  in  1860  was  stationed  in  Mon-
treal west.  Soon  afterward  he  resigned  his  charge
in  consequence  of  illness,  and  after  his  recovery
labored  in  St.  John's  circuit,  Collingwood,  Toronto,
and  Ingersoll.  In  1869  he  was  elected  editor  of
the  "  Christian  Guardian,"  the  principal  organ  of
Methodism  in  Canada.  At  the  general  conference
of  the  United  Methodists  in  1883  he  was  elected
by  acclamation  to  the  editorial  chair.  In  connec-
tion with  the  movement  for  the  union  of  the  vari-
ous branches  of  the  Methodist  church,  he  was  one
of  the  chief  advocates  of  lay  delegation  and  union
principles ;  and  at  the  London  conference  in  1873,
when  a  plan  of  union  had  been  agreed  upon  by
the  Wesleyan,  Eastern  British-American,  and  New
Connection  conferences,  he  and  Dr.  Nelles  were  ap-
pointed delegates  to  the  British  conference  to  rep-
resent the  united  church  and  arrange  the  terras  of
settlement  with  the  parent  body.  He  was  also
present  as  a  delegate  from  Canada  at  the  Method-
ist oecumenical  conference  that  met  in  London,
England,  in  1881.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  by  Victoria  college,  Cobourg.  His
writings  include  a  prize  essay  against  the  use  of  to-
bacco (1858),  and  poems  on  "  John  Milton,"  "  Ni-
agara Falls,"  and  "  Voices  of  the  Past."

DEWDNEY,  Edgar,  statesman,  b.  in  Devon-
shire, England,  in  1835.  He  went  to  British  Co-
lumbia in  1859,  and  was  employed  on  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway  survey  as  an  engineer.  He  repre-
sented Kootenay  in  the  local  parliament  in  1868-'9,
and  was  returned  for  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1872,  again  in  1874,  and  by  acclamation  at  the  gen-


eral election  in  1878.  In  1879  he  resigned  on  being
appointed  Indian  commissioner,  which  office  he
held  till  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  the
northwest  territories  in  December,  1881.  In  July,
1888,  he  was  appointed  minister  of  the  interior  and
superintendent-general  of  Indian  affairs  for  Canada.

DEWEES,  William  Potts,  physician,  b.  in
Pottsgrove,  Pa.,  5  May,  1768;  d.  in  Philadelphia.
18  .May.  1841.  He  attended  lectures  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania,  and  began  to  practise  at  Ab-
ington,  Pa.,  in  1789,  without  having  taken  a  degree,
which,  however,  was  soon  conferred  upon  him  by
the  university.  Yellow  fever  having  thinned  the
ranks  of  the  physicians  in  Philadelphia  in  1793,
Dr.  Dewees  removed  there,  selecting  obstetrics  as
his  specialty,  and  won  a  high  reputation  in  t  hat
department.  In  1812  he  relinquished  his  practice
on  account  of  delicate  health  and  resided  at  Phil-
ipsburg,  Pa.,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  agricult-
ure until  1817.  In  that  year  he  returned  to  Phila-
delphia and  resumed  practice.  In  1826  he  was
elected  adjunct  professor,  and  in  1834  professor  of
obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women  and  children  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In  the  latter  year,
his  health  failing,  he  was  obliged  tq  resign  his  pro-
fessorship. After  spending  a  winter  in  Cuba  and
a  summer  in  the  north,  he  settled  in  Mobile,  and
returned  to  Philadelphia  a  year  before  his  death.
He  published  a  volume  of  "  Medical  Essavs  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1823) ; ."  Treatise  on  the  Physical  and  Med-
ical Treatment  of  Children  "  (1825 ;  10th  ed.,  1854) ;
"System  of  Midwifery"  (1825;  12th  ed.,  1854);
"  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  Females  "  (1826 ;  10th
ed.,  1854) ;  and  "  Practice  of  Medicine  "  (1830).

DEWEY,  Charles  Augustus,  jurist,  b.  in
Williamstown,  Mass.,  13  March,  1793  ;  d.  in  North-
ampton, Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1866.  He  was  a  son  of
Daniel  Dewey,  who  represented  Berkshire  county
in  congress  in  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1811,  studied  law  with  Theodore  Sedgwick,  of
Stockbridge,  and  began  the  practice  of  the  profes-
sion in  Williamstown  in  1814,  where  he  remained
until  in  1826  he  removed  to  Northampton.  He
served  as  U.  S.  district  attorney  from  1830  till
1837,  when  he  was  appointed  the  fifth  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Massachusetts.  In  1840  he  re-
ceived from  Harvard  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  Judge
Dewey  continued  on  the  bench  until  his  death,  a
period  of  twenty-nine  years.  He  was  a  laborious
member  of  the  court,  always  taking  upon  himself
his  full  share  of  the  work,  and  never  seeking  to
avoid  any  of  the  responsibilities  of  his  office.  Al-
though not  a  brilliant  lawyer,  he  was  distinguished
by  the  sound  sense  exercised  in  the  consideration
of  all  questions  coming  before  him.  He  was
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  entire  body  of  statute
law,  as  well  as  with  that  regulating  mercantile
transactions  and  charitable  trusts,  which  latter  re-
ceived a  large  share  of  his  attention  at  the  begin-
ning of  his  judicial  career.

DEWEY,  Chester,  educator,  b.  in  Sheffield,
Mass.,  25  Oct.,  1784 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  5  Dec.,
1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1806,
studied  for  the  ministry,  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1808,  and  officiated  at  Tyringham,  Mass.  In
the  same  year  he  became  tutor  at  Williams,  and  in
1810  was  appointed  to  the  professorship  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy.  He  held  this  place
for  seventeen  years,  during  which  he  did  much  for
the  advancement  of  the  college.  For  many  years
he  was  professor  and  lecturer  on  chemistrv  and
botany  in  the  medical  colleges  of  Pittsfleld,  Mass.,
and  Woodstock,  Vt.  In  1836  he  became  principal
of  the  collegiate  institute  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  remained  till  1850,  when  he  Vas  appointed


DEWEY

professor  of  chcmj-try  and  mttimil  philosophy  in
tin-  I '  ii  i  \  t-r-  neater,  whioh  whs  established

that  feat, Hi-  h«ld  tliis  office  until  1800,  at  which

time  in-  oflevsd  hi-  resignation,  haling  unable  t<>

jM-rfi>riii  active  service,  hut  consented  t<>  retain  11
nominal  connection  with  tin-  university,  and  t<>
give  iii-trtictiou  when  it  railed  hi-  convenience.
Aft«-r  the  age  "f  eighty  In-  lived  in  retirement,  tad
aided  many  nUgiatSl  an<l  benevolent  objects.  Ili-
flit  ire  life  wijs  given  to  scientific  pursuits,  and  he
held  a  high  |«>-iti>)ti  MMMf  American  naturalist-.
lie  made  tin-  study  of  g rasses  a  BjR-cialty,  anil  dis-
covered and  dcscrilM-d  several  new  si>ecics.  The
degree  <>f  M.  D.  WSJ  conferred  upon him I

i,  1».  1>.  by  Union  in  1*38,  and  LL.  D.  by
Williams  in  1850.  He  was  a  careful  and  accurate
observer  of  the  weather,  and  his  notes  were  pub-
lished in  regular  monthly  report-.  Hi-  pa|>ers  on
some  of  the  "Families  and  Natural  Orders  of
Plants,"  published  in  the  "American  Journal  of
Science."  attracted  the  attention  of  some  of  the
leading  European  botanists,  and  led  to  a  corre-
s[M)ndence  with  them.  In  the  class  of  "carices"
he  was  a  recognized  authority,  and  his  writings  on
that  subject  make  an  elal>orate  monograph,  upon
which  he  labored  for  more  than  forty  years.  II  i-
44  History  of  the  Herbaceous  Plants  of  Massachu-
setts" was  published  by  that  state.  His  latest
writings  were  review  articles  on  "The  True  Place
of  Man  in  Zoology"  and  "An  Examination  of
some  Reasonings  against  the  Unity  of  Mankind."

DEWEY,  Frederic  Perkins,  chemist,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  4  Oct.,  1855.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  in  1870,  and  in  the
autumn  of  that  year  became  assistant  in  analytical
chemistry  in  Lafayette  college.  This  office  be  held
until  .July,  1877,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  chemi-
cal work  of  the  North  Jersey  iron  company,  and
continued  as  such  until  the  spring  ff  1*78,  after
which  he  worked  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Sheffield
scientific  school  as  a  post-graduate.  In  April,
1879,  ho  became  chemist  of  the  Roane  iron  and
steel  comjMinv,  and  in  1881  was  associated  with
Dr.  George  W.  II awes  in  investigating  the  build-
ing-stones of  the  United  States  for  the  Tenth
Census.  He  was  appointed  in  December,  1882,
curator  of  metallurgy  in  the  U.  S.  national  mu-
seum in  Washington.  His  literary  work  includes
articles  on  the  chemical  examination  of  iron  and
iron  ores,  contributed  to  various  scientific  journals;
also,  "The  Chemical  Examination  of  Building-
Stones,"  for  the  Tenth  Census  report,  a"  Biographi-
cal Sketch  of  Dr.  Hawes."  for  the  Smithsonian  re-
port. He  prepared  a  "  Plan  to  Illustrate  the  Min-
eral Resources  of  the  United  States  and  their
Utilization"  at  the  World's  Industrial  and  Cotton
Centennial  Exhibition  of  1884- '5  in  New  Orleans.

DEWEY,  Mel vll,  librarian. b.  in  Adams  Centre,
Jefferson  <  -.>.  N.  Y.,  10  Dec.,  1851.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  in  1874,  and  was  acting  librarian
there  from  1873  till  1876,  when  he  removed  to
Boston  and  devoted  himself  to  popular  education
through  tin- simplifying  and  systematizing  of  libra-
ries and  library  work,  the  introduction  of  the  in-
ternational or  metric  system  of  weights  and  meas-
ures, and  the  simplification  of  English  selling.
He  has  been  a  contributor  to  periodical  literature
in  the  advancement  of  his  ideas,  has  prepared  vari-
ous catalogues,  and  edited  the  "  Library  Journal  "
from  1M7»>  till  1881,  ••  Library  Note-."  tin-  ••  Metric
Bulletin,"  "Metric  Advocate."  end  "Spelling-Re-
form  Bulletin."  He  became  manager  of  the  Li-
brary Bureau  in  ls?<i.  chief  librarian  of  Columbia
college  in  1883,  and  professor  of  library  economy
and  director  of  the  Columbia  college  library  school


A  INT


I0P


I  in  1**7. II-  i,  the  author  ..f  «  •M'laseification  and

Subject-Index  for  Cataloguing  and  Arranging  the

Its and Pamphlets  of  .a Library" (Amherst,

1876); and "Decimal  Classification  and  Relaiiv

tndei  "  (Boston,  ink',).

DEWEY,  Orrilla,  theologian,  b.  in  Sheffield.
Mass.,  2*  March.  171*4:  d.  then-,  21  Mar.  I
His  ancestors  were  among  the  fli
field,  wherein-  s|M-nt  hi- early  life,  alternately  votfc.
bgnpOB  his  father-  farm  and  attending  f t ■•-  \il-
lage  school  He  was  naturally  thoughtful,  and  wan
encouraged  in  his  love  of  rending  by  his  father.
His  mother's  piety  had  great  influence  in  the  forma-
tion of  his  character.  Tin-  strict  Calvini-m  that
colored  the  religious  life  around  him  «M  cr-atlv
tempered  by  his  intercourse  with  In-  cousin,  Paul
I»i\mv,  who  was  an  able  mathematician  and  a
skeptic  with  regard  to  the  prevailing  theology.
His  parents  had him  so  thoroughly  prepared  for

oollegethat  be  entered  theaophonore  elaai  in  Will-
iams, where  he  was  graduated  in  1H4.  He  then
returned  to  Sheffield,  where  he  engage*  1  in  teach-
ing, and  afterward  went  to  New  York.  bworafng  a

clerk  in  a  dry-goods  boom. He  wa-  iiadualod  at

Andover  theological  seminary  in  1H]<).  and  for  eight
months  was  agent  for  the  American  education so-
ciety, having  declined  an  immediate  ami  |N-rmancut
pa-t orate  on  account  of  his  unsettled  views  i
Log  theology, notwithstanding  a  very  candid  ex-

preeeJou  of  his  opinions,  he  was  offered  ■  pulpit  in
Gloucester,  which  he  accepted  temporarily.  II.
soon  became  a  Unitarian,  and  was  appointed  to  la-
the assistant  of  Dr.  ('banning,  in  Boston,  with  whom
he  formed  a  lasting  friendship,  and  whose  church
he  supplied  during  it-  pa-tors  travels  in  Europe.
In  1823  be  became  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  chunh
in  New  Bedford,  remaining  there  for  ten  year-,
until  he  went  to  Europe  on  account  of  his  health.
He  was  called  to  the  2d  Unitarian  church  of  New
York  in  1835.  which  during  his  mini-try  built  the
Church  of  the  Messiah.  In  1H42  his  health  again
failed,  and  he  went  a  second  time  to  Europe,  re-
turning in  1844.  He  was  compelled  to  resign  his
charge  in  1848,  and  retired  to  his  farm  in  Sheffield,
where  he  prepared  a  course  of  lectures  for  the  Low-
ell  institute  of  Boston, on  the  "Problem of  Human
Life  and  Destiny."  which  course  was  repeated
twice  in  New  York,  and  delivered  in  many  other
cities.  This  was  followed  by  a  second  Lowell
course,  in  I860,  on  the  "Education  of  the  Human
Rai  r,"  which  was  widely  repeated.  Dr.  Dewey  was
called  to  a  church  in  Albany,  where  he  remained
one  year,  and  to  Washington,  where  he  sjx-iit  two
years.  In  1858  he  again  settled  in  Boston  a.-|**U>r
of  the  society  called  the  "  New  South,"  but  retired

after  four  years  ot  service,  and  onii-  DON  returned

to  his  farm  in  Sheffield,  where  be  resided  until  hie

death.  He  lectured  frequently,  and  apjH-areil  in
public  for  the  last  time  in  the  old  Congregational
church  at  the  centennial  celebration.  1*  .June.  l^T'"..
His  controversial  articles  and  sermons  were  re-
printed in  a  cheap  form  by  the  Unitarian  MI
Hon.  His  first  I>ook  was  ""Letters  on  Revivals."
His  works  were  leaned  in  a  collected  edit  ion  (:t  vols..
New  York.  1K47):  and  again  d  vol..  BVO,  London,
1844).—  Hi-  daughter,  Mary  E..  author,  b.  in  Shef-
field. Ma—.,  ha-  translat.il  QaOTgS  Sand's  "Miller
of  Angilwult."  and  edited  "The  Life  and  letters
of  Catherine  M.  Sedgwick"  (New  York,  I87U

1>E  WINT.  John  Peter,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  17H7:  d.  in  Fi-hkill.  N.  Y..  17  Nov..  W»  At
an  eaiij  w  hi  removed  with  his  parents  to  Fi-h-
kill  on  the  Hudson,  where  his  father  had  purchased
a  large  e-tate.  He  was  a  -taunch  republican  and
an  eminent and wealthy  citi/en.— Ilts  wife,  Car©-


160


DE  WITT


D'WOLF


line  Abigail  Smith,  was  a  daughter  of  Col.  Will-
iam S.  Smith,  who  served  with  <  1  i-t i n<-t i< m  under
Washington.  She  edited  her  mother's  letton  un-
der the  title  of  "The  Correspondence  of  Him  Ad-
ams, daughter  of  John  Adams"  (New  York  and
London,  1847).  The  greater  number  of  these  let-
ters were  written  during  Miss  Adams's  travels
abroad  before  her  marriage  with  Col.  Smith,  which
took  place  in  London,  12  June,  1786.  Mrs.  Smith
died  m  Quincy,  Mass.,  on  14  Aug.,  1818,  and  in  1814
her  daughter  Caroline  married  Mr.  De  Wint.

DE  WITT,  Benjamin,  scientist,  b.  in  1774;  d.
in  New  York  city  in  1819.  He  was  a  practising
physician  in  New  York,  and  published  a  treatise
on  "Oxygen"  (New  York,  1797);  "An  Oration"
(1808);  and  "Minerals  in  New  York,"  in  trans-
actions of  the  American  association  of  science.

DE  WITT,  Charles,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  1728 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  N.  Y.,  in  Sep-
tember, 1787.  He  was  a  delegate  from  New  York
to  the  old  congress  during  its  sessions  in  Philadel-
phia, Princeton,  and  Annapolis  in  1783,  at  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  in  1784,  and  the  first  session  in  New
York  city  in  1785.

DE  WITT,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Catskill,
N.  Y.,  in  August,  1789 ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,
11  Oct.,  1831.  He  studied  for  a  time  at  Union,
but  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1809,  studied
theology  with  Dr.  Porter  in  Catskill,  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1811,  and  held  pastorates  in  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  at  Lanesborough,  Mass.,  and
Albany,  N.  Y.,  till  1823,  when  he  became  professor
of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  theological  seminary
at  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.  In  1825  Dr.  De  Witt
assumed  also  the  professorship  of  belles-lettres,
criticism,  and  logic  in  Rutgers  college.  The  three
chairs  he  filled  until  his  death.  His  publications
were  confined  to  occasional  discourses. — His  son,
John, b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  19  Oct.,  1821,  was

S-aduated  at  Rutgers  in  1838,  and  at  the  New
runswick  seminary  in  1842.  He  was  ordained  in
the  Reformed  church  and  was  pastor  at  Ridge  way,
N.  Y.,  in  1842-'4,  at  Ghent  in  1845-'8,  at  Canajo-
harie  in  1848-'9,  and  at  Millstone,  N.  J.,  from  1850
till  1863,  when  he  became  professor  of  sacred  lit-
erature in  the  theological  seminary  at  New  Bruns-
wick. He  was  a  member  of  the  Bible  revision
committee,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Sure  Foun-
dation and  How  to  Build  on  it "  (New  York,  1860),
and  a  new  translation  of  the  Psalms  (1885).

DE  WITT,  Simeon,  surveyor,  b.  in  Ulster
county,  N.  Y.,  25  Dec,  1756 ;  d.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,
3  Dec,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Queen's  (after-
ward Rutgers)  college  in  1776,  being  the  only
graduate  in  that  year.  He  joined  the  army  of  Gen.
Gates,  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,
and  from  1778  till  1780  was  assistant  topographer
to  the  Continental  army,  and  then  chief  of  the
topographical  staff  of  Gen.  Washington  until  the
close  of  the  war  in  1783.  In  1784  he  became  sur-
veyor-general of  the  state  of  New  York,  in  which
post  he  remained  until  he  died.  He  performed
valuable  services  in  locating  lands  and  laying  out
roads,  and  was  one  of  the  chief  promoters  of  the
Erie  canal.  To  Mr.  De  Witt  it  was  long  believed
we  were  indebted  for  the  extraordinary  classical
names  of  Carthage,  Pompey,  Sempronius,  etc,
given  to  various  townships  of  the  state.  His  sup-
posed pedantry  and  folly  afforded  a  fine  theme  for
one  of  Drake  and  Halleck's  "  Croakers."  But  it  is
now  known  that  the  real  ^culprit  was  the  deputy-
secretary  of  state  of  that  period.  In  1796  De  Witt
was  nominated  surveyor-general  of  the  United
States,  but  declined.  He  was  for  many  years  a
resident  of  Albany,  and  was  active  in  advancing


its  literary  and  material  bfeamta He  became  a

recent  of  the  state  university  in  ITU*,  vie.-.-han-
cellor  in  1817,  and  chancellor  in  182!».  Be  pub-
Uflhed  a  map  of  New  York  (1804),  and  a  treatise
on  the  "Elements  of  Perspective"  (Albany.  lsi:{).
Dr.  T.  liomeyn  Beck  published  a  "Eulogium"  on
his  life  and  services  (Albany,  1835).— His  wife,
Susan  Linn  (1778-1824),  wrote  "  Justinea,"  a  nov-
el, and  "The  Pleasures  of  Religion,"  a  poem.

DE  WITT,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kings-
ton, N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1791 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18
May,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1808,  and
studied  theology  in  the  seminary  at  New  Brunswick,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1812.  The  same  year
he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the
combined con-

S regations  of
ew  Hacken-
sack  and  Hope-
well, Dutchess
co.,  N.  Y.,  where
he  remained  un-
til 1827,  when  he
accepted  a  call
to  the  Collegiate
Dutch  church
of  New  York
city,  of  which  he
was  the  senior
clergyman  from
1858  until  his
death.  He  was
vice  -  president
for  many  years
of  the  New  York
historical  soci-
ety, and  its  president  in  1872-'4;  also  an  active
director  of  the  Bible,  Colonization,  Tract,  and
Sunday-school  societies,  as  well  as  the  boards  of
his  church.  He  published  very  little,  even  his  ser-
mons being  generally  unwritten.  He  was  one  of
the  last  of  the  ministers  of  the  Reformed  Dutch
church  who  could  preach  in  the  Dutch  language.

DE  WITT,  William  Radcliffe,  clergyman,  b.
in  Clinton,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1792 ;  d.  in
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  23  Dec,  1867.  He  was  trained  to
mercantile  life,  but  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Alex-
ander Proudfit.  Leaving  his  studies  to  volunteer
in  the  war  of  1812-'5,  he  fought  under  Com.
McDonough  on  Lake  Champlain.  After  the  war
he  completed  his  theological  course  with  the  Rev.
Dr.  John  M.  Mason,  of  New  York  city,  and  became,
in  1818,  pastor  of  the  church  in  Harrisburg,  over
which  he  presided  until  his  death.  From  1854  till
1867  he  filled  the  office  of  state  librarian,  and  in-
terested himself  in  the  public-school  system  of  the
state. — His  son,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Harris-
burg, Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1842,  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1861,  studied  law,  then  theology,  in  Prince-
ton seminary  and  the  Union  theological  seminary
in  New  York  city,  and  was  ordained,  9  June,  1865.
From  1865  till  1869  he  was  pastor  at  Irvington,
N.  Y.,  then  till  1876  of  the  Central  Presbyterian
church  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  of  the  10th  Presby-
terian church  in  Philadelphia  from  the  latter  year
till  1882,  when  he  became  professor  of  ecclesiastical
history  in  Lane  seminary,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He
has  published  "  Sermons  on  the  Christian  Life "
(New  York,  1885).

D'WOLFE,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,
in  1763  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  21  Dec,  1837.  He
was  elected  V.  S.  senator  from  Rhode  Island,  but
served  only  from  B  Dec,  1821,  till  December,  1825.
when  he  resigned  the  office.


MA


DK.\


m


in  \  I  I  i:.  Henry,  sculptor,  i>.  m  Nelson
(n,ri  ,■  ... v \ .. n Oct,  U»8;  .1.  in  Cambridge,
Mm*.,  23  June,  1878. Hit  father  died  when  Benrj

■  child,  and  in  1*17  In-  removed  with  In-  famih
to  Pomfret, Conn.,  where  he  worked  on  ■  farm,  and
was  afterward  Indentured  to  a  blacksmith. Altar

[ng  his  apprenticeship  he  married,  ami  began
for  himself,  continuing  in  it  wtm  years.
i  worker  in  metals,  and  often  attrib-
uted lii-  subsequent  |»ower  <»f  using  the  chisel  t<>
tin-  early  training.  The  occupation  hail  always
been  distasteful  t..  him,  however,  and.  determining
to  become  an  artist,  he  wenl  to  Providence,  K.  I..
where,  though  self-taught,  he  had  some  success,  af
A  portrait-painter.  He  removed  in  1880  to  Boston,
ami  in  the  followingyear  to  Cambridge,  when  he

passed the remainder  nf  his  life, all  attention
turned  to  sculpture  about  into,  and  he  after-
ward confined  himself  to  that  art. Be  may  be  named
with  Crawford,  Powers, and  Hart  as  a  pioneer  of

American  sculpture; but,  unlike  them, he  never

left  this  country,  holding  with  Palmer  thai  it  was
not  necessary  for  American  artists,  to  go  to  Italy
either  for  inspiration  or  for  instruction,  and  that
our  artists  who  live  abroad  lose  their  claim  to  be
called  distinctively  American.  Mr.  Dexter  never
saw  a  sculptor  model  in  clay,  nor  chisel  the  marble,
until  years  alter  he  was  a  master  in  his  art.  Be
achieved  special  SUCCCSS  in  his  |M>rtrait  busts,  of
which  he  made  nearly  800.  His  first  marble  bust
was  that  of  Major  Samuel  Kliot.  of  Boston.  His
■  Binncy  Child."  in  Mount  Auburn  cemetery,  is
said  to  be  the  tii-sit  marble  statue  executed  in  this
country.  In  1H<50  he  modelled  the  busts  of  all  the
governors  of  the  United  States  then  in  office,  with
the  exception  of  the  governors  of  California  ami
Oregon,  ffivinff  about  a  week  to  each,  and  travel-
ling IT.ihk)  miles.  The  collection,  numbering
thirty-one  busts,  was  intended  for  the  capitol  at
Washington,  but  the  civil  war  prevented  the  con-
summation of  his  plan.  Other  imrtrait  busts  by
his  hand  are  those  of  Charles  Dickens.  Longfellow,
Agassi/.  Henry  Wilson,  and  Anson  Burhngame.
II is  statues  include  "The  Backwoodsman."  now  at
WeUesley  college  (1847);  "The  Cnshing  Children"
(lsjs);  "Gen.  Joseph  Warren  at  Bunker  Hill"
and  "  Nvmph  of  the  Ocean  "  (1*70).
DKYTER,  Henry  Martyn,  clergyman,  b.  in
Plympton,  Mass..  13  Aug..  lS'-M  ;  d.  in  New  Bed*
ford,  Mas*,  18  Nov.,  181X).  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1840,  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1X44,  and  was  called  to  l>e  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  at  Manchester.  X.  H.,  in  the  same
year.  In  1848  he  removed  to  Boston,  and  remained
in  charge  of  what  is  now  the  Berkeley  street  Con-

rgational  church  until  ls»i7.  From  [861  till  1*M
was  editor  of  the  "  Congregationalist,"  and  from
1869  till  IStHJ  of  the  "Congregational  Quarterly,"
the  publication  of  which  lie  Began  in  connection
with  Drs.  Clark  and  Quint.  In  1867  he  resigned  his
pastorate  to  become  editor-in-chief  of  the  consoli-
dated "Recorder"  and  "Congregationalist."  in
which  he  continued,  Be  wasa  frequent  contributor
of  historic  il  essays  to  |teriodical  literature.  In  1865
he  received  the  uegree  of  I).  D.  from  Iowa  college,
and  in  1«K)  from  Vale.  From  1*77  till  Ikho  he  was
lecturer  on  Congregationalism  at  Andover  theologi-
cal seminarv.  Among  his  published  works  are  "The
Voice  of  the  Bible  the  Verdict  of  Reason  "  (1858) ;
Phoughta  "  <  'onirregationalism  :

What  it  is.  Whence  it  is.  HOW  it  Works.  Why  it  is
•  r  than any other Form  of  Church QoTan

ment,  and  its  Consequent  Demands"  (1868;  Rh

1879);  "The  Verdict  of  Reason  upon  the Fu-
ture Punishment of  those  who Die tmpsnitOBi"
VOL.  II. — 1 1


"The  Church  Polity  of  the  Pilgrims  the
Pohty  of  the N.w Testament

and  hi«  'Banishment'  troa  the
Massachusetts  Colon)

nalismoftl  mdred  Years,

in  its  Literature,  with  Sp<
Certain  Recondite, Neglected,  or Disputed Pas-
sages,*'wit  ha  Bibliographical  Appendh

\  Hand-boo*  of  Congregationalism
ton,  INSO);  ••  Roger  William*'*  Christenings  make
not Christians; a  Long-lost  OVSfsd  and

Exactly  lb-printed,  ami  Edited  "(Proridenci
" The  True  StorV  of  John  Smyth,  I  j.tist,

ete."  (IKhl);  and  "Common  S-iis,-  as  to  Woman
BttflkMs"  j  18881 The  ••C.ii^r. ■-iitioiinlism  .,f  the

Last  ;t(Mt  Years  "  is  enriched  with  a  bibliography
containing  7.2.r»o  titles  II. •  also  edited,  for  pri-
vate reprint,  <  lurch's  ••  Eaetern  Expeditions  "  and
■kt  ■  Entertaining  Passages  Rttattrtg  to  Philip's

War."  together  With  MoUlt's"  Relation."  from  the

first  edlflona.  He  prepared  in  msunsssrij
Bibliography  of  the  Church  Struggle  in  England
during  the  Sixteenth  Century."  with  IjBOO  titles.
For  many  years  he  was  preparing  a  history  of
"Old  Plymouth  Colony."  the  first  volume  of  which,
devoted  to  the  "  Prc-history  of  the  Colony,  with
the English and Hutch Life of the Plymouth

Men,"  he  left  in  manuscript.
DEXTER,  Samuel,  merchant,  b,  in  1786;  d.  in

Mendon.  Mass.,  in  1810.  He  WSS  th>.  son  of  Bar.
Samuel  Dexter,  of  Dedham,  Mass.,  who  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1720.  He  accumulated  a  com-
petency in  mercantile  pursuits  in  Boston  before  he
had  readied  the  age  of  fifty,  ami  devoted  much
time  to  historical  studies.  In  the  discussion  be-
tween  the  mother  country  and  her  colonies  that
preceded  the  Revolution,  Mr.  Dexter  t«>ok  very
strong  ground,  basing  his  views  on  the  legislative
precedents  in  which  he  was  well  versed.  While
not  displaying  the  ardor  of  <>tis,  Warren,  or  Haw-
lev,  nor.  mi  some  questions,  perhaps,  the  firmness
of"  Adams,  he  labored  not  less  Eealously  than  they,
in  company  with  such  men  as  Bowdoul  and  Win-
throp,  to  inform  the people  on  the  important

questions  then in debate,  and to  confute  and  cX-

pose  the  fallacies  of  Cove.  Bernard  and  Butchin-
son.  He  and  his  friends  pointed  oul  the  danger
of  the  policy  pursued  by  the  British  ministry,  and
sought  to  convince  their  fellow-citisens  that  all
that  was  dear  to  them  was  at  >lnkr.  Be  was  a
member  of  the  governor's  council  before  th>
lotion,  and  for  several  years  between  1786  and  1775
served  on  the  more  Important  committees  of  l«>th
the  house  and  the  council.  In  177<>-'7.  ami  sub-
sequently, he  was  chosen  one  of  the  supreme  ex-
ecutive council  of  the  state.  In  his  later  yean  be
retired  from  public  service  and  devoted  much  time
to  religious  investigations.  These  led  him  to  re-
ject tin- doctrines  of  Calvin,  and  to  incline  strongly
toward  the  Arminian.  At  his  death  he  left  a
legacy  of  $5.imki  to  Harvard  for  the  encouragement
of  biblical  criticism.  He  also  bequeathed  «M<>  to  a
clergyman,  on  condition  that  the  latter  should  de-
liver a  funeral  sermon  in  his  inemorv  without  mak-
ing any  mention  of  his  name,  the  discourse  to  I*-
based  on  the  text.  -The  things  which  an-  seen  are
tcmiMiral;  but  the  things  which  an-  not  seen  are
eternal."— His  son.  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,
14  Mav.  1781:  d.  in  Athei.  Hay.  1818,

was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  17*1.  ami.  having
studied  law  at  Worcester.  Mass.,  with  1*  vi  Lincoln.
was  admitted  to  the  l<ar  in  17M.  After  practising
for  some  yeSJH  ■  Worcester  and  Middlesex  coun-
ties, he  removed  to  Boston,  which  he  made  his
home for  the  remainder  of his  life. He  was  a


ntt


DKXTKH


DEXTEK


J^<1


Mflimhnr  flf  t  he  Massachusetts  house  of  representa-
tives in  1788-'90,  served  in  the  lower  DOOM  at
Washington  in  179:{-'r>,  and  was  elected  to  the
V.  S. senate,  in which  body he  sat from 'J Die..

1799,  until  Jane,  18(X),  when  he  rattened,  on  being

appointed  secretary  of  war  bv  President  Adam-.
This  ollice  be  held  until  81  l>ec.,  1800,  when  la-
was  named  secretary  of  the  treasury,  which  place
he  filled  until  the  inauguration  of  President  Jeff  er-

son.  He  then  re-
turned to  the  prac-
tice of  the  law,  ap-
pearing every  win-
ter at  Washington
in  important  cases
before  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court.  He
was  a  close  rea-
soner  and  an  able
logician,  and  in
pleading  chose  to
rely  more  on  the
strength  of  his  ar-
guments than  on
ad  captandum  ap-
peals to  the  jury ;
yet  he  could  be  pa-
thetic and  impres-
sive in  addressing  himself  to  the  feelings  and  the
moral  sense.  He  began  life  a  decided  federalist,
but  gradually  separated  from  the  party,  support-
ing President  Jefferson's  war  policy,  and  in  1812
going  with  the  republicans  in  advocating  a  con-
test with  England.  But  he  never  considered
himself  a  member  of  the  latter  organization,  and,
on  being  nominated  as  the  republican  candidate
for  governor  of  Massachusetts,  in  1816,  a  few
weeks  before  his  death,  he  published  an  address
to  the  electors,  declaring  that  he  differed  radi-
cally with  that  party.  His  name  was  not  with-
drawn, however,  and  he  was  defeated  by  a  ma-
jority for  his  opponent  of  2,000  out  of  47,000
votes.  In  1815  he  was  offered  a  special  embassy
to  Spain  by  President  Madison,  but  declined  it.
In  1813  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Harvard.  He  was  the  first  president  of  the  first
society  formed  in  Massachusetts  for  the  promo-
tion of  temperance,  in  which  question  he  took
great  interest.  He  died  of  scarlet  fever,  in  the
prime  of  life,  while  visiting  Athens,  N.  Y.,  to  at-
tend the  wedding  of  his  son.  He  was  the  author
of  the  reply  of  the  senate  to  the  address  of  Presi-
dent Adams  on  the  death  of  Washington,  and  pub-
lished a  "  Letter  on  Freemasonry  " ;  "  Progress  of
Science,"  a  poem  (1780);  and  "Speeches  and  Po-
litical Papers,"  besides  political  pamphlets. — His
son,  Franklin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,
5  Nov.,  1793;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  14  Aug.,  1857,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1812,  and  in  1857  re-
ceived from  that  college  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He
studied  for  the  bar,  and  soon  attained  a  good  posi-
tion in  his  profession.  He  filled  many  public
offices,  and  was  elected  to  both  branches  of  the
state  legislature.  In  1836  he  was  a  member  of  a
select  committee  on  the  revised  statutes.  He
served  as  U.  S.  district  attorney  from  1841  till
1845,  and  was  reappointed  by  President  Taylor  in
1849.  His  reputation  for  professional  learning
and  logical  acuteness  was  greatly  increased  by  his
able  defence  of  the  Knapps,  who  were  tried  for  the
murder  of  Capt.  White,  of  Salem,  in  1830,  Daniel
Webster  l>cing  employed  for  the  prosecution.

DEXTER,  Simon  Newton,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  11  May,  1785;  d.  in  Whitesboro,
N.  Y.,  18  Nov.,  1862. He  was  a  son  of  Andrew


Dexter,  the  first  manufacturer  of  cotton  goods  in
the  United  States,  and  a  nephew  of  Samuel  In
ter.  of  Boston,  secretary  of  the  treasury  under
Pretidont  John  Adams.  He  matriculated  at  Brown
university,  but  MOB  left  that  institution  to  engage
in  business  in  Boston.  In  L810  he  removed.  1..
Whitesboro,  X.  Y..  and  in  1817  built  a  section  of
the  Brie  canal.  In  lH24-'9  he  performed  a  similar
service  in  the  const  met  ion  of  the  Chesapeake  and
Delaware  canal.  On  returning  to  Whitesboro  he
became  agent  of  theOriakany  Manufacturing  com-
pany, and  in  1882  assumed  charge  of  the  Dexter
company.  He  was  also  largely  interested  in  manu-
factures elsewhere  in  the  state  of  New  York  and  in
Elgin,  111.  He  served  as  a  trustee  of  Hamilton
college,  and  for  several  years  supported  a  profes-
sorship, giving  the  college  in  all  about  |>32,0<M).  He
was  president  of  the  Whitestown  bank  (1833-'53),
canal  commissioner  in  1840,  and  manager  of  the
State  lunatic  asvlum  from  1849  till  1862.

DEXTER,  timothy,  merchant,  b.  in  Maiden,
Mass.,  22  Jan.,  1743;  d.  in  Newburyport,  26  Oct.,
1806.  He  learned  the  trade  of  leather-dressing,
and  in  1764  began  business  on  his  own  account  in
Charlestown,  Mass.  He  made  much  money  by  bis
trade,  and  also  by  the  purchase  of  the  depreciated
continental  money,  which  was  greatly  increased  in
value  after  Hamilton's  funding  system  went  into
operation.  Being  now  wealthy,  Dexter  assumed
the  title  of  "  Lord,"  but  failed  to  obtain  social  rec-
ognition in  Boston  or  Salem,  and  removed  to  New-
buryport, where  he  purchased  two  large  mansions,
one  of  which  he  sold  at  a  profit,  and  the  other  he
fitted  up  as  his  palace  in  a  bizarre  style,  prompted
by  his  capricious  taste.  He  raised  minarets  on  the
roof  of  his  mansion,  surrounded  with  a  profusion
of  gilt  balls,  and  in  his  garden  erected  rows  of
columns,  fifteen  feet  high,  on  which  he  placed  co-
lossal images  of  Jefferson,  Adams,  and  others,
carved  in  wood,  Washington  occupying  the  place
of  honor  on  a  Roman  arch  that  stood  in  front  of
the  door.  One  peculiarity  of  his  whim  was  that
he  continually  changed  the  names  of  his  great
men,  and  the  Gen.  Morgan  of  yesterday  might  be-
come the  Bonaparte  of  to-day  or  the  Nelson  of  to-
morrow. Dexter  placed  himself  among  the  great,
whom  he  delighted  to  honor,  and  labelled  his  col-
umn "  I  am  the  greatest  man  in  the  East."  There
were  upward  of  forty  of  the  figures,  including  four
lions,  two  couchant  and  two  passant,  the  whole
costing  about  $15,000.  He  kept  a  poet  laureate,
named  Jonathan  Plummer.  Though  his  inordinate
vanity  and  shrewdness  alone  saved  him  from  com-
plete mental  imbecility,  he  yet  had  powerful  pas-
sions, and  the  artist  that  lettered  his  images,  hav-
ing opposed  his  wishes,  narrowly  escaped  death
from  a  pistol  fired  by  his  patron.  He  had  seen,  at
the  houses  of  Hancock  and  Russell,  cases  of  well-
bound  books,  and  he  forthwith  bought  the  best-
bound  books  he  could  find,  irrespective  of  contents :
and,  having  heard  that  the  nobles  in  England  had
a  great  passion  for  paintings,  he  employed  a  young

fentleman  of  taste  to  purchase  pictures  for  him  in
In  rope,  but,  on  his  return,  Dexter  selected  all  the
daubs  and  declined  to  take  the  others.  He  had  a
coat  of  arms  painted  on  his  coach,  with  baronial
supporters,  ana  was  never  happier  than  when  the
boys  ran  after  his  coach  and  cream-colored  horses,
ciying  "Huzza  for  Dexter's  horses!"  But  when
tluir  admiring  cries  no  longer  followed  him,  his
love  for  cream-colored  horses  died  away.  Though
he  was  the  same  imitative  creature  in  his  commer-
cial speculations  that  he  was  in  other  respects,  he
was  almost  invariably  successful.  Certain  mis-
chievous  merchants'  clerks  at  one  time  induced


i»k  .


I  HA*


168


him  to  send  it  large  lot  of  IWBiBnW  t«»  the
w  ri  Indies  i\s  i>urt  of  M  assorted  cargo.  The
captain pal In-  Vmiki ■••  Ingenuity  to  work,  called

tlnni  skimmers,  iiml  Introduced  them  tntos  lagar-
making  establishment,  where  they  met  with  such

r  tinit  the  whole  lot  m  toon  sold  to  great  ed-

tter  purchased  a  country teal  in  the

town  of  i  II.,  and  again  mane  an  oaten*

us  display  of  hi-  wealth  in  an  aboard  ornamen-
tation of  his  bouse,  in  erecting  magnificent  stables
and  enormous  pigeon-houses ;  hut,  as  he  became
quarrelsome,  the  neighbor!  frequently  repaid  hi-
impudence  with  ■  horse-whipping.  When  the  newt
of  the  death  of  Louis  \vi.  reached  Boston,  I >« •  x t » ■  r

was  there,  ami  at  once  hastened  to  Newlinrv|«.rt
and  bribed  tbeeeztons  to  ring  the  passiug-licll  U--

he  circulated  the  tidings  of  the  monarch'i
death. In  anticipation  of  ha  own  death,  he  had

legant  coffin  made  and  a  tomb  prepared,  and
arranged  a  mock  funeral  (supposed  by  many  to  U-
real),  and  caned  his  wife  because  she  failed  to  she* I
tears  at  the  pageant.  His  remarks  at  Hmoufcowod
great  acuteness,  as  on  one  occasion,  when  the  pa|>ers

teeming  with  Lord Thnrlow'l  famous  remark.
"  When  I  forget  my  king,  may  my  (iod  forget  ine."
he  travestied  it  to  "  When  I  forget  myself,  may  <m»1
forget me." Were  this  all  there  were  to  relate  of

:  Timothy  Dexter*!  achievements,  he  might  be
irded  with  ■  contempt  that  still  left  room  for
pity:  bat  his  bacchanalian  orgies  and  licentious
escapades  preclude  almost  every  feeling  but  that  of
disgu-t.  Toward  the  close  of  his  career  he  appears
to  have  regretted  his  follies.  The  disposition  of  his
wealth  was  judicious,  ami  showed  that  he  was  imt
wanting  in  regard  for  his  relatives.  Being  desirous
of  reputation  M  an  author,  he  published  a  book
entitled  "A  Pickle  for  the  Knowing  Ones."  and.
having  been  annoyed  by  the  printers  alxmt  punc-
tuation, he  retaliated  by  writing  a  pamphlet  with-
out a  point  of  any  kind',  and  at  the  end  filled  half
a  page  with  points  in  a  mass,  inviting  the  readers
to  "pepper  the  dish  to  suit  themselves."

DE  ZENU,  Frederick  Augustus,  Baron,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Dresden,  Saxonv,  in  1756;  d.  in  Clyde,
N.  Y..  M  April.  18S&  He  received  a  military  edu-
cation, and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  became  lieuten-
ant of  the  guard  in  the  service  of  the  landgrave  of
Ilcsse-Cassel.  He  saw  service  in  Moravia  and  Bo-
hemia, and  in  1776  received  the  court  appointment
of  gentleman  of  the  chamber.  He  came  to  this
country  about  the  close  of  1780  as  captain  of  one
of  the  Hessian  regiments  in  the  British  service.
He  was  honorably  discharged  from  the  German
service  in  l?s;{,  and  in  17H4  married  an  American
lady  and  purchased  an  estate  at  Bed  Hook,  N.  Y.
lb-  was  naturalized  in  1780,  and  in  1799  commis-
sioned major  of  a  battalion  of  militia  in  Ulster
county,  N.  V.,  in  which  county  he  had  become
joint  owner  with  Chancellor  Livingston  of  a  large
tract  of  UumL  Be  was  intimate  with  Gov.  Clint  >n.
interested  like  him  in  the  owning  of  the  interior
Water  communications  of  the  state,  and  (>ersonallv
surveyed  in  1790-'2  the  entire  country  from  Al-
bany to  theOeneSM  river. Be  was  connected  with

Schuyler  in  the  Western  Inland  Lock  Navi-
gation company,  ami  in  1T!«»  was  one  of  three  who

established  near  Albany  a  manufactory  of  window-
glass,  the  first  in  the  state,  which  proved  a  finan-
cial success  until  1815,  when  it  closed,  owing  to
failure  of  fuel  in  the  neighborhood. In  I8u  )m

i  measures  that  resulted  in  the  impi
incut  of  the  navigation  of  Seneca  river  and  its  as-
sociated lakes,  and in 1814-'6 began what ulti-
mately became  the  Chemung  oanaL Bs  rosMod
at  Kingston,  Ulster  co.,  and  later  at Bainbridge.


I  Chenango  co..  ban  he  built  and  owned

the  bridge  over  the  SuM|Uehnuna  n

l»i  /IK1..  Joseph Darld,  •  median  B.  I
ate,  b.  in  MiL-kinongv,  province  ..f  yiM.|„.,  •„»]  \
f808j  d.  in  Levis,  ft  Jm
in  the  theological  schools  of  (^ucU-c,  nix!
>>|"  10,  and  was  appointed  vicar  n .

do  Loop  the  Mime  year, lie  beoams  pastor  of  8l

:'Ii  de  Levis  in  1848,  and  iir-<
Dame  da  Lorit  in  UMl Bewm  the  founder  of
the  town  of  Leris,and  ibofoaaded  inthnt  place
the  ohorcfa  of  Notre  Dame,  the  Commsreml  and

,  Classical  college,  the  convent o| the  Sist.  i

ity.  and  St.  Joseph's  hospital. He  h»s  ■  |„.
of  the  church,  and  was  Mint mint  Pqm

LtO  XIII.  He  was  not  les*  distinguished  f,,r  hi*
love  of  science  than  for  hi*  piety  and  bsOSTolsMa,

HI  \S,  Bartholomeii  fde-aeX  PottOl
gator,  b. abool the  middle  of  the 15th  .enturv;
lost  at  sea.  211 .May, 1500.  while  on his  w„v from
Brazil  to  India. In I486  he  sailed  on  an  espedi-
tion  to  explore  the  western  coast of Africa,  and.

without  knowing  it,  was  carried  around  the  math-
era  |M.int  of  the  continent  and  landed  at  the  mouth
of  Great  Fish  river,  where  be  discovered  that  he
was  on  the  eastern  coast.  The  ttormj  oajM  which
he  doubled  on  his  return  in  14m?  he  called  <
Tormentooo,  a  name  which  the  king  of  Portugal

changed  into  Cabo  de  B<>a  Bsperanoa,  or  Caps  of
Good  Bope.  He  tubseqnently  sailed  on  another
African  exiiedition  tinder  Vasco  da  (iama,  and
commanded  one  of  the  vessels  of  the  fleet  with
which  Cabra]  discovered  Brazil.

BIAS.  (ionealvcs  Antonio.  Brazilian  \**t.  b.
in  Caxias,  Brazil.  10  Aug..  188S;  <1.  at  sea  in  1868.
At  an  early  age  be  studied  law  and  philosophy  at
the  University  of  Coimbra,  Portugal. Betaraing

to  his  native  [and,  he  for  a  time  practised  law  in
MaranhAo,  and  thence  went  to  Bio  de  Janeiro,  re-
tiring from  his  profession  and  devoting  himself  to
science  and  literature.  Afterward  be  became  pro-
fessor of  history  in  the  Dom  Pedro  II.  college.
Prof.  Diss  made  several  visit*  to  Prance  and  Ger-
many in  the  interest  of  science  ami  for  his  health.
Among  his  writings  «re  Primeiros  Cantos"  (Bio

de  Janeiro,  l*-b;> ;  ••  I nor  de  afendonoa,n  a  drama

(1847);  "Segundos Cantos'' (1849);  H Ultimos Can-
tos **  and14 <  >s  Tymbivas."  an  epic  (Leipaic.  lv
and  "  Diccionario  da  lingua  Tupy."  an  Indian  dia-
lect (!K5M).  Hias  also  wrote  many  interesting  pa-
pers on  historical  subjects,  especially  on  the  migra-
tion of  the  Indian  tribes,  and  also  a  good  report
entitled  "  Brazil  e  Oceania."

DIAS.  Henrique,  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Par-
namhiico  at  the  end  of  the  Ulth  or  Uginningof  the
lith  century;  d.  in  Recife. :tl  Aug.,  ML  He  was
of  pure  African  blood,  ami  received  but  seantv
education.  In  n>^s  the  Portuguese  army  was  suf-
fering continuous  defeats fr the  invading  Dutch

forces,  who  advanced  to  the  conquest  "'  '"'"  oom>

try.  when  a  party  of  negroes,  headed  by I  Mas  »p-

nosYod  before  Gen.  Haass  de  Albaqaerqae,  com-
manding tin'  Portuguese',  and  offered  to  light
against  the  invaders.  AlbaOJ^MWOtteOOttftanod  Bias
SS  captain  of  bit  men.  and  00 18  Bent,  of  the  same

rear  Diss  rendered  great  tarries,  guiding  an  tspe*

ilition  of  '.»(H»  Portuguese  to  cut  off  the  march  of
1,000  Hutch  troops  that  were  coming  to  the  relief
of  [goaraosn,  The  Itattle  was  bloody,  and  the
negro  captain  fought  bravely  and  was  wounded.
Till  MM  Dies  tool  |>art  in  all  the  engagements,
but  00  8  July  of  that  year  he  was  taken  prisoner  at
the  fort  of  Arraial  do  Bun  .lesus,  after  a  three-
months"  siege  and  a  heroic  defence.  The  I>u'
mistaking  the  negro  for  a  man  of  no  importance,


1C4


DIAS  vii;ii;\


DlAZ DE PINEDA


loft  him  at  liberty,  ami.  aftor  hiding  for  some  time
in  tin-  woods,  l>ias  rejoined  the  Foitugueee  army
ami  gave  i  hem  1  [dings  of  tho  fall  of  Arraial  do  Horn

Jcmis.  (>n!»  .July  be  distinguished  himself  again
in  B  battle  unilcr  the  orders  of  Fclippe  Camarao.
Ob  IT  and  is  l'.li.,  1  (»:{?,  the  negro  captain,  at  the
head  of  a  company  of  eighty  of  liis  race,  took  again
a  prominent  j>art  in  the  battle  of  Porto  Culvo.  He
was  dangerously  wounded  in  the  left  hand  during
the  battle,  and  bad  it  immediately  amputated  so  as
to  return  to  the  fight  without  loss  of  time.  On
reconimeniiat  ion  of  the  commander-in-chief,  he  was
rewarded  by  the  king  of  Spain  and  Portugal  with
knighthood  and  tho  cross  of  the  order  of  Christ.
and  was  also  appointed  chief  commander  of  all  the
colored  troops.  From  1G37  till  1045  Dias  distin-
guished himself  as  a  guerilla  chief  in  tho  defence
of  San  Salvador  da  Bahia,  and  in  the  repulse  of  tho
forces  of  Prince  .Maurice  of  Nassau.  In  1645  he
deserted  with  his  colored  troops  from  Bahia  to  join
the  forces  that  had  risen  against  Spanish  rule. He

Sassed  through  the  districts  of  Sergipe  and  Sao
'rancisco,  and  in  Alagoas  roused  the  inhabitants
to  revolt,  joining  afterward  the  forces  of  Cardoso
and  Fernandez  Vieira,  who  were  at  the  head  of  the
insurgents  in  the  province.  From  1645  till  1654
I  Has  took  part  in  numerous  engagements,  and,  while
the  other  generals  were  absent  for  the  conquest  of
Itamaraca,  he  commanded  for  some  time  the  forces
besieging  Recife,  and  was  again  victorious  in  the
two  battles  of  Guararapes ;  in  fact,  excepting  the
capitulation  of  Arraial  do  Bom  Jesus,  he  was  never
defeated  in  twenty-one  years  of  warfare.  Yet,
while  the  Portuguese  government,  after  the  expul-
sion of  the  Dutch  invaders  and  the  independents
from  Spain,  rewarded  liberally  all  the  chieftains  of
the  war  in  the  province  of  Pernambuco,  Dias  was
forgotten,  and  died  in  poverty.  But  his  name  was
given  to  a  regiment,  which  has  always  been  com-
manded by  a  man  of  the  negro  race.

DIAS  VIEIRA,  Joao  Pedro,  Brazilian  states-
man, b.  in  Guimaraes,30  March,  1820;  d.30  Oct.,  1870.
He  studied  law  at  Maranhffo,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Sao  Paulo.  In  1842  he  was  appointed  district
attorney  for  the  capital  of  his  province;  but,  as
he  soon  afterward  entered  politics  in  the  liberal
party,  at  that  time  in  the  opposition,  he  had  to  re-
sign this  office.  In  1846,  under  a  change  of  min-
istry, he  was  again  appointed  district  attorney  for
Itapicura-mirim,  and  elected  soon  afterward  a
member  of  the  provincial  assembly  of  MaranhSo,
where  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  moderation
and  as  an  orator,  and  exercised  great  influence  in
the  government  of  the  province.  In  1852  he  was
appointed  attorney-general  of  the  provincial  treas-
ury, and,  two  years  later,  general  director  of  public
lands  of  the  province,  and  occupied,  at  the  same
time,  the  chairs  of  philosophy,  rhetoric,  and  geog-
raphy in  the  seminary  of  the  bishopric.  He  was
appointed  governor  of  the  province  of  Amazonas
in  1855,  and  filled  this  place  until  4  Jan.,  1857,
when  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  Chamber  of
representatives,  and  became  in  1860  deputy-general
for  his  province.  From  1858  he  interested  himself
in  steam  navigation  on  the  rivers,  and  in  the
chamber  obtained  the  protection  of  the  national
government  for  it.  On  15  Jan.,  1864,  he  was  ap-
pointed minister  of  the  navy,  and  on  15  March
minister  for  foreign  affairs.  A  new  ministry  was
formed  on  .31  Aug.,  but  only  a  few  days  passed  be-
fore Dias  Vieira  was  again  called  to  take  charge  of
the  portfolio  of  foreign  affairs.  The  country  was
involved  in  a  foreign  war,  and  Dias's  activity  was
so  great  that,  within  nine  months,  the  nation,
which  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  had  not  a  single


ship,  found  itself  in  the  possession  of  a  powerful
fleet  and  a  well-disciplined  army.  Dias  Vieira  was
rewarded  with  the  title  of  imperial  councillor  and
other  distinctiona.  He  left  no  estate,  and  the  gov-
ernment gave  his  widow  a  pension  of  2.'J<M)  milrcLs.

DIAZ,  Alonso,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Seville,
Spain,  early  in  the  Kith  century;  d.  in  Cuzco  about
1556.  He  sought  his  fortune  in  the  New  World,
became  son-in-law  of  the  former  governor  of  the
Isthmus  of  Panama,  Pedrarias  Davila,  and  was  one
of  the  conquerors  of  Cuzco,  where  he  settled.  He
was  di-i  inguiahed  for  his  gigantic  strength,  and  is
said  to  have  killed  the  Indian  prisoners  by  suffo-
cating them  in  an  embrace,  so  that  the  emperor,
Charles  V.,  issued  a  decree  forbidding  such  acts.
Diaz  also  suffocated  one  of  the  most  famous  Indian
wrestlers  in  a  trial  of  strength,  and  on  one  occa-
sion is  said  to  have  carried  nis  war-horse  on  his
shoulders.  In  1553  he  was  one  of  the  principal
accomplices  of  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron  against
Pizarro's  successor.  After  the  battle  of  Pucara,
Diaz  surrendered  in  the  royal  camp,  and  was  par-
doned by  the  judges  of  the  Audiencia,  as  thev  were
unaware  that  Giron  had  already  sought  safety  in
flight,  fearing  that  he  would  be  delivered  to  the
royal  forces  by  his  own  followers.  Diaz  settled
again  in  Cuzco,  but,  as  he  continued  his  rebellious
attempts,  he  was  made  a  prisoner  by  the  mayor,
Bautista  Mufioz,  and,  together  with  several  other
conspirators,  was  executed  by  the  garrote,  by  order
of  the  viceroy,  Marquis  de  Cafiete,  and  his  estate
was  confiscated.  Several  books  and  poems  have
been  written  about  the  adventures  of  Alonso  Diaz.

DIAZ  CAMARGO,  Antonio,  explorer,  b.  at
the  close  of  the  17th  century.  He  was  the  first  to
explore  the  province  of  Minas  in  Brazil.  He  was
commander  of  a  party  of  explorers  called  "  bandei-
ras,"  composed  of  the  mestizos  of  Sao  Paulo,  and
examined  that  part  of  the  country  known  as  Villa
Rica,  and  discovered  a  great  quantity  of  gold.
Thus  was  founded  the  city  of  Villa  Rica,  or,  as  it  is
sometimes  called,  Ouro  Preto  (dark-colored  gold).

DIAZ  DEL  CASTILLO. See  Castillo.

DIAZ  DE  LUGO,  Juan  Bernardo  (de-ath-da-
lu'-go),  Spanish  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Seville  at  the
close  of  tne  15th  century  ;  d.  in  1556.  He  was  pro-
fessor in  Salamanca  of  belles-lettres  and  the  dead
languages.  He  was  present  at  the  council  of  Trent
and  became  bishop  of  Calahorra.  He  spent  thir-
teen years  in  America.  Of  his  works,  the  best-
known  are  "Practica  criminal  canonica "  (Alcala,
1559);  "Reglas  de  derecho"  (1569);  "Antidoto
contra  la  desesperacion  "  (Salamanca,  1553);  "Ins-
truction de  Prelados  " ;  and  "  Comentarios  a  Isaias."

DIAZ  DE  PINEDA,  Gonzalo  (de-ath-da-pe-
na'-dah),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Torrelavega  early
in  the  16th  century :  d.  in  Peru  in  1545.  He  went
to  Peru  with  Francisco  Pizarro  on  his  last  expedi-
tion (1531),  and  in  1534  accompanied  Sebastian
Velalcazar  in  the  conquest  of  what  was  afterward
called  the  "  New  Kingdom  of  Granada."  In  1535
he  was  sent  by  Velalcazar  to  explore  the  river
Magdalena,  the  upper  course  of  which  the  expedi-
tion had  reached,  down  to  its  mouth,  and  acquire
information  about  the  adjacent  country.  He  en-
tered the  territory  of  the  Indians  called  Quijos  and
Canelos,  which  he  discovered  in  1536,  and  his
glowing  description  of  the  richness  of  these  coun-
tries gave  rise,  some  years  later,  to  the  unfortunate
expedition  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  to  Canelos  and
Amazonas.  In  1539  Diaz  was  appointed  governor
of  Quito,  and,  by  order  of  the  judge,  Lorenzo  Al-
dana.  imprisoned  and  sent  to  Lima  Diego  Sandoval
and  Cristobal  Daza,  friends  and  followers  of  V.  lal-
cazar,  who  was  in  a  revolt  against  Pizarro. In  the


DlAZ  Dl  SOLlS


DfAZ  mi.i.«.  LRRJO


168


beginning  of IMO  In- man  lied with (ioii/.alo  PI"

zarm  in  his  famous  expedition  for  the  conquest  >>\
th.-  country  of  tin-  Qanalos,  flatted  formerly  bj
.  end  for  tin-  exploration  of  the  country  east
of  the  An  rendered  ralnable  services  to

Pizarn>  in  this  ajrlbftaaMBte  axpsditioB  by  In*  |

knowledge  <»f  tin-  Indian  countries,  a*  well  a*
hy  his  endurance  of  fatigues  and  hardships.  Diaz,
with  only  a  handful  ol  followers,  went  in  SBSTOB  01
tht>  expedition  of  Francisco  Orcllana,  who,  after
the  pn>\  isjdiis  had  given  out,  had  !><•. n  x-nt  down
the  river  Napo  in  w-andi  of  supplies  in  the  U-gin-
ning  of  loll,  bat,  finding  only  a  wilderness,  had
descended  the  Amazon,  winch  bsdisOOYevad  to  its
mouth.  Seeing  the  fruit  lessness  of  his  errand,
Diaz  returned  in  search  of  Pizarro,  being  continu-
ally harassed  by  the  Indians,  and  was  the  principal
means  <>f  extricating  the  half-famished  expeditaOO
from  the  wilderness  and  bringing  it,  although  with
heavy  losses,  to  Peru.  In  1544,  when  (ionzalo
iiro  rose  in  rebellion  against  Nunez  de  Vela,
■  le  Pineda,  at  that  time  in  Lima,  offend  hi*
services  to  tin-  viceroy,  anil  ■Meed  him  to  ■end  an
expedition  to  the  interior.  The  viceroy  sent  him
to  Jauja  at  the  head  of  a  companv  of  infantry  and
a  force  of  cavalry,  with  his  nephew,  Vela  MUfiat,
the  object  being  to  ncWVSBt  the  junction  of  a  force
from  lluanuco,  under  command  of  Pedro  Puelles,
with  Pizarro's  army  in  Cuzco.  Hut  scarcely  had
Diaz  Pineda's  force  entered  the  Andes  mountains
when  he  (being  Puelles's  son-in-law)  pretended  that
he  was  forced  by  his  officers  to  pronounce  for  Pi-
zarro,  and  joined  Puelles,  young  Vela  Nunez
barely  escaping.  Gonzalo  Pizarro  sent  Diaz  Pi-
neda in  1545,  with  (ieronimo  de  Yillegas,  to  Tra-
jillo  and  Piura  to  recruit  soldiers.  Meanwhile  the
viceroy  had  been  set  at  liberty  by  one  of  the
judges,  and,  landing  at  TumU-z,  gathered  forces
to  march  against  Diaz  Pineda,  at  that  time  in
Piura,  who  had  surprised  and  killed  in  Bracain<>ro>
Capt.  Heredia,  of  the  government  forces.  Diaz
retreated  from  Piura,  but  surprised  a  part  of  the
advancing  forces  at  Chachayoyas  and  defeated
them.  On  receipt  of  this  news,  the  viceroy  ad-
vanced with  the  remainder  of  his  forces  ujnm
Diaz  and  surprised  him  at  Colliquen.  Seeing  hi*
troops  disponed,  Diaz  sought  refuge  with  Iler-
nanuo  de  Alvarado,  where  he  perished,  being
forced  by  hunger  to  eat  poisonous  plants.  Garci-
laso  de  la  Vega,  in  his  history  of  the  conquest,  re-
lates that  the  two  officers,  together  with  (ieroni-
mo yillegas,  were  killed  by  Indians.

1)1  AZ  DE  SOUS.  .Iiian,  Spanish  navigator,  b.
in  Lchrija,  Spain,  in  1471  ;  d.  in  Sooth  America  in
151f»(or,  according  to  Han-ia  and  Sala.  in  1515).  In
1506  he  sailed  from  Cadiz  in  command  of  a  carvel,
together  with  Vicente  Tales  Pinzon,  and,  follow-
ing the  course  taken  by  Columbus  from  the  island
of  Guanajos  to  discover  new  countries  on  the
American  continent,  they  entered  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  discovered  the  coast  of  Yucatan  and  the
bay  of  Campeachy,  which  they  called  Gulf  of  the
Nativity,  and  saw  the  mountain  range  of  Curia.
In  1007  they  returned  to  Spain,  and  Diaz  was  ap-
pofatsd  by  the  king,  together  with  Amerigo  Ves-
pucci  and  Collado,  member  of  a  council  of  pilots,
presided  over  by  the  king  hlSJISOrf.  at  which  it  e/SS
resolved  to  continue  the  exploration  of  the  Atlan-
tic coast  of  South  America,  and  Diaz  was  appointed
commander,  with  the  title  of  royal  pilot.  He  left
Seville  in  150H  with  two  carvels,  one  commanded
bj  Vafiez  Pinzon,  and  from  the  Qsps  Verde
islands  they  made  h.nd  at  CajN- St.  Augu*tinand
sailed  southward  as  far  as  40  S.,  recognizing  the
coast  and  landing  at  several  points,  taking  posses-


sion in  the  name  pi  th-  king  of  Spate,  and  erect-
ing crosses  (IV  M)). Having  quarrelled  with  I'
he returned the  same  year  to  Spain. 'II.
considered Diaz  guilty,"  and  sent him  t..  prison.
Hut  afterward  hi*  inn  ,|, |„.

was  awarded :m.<«n» nasjaisilai

distinctions,  and  at  th.-  death  ■  ' \
received  the  title  of  chief  pilot  of  the  kingdom.
Ha  WBS  considered  the  most  ex|>crt  mariner  of  that
time. In  1010  be  was  agsla  **  nt  on  an  iptdlttm

to complete the cUsOOYSrj and take | M

Smth  America,  and  on B Oet.of  thai
from  Lepe,  Spain,  with  two  *hi|r.. In  I
be  di*<o\ered many  new points  of  tin-  •■oast,  en-
tered Rio  <le  Janeiro,  and.  sailing  southward,  dh>

covered  an  i*land  which  he  called  La  Plata:  then
taking  a  southwest  course,  he  discovered  land,  and
in  J7  S.  a  bay.  which  he  called  Hahia  de  !
dido-,  passed  Ca|M-  ( 'orrieiites,  and  visited  tin  i-land
of  Sjui  Sebastian,  which  he  called  Loboa  Bs  •  n-
tered  the  port  of  Nuestra  BaOoCB  ds  la  Candclaria,
80  S„  and  again  took  poassssion  of  the  coiuitrv  in
the  name  of  the  kino;  of  Spain.  Afterward  he
anchored  in  a  broad  river,  which,  bettering  it  to
be  an  arm  of  the  ocean,  be  called  ■•  *
but.  finding  out  that  it  was  a  river,  called  it  Sili«,
which  to-day  i*  the  river  Plate.  With  one  of  his
ships  he  ascended  the  river,  and.  seeing  Indians  on
the  shore,  landed  with  a  few  sailors,  desiring  to
Capture  some  of  the  inhabitants  and  carry  them  to
Spain  as  a  present  to  the  king.  Hut  he  fell  into
an  ambuscade,  and.  together  with  the  whole  l«>at
crew,  was  killed  in  Bight  of  his  ship,  roasted,  ami
eaten.  DiaJ  Soils  was  tin-  tir*t  who  by  order  of
the  kin<,r  designed  a  marine  chart  of  the  coast  of
America  (100O\  and  afterward  examined  all  the
charts  designed  by  other  mariners.

DIAZ  MELGABEJO,  Ray.  Spanish  soldier,  b.
in  Seville.  Spain,  at  the  beginning  of  the  h»th  cen-
tury; d.  about  1080.  After  six  years  of  Barries  in
the  Spanish  army  in  Italy,  be  wenl  with  Got.  Akar
Nunez  Csbess  de  Vacs  to  the  Bio  de  la  Plata,  in
the  expedition  that  sailed  on  1  Nov..  1040,  Be
remained  by  CabeBS  de  Vaca  until  24  April.  1044,
when  he  was  deposed  through  a  conspiracy  of  the
royal  oflScen,  and  Capt  Martinez  de  Irala  was  ap-
pointed in  his  place.  Diaz  Melgarejo  protesh-d
against  these  proceeding*,  and  wa*  subsequently
put  into  prison,  notwithstanding  be  was  related
to  Irala.  When  CabeSB  de  Vaca  sailed  for  Spam,
Diss  was  left  at  Asuncion,  where  be  begsn  to  or-
ganise, in  companv  of  his  relative  DiegO  OS  Abreu.
a  party  called  the  loyalists.  When,  in  l.r»l7.  Irala
set  out  toward  Peru",  he  left  Fernando  Mendoza
acting  as  governor  at  Asuncion.  Mendoza  tried.
in  1048,  to  bare  hi*  authority  confirmed,  but  was
thwarted  bythe  election  of  Abreu.  through  the  ex-
ertions of  Ray  Diss.  After  Abn-u  Imd  pnalahad
Mendoza  with  death,  for  attempting  to  assassinate
him.  and  to  avoid  Irala's  indignation,  he  tlinl  to
the  woods,  where  Diaz  kept  him  company  for  seven
yean,  until  Abreu  w  a*  killed  by  emissaries  of  Pettpo
Caceres,  and  Diaz  was  then'  imprisoned.  BOOB
afterward  Diaz  escaped  from  prison,  through  the
Influence  ..f  hi*  brother-in-law  Irala,  and  BM  out
with  a  COapanloa  for  Hrazil,  but  they  were  caught

bra  tribe  of  Tupi  Indian*. Hi*  oaaanaadoaaarvad

as  food  for  than,  but  Diss  was  saved  thmugh  the
affection  of  aa  Indian  woman,  and  finally  armed
at  San  Vicente,  where  he  married.  Hut  he  soon
discovered  an  intimacv  batwasa  his  wife  and  a
lover,  and.  killing  them  both,  tied  to  Asuncion,  lb-
set  out  tor  San  Vicente  with  some  Spaniards  and  a
tluguueu.  siaiaaj,  alnwa  aata  thaGoss  broth-
ers, who  wen  the  llM  SO  im|«»rt  cattle. They  ar-


166


DfAZ


DfAZ


rived  in  1555  at  Asuncion,  where  they  were  wel-
comed by  Inilu.  who  sent  then  to  oonqnex  and

settle  the  territory  of  Guayra,  with  the  few  remain-
ing partisans  of  Abreu.  Diaz  resisted  heroically,
in  the  city  of  Guayra,  the  fierce  attacks  of  the  na-
i  i\  m  in  1560,  and,  after  several  years  of  continuous
struggles,  was  appointed  governor  of  that  city.  In
L5TO  eJonao  KhpellDe,  a  nephew  of  Cabeza  de
Vaca,  was  appointed  to  replace  Diaz  in  his  com-
mand ;  but  his  credentials  were  disregarded,  his
family  imprisoned,  end  Riquelme  himself  was  put
in  chains.  Soon  after  this,  Diaz  was  commissioned
to  take  Riquelme  and  Felipe  de  Caceres  to  Spain.
They  sailed  from  Asuncion  in  1573.  Unfavorable
weather  forced  their  ship  to  enter  the  Brazilian
port  of  San  Vicente,  and  when  Diaz  was  ready  to
proceed  on  his  voyage  he  had  to  go  to  the  assist-
ance of  the  new  governor,  Ortiz  de  Zarate,  against
the  Charrua  Indians.  During  the  term  of  office  of
this  governor  and  of  his  successor  Garay,  Diaz
made  new  and  successful  expeditions,  which  gave
him  the  name  of  "  Invincible  Captain."  He  found-
ed, in  1576,  Villarrica  del  Espiritu  Santo,  and  in
1580  of  Santiago  de  Jerez,  or  Nueva  Vizcaya.

DIAZ,  Miguel,  Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Ara-
gon  after  the  middle  of  the  15th  century.  He  was
in  the  service  of  Bartholomew  Columbus,  brother
of  the  great  discoverer,  at  the  time  he  was  in  com-
mand of  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  arrived  in  1495.
Having  had  a  duel  with  another  Spaniard,  and
wounded  him  seriously,  Diaz  fled  from  the  settle-
ment at  La  Isabella,  concealed  himself  among  the
Indians,  married  their  queen,  and,  after  many  ro-
mantic adventures,  discovered  the  gftld-mines  of
St.  Christopher,  on  the  banks  of  the  Hayna,  in  1504.
These  were  the  first  mines  ever  worked  by  Euro-
peans in  the  New  World.  For  this  service  Diaz
received  a  pardon  from  Columbus.  He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  fortress  of  Santo  Domingo  when
Bobadilla  arrived  to  investigate  the  conduct  of
Columbus,  and  refused  to  surrender  it.  He  sub-
mitted, however,  to  Bobadilla.  In  1509  he  was  ap-
pointed lieutenant-governor  of  Porto  Rico,  and
nothing  more  is  known  of  his  life.  He  took  a  con-
spicuous part  in  the  foundation  of  Nueva  Isabel,
now  Santo  Domingo.

DiAZ,  Pedro,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Toledo,
Spain,  in  1543 ;  d.  in  Mexico,  12  Jan.,  1618.  He  be-
came a  Jesuit  in  1566 ;  in  1572  went  to  Mexico  to
preach  the  Gospel,  and  in  1592  became  provincial
of  his  order.  His  most  noted  work  is  "  Littera  de
Missionibus  per  Indiam  Occidentalem  ab  Jesuitis."
He  was  rector  of  the  Jesuit  colleges  of  Mexico  and
Guadalajara,  went  to  Rome  twice,  in  1577  and  1595,
and  founded  new  colleges  at  Puebla,  Oaxaca,  Mich-
oacan.  Guadalajara,  and  Antequera.  He  also  began
the  missionary  work  among  the  Indians  of  northern
New  Spain,  now  a  part  of  the  United  States.

DIAZ,  Porflrio,  president  of  Mexico,  b.  in
Oaxaca,  15  Sept.,  1830.  His  paternal  grandparents,
including  his  maternal  great  grandfather,  were  full-
blooded  Spaniards,  the  latter  a  native  of  Asturias ;
but  his  great  grandmother  was  of  a  Mixteca  race  of
Indians  crossed  with  the  Spanish,  with  more  of  the
former's  blood.  He  made  his  preparatory  studies
at  the  Institute  of  the  state  of  Oaxaca.  where  he
commenced  to  read  law.  During  the  war  of  1847
with  the  United  States  he  enlisted  in  a  militia
regiment  which  never  reached  the  theatre  of  war.
After  the,  triumph  of  the  party  that  called  Santa
Anna  to  the  dictatorship,  Diaz,  in  a  fit  of  discour-
agement, left  the  army,  and  gave  his  attention  to
law.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  revolution,  provoked
by  the  plan  of  Ayutla  in  1854,  he  commanded  a
battalion,  and  after  the  flight  of  Santa  Anna,  on  9


Aug.,  1855,  was  appointed  political  and  military
chief  of  the  district  of  Ixtlaii.  in  Oaxaca.  Be  WW
also  appointed  political  chief  and  military  com-
mandant of  the  Tehoentepeo  district,  in  the  state
<>f  Oaxaca,  where  great  disturbance-  look  place  due
to  the  rivalry  between  the  towns  of  Tehuantepec
and  Juchitan,  in  which  position  he  began  to  show
the  civil  and  military  endowments  which  he  after-
ward developed.  After  Gomonfort  had  been  re-
elected president  in  1S57,  but  had  gone  over  to  the
reactionary  party,  and  was  forced,  21  Jan.,  1858,
to  surrender  the  executive  power  to  Benito  Juarez.
Diaz  was  faithful  to  the  liberal  party,  against  the
reactionary  or  church  party,  which."  under  Mira-
mon  and  Marquez,  began  the  bloody  three  years'
revolution  called  the  "  War  of  the  Reform."  Such
were  his  energy  and  courage  that,  early  in  May.
1860,  he  had  achieved  the  complete  pacification  of
the  rebellious  district  of  Tehuantepec.  After  the
complete  triumph  of  the  liberal  party  he  was
elected  deputy  to  the  congress  of  1861,  but  he  soon
took  the  field  again,  joining  the  division  led  by
Gen.  Gonzalez  Ortega  against  the  reactionary  chief-
tain. Marquez,  obtaining  over  the  latter  a  victory
at  Jalatlaco  that  elicited  the  praise  of  his  supe-
rior, who  petitioned  the  government  for  the  rank  of
general  for  Diaz.  In  the  succeeding  trying  period
of  the  intervention,  begun  in  December,  1861,  at
the  head  of  a  small  band  of  warriors  from  Oaxaca,
he  was  one  of  the  first  to  oppose  the  arms  of  the
invader,  and  aided  Gen.  Zaragoza  in  deciding  the
victory  of  5  May,

1862,  *in  Puebla.
Shortly  afterward
he  was  appointed
governor  and  mili-
tary commander  of
the  state  of  Vera
Cruz,  but  was  soon,
at  his  own  request,
transferred  to  the
army  of  operation,
and,  under  Gonza-
lez Ortega's  com-
mand, took  part  in
the  defence  of  Pu-
ebla, besieged  by
the  French  army
from  March  till
May,  1863,  and.  on
the  surrender  of
the  city  in  the
latter  month,  was
made  prisoner,  but
escaped.  The  government  had  to  fly  from  the
capital,  and  Diaz  was  constrained  to  accept  the
command  of  the  army,  though  on  condition  that
he  should  be  relieved  after  a  short  period,  because
he  apprehended  that  his  youth  might  give  rise  to
jealousies  among  the  older  generals. After  the

government  was  regularly  installed  at  San  Luis
'otosi  he  marched  southward,  and,  in  November.

1863,  invested  with  full  powers  for  the  administra-
tion and  defence  of  the  southeastern  states.  Oaxaca,

?art  of  Puebla,  Chiapas,  Tabasco,  Campeche,  and
rucatan,  took  up  a  position  between  Puebla  and
Oaxaca.  After  the  arrival  of  the  emperor.  .Maxi-
milian, in  April,  1864,  and  during  the  period  of
intervention  and  empire,  he  constituted  one  of  the
mainstays  of  the  republican  cause,  through  an  un-
interrupted series  of  difficulties  and  hardships,  and,
with  an  effective  force  that  never  exceeded  5,000,
composed  of  troops  for  the  most  part  ill-armed  and
ill-munitioned,  and  with  insufficient  means  of  stijt-
port,  he  turned  the  tide  of  invasionf But  at  last


v^^Wj^/^^Z**.


i»i  \z


DfAZ


107


the  Imperial  troops,  after  success  in  OllMr  parts  -if

Mexico,  turned  their  attention  eeriooalf  i"  the

southern  states,  Hii'l,  invading  the  -  \aca.

in  id.-  capital,  where  he  was  f
to  capitulate  in  February.  1*(>.">.  and  was  a  second
time  taken  a  |>ri»<>ncr  to  I'uebla,  but  a  second  time
escap'l  in  S-ptcmU-r.  In  tin-  next  vajgf  he  was
again  at  the  bead  of  '•**>  men  m  the  ea>t.  ami  won
Miahuatlan  h  victory  over  more  than  iloiihle  his
toroas. In  the  battle  <".f  l*a  Carbonen  he  took  500

rian  prisoners.  After  the  Preach  army  had
abandoned  Mexico,  in  February,  1*4)7.  Dial  rapidly
augmented  Ins  forces,  and.  together  with  the  forces
Matorreand  Alvarez,  who  joined  him,  be-
sieged I'uebla,  commanded  b\  (ien.  Orouos.  After
a  bloody  assault,  the  city  was  captured.  ••»»  April.
Diaz  immediately  marched  against  the  army
«>f  Marques,  who  bad  attempted  to  relieve  I'uebla,

iJnfmHng  him  at  San  Lorenzo,  ami,  after  his  re-
treat to  the  city  of  Mexico,  laid  sie^'e  to  that  city,
which  surrendered  on  II  .lune.  1*<>7.  BottM  acts
of  oroahj  were  attributed  to  Diaz  during  this  cam-
paign. In  the  Planch  chambers,  and  esj>ecially  in
tin-  senate,  grave  charges  were  brought  against
him  for  his  unmerciful  conduct  toward  those  who
fell  into  his  p>wer,  and  crimes  were  mentioned  by
Marshal  Forev  and  several  senators  in  the  session
of  March.  1865.  Borne  French  writers,  and  among
them  Count  Keratry.  in  his"  Kle\ati>>n  and  Down-
fall of  Maximilian,"  accuse  (ien.  Diaz  of  cruelty;
but  Count  Keratry  is  not  an  unbiased  writer,  ami,

rding  to  the  judgment  of  impartial  [mtsoiis
well  informed  of  the  facts,  while  it  is  true  that
Diaz  is  endowed  with  an  unbending  will  which
does  not  stop  at  bloodshed  when  he  believes  it
meessary  to  the  realization  of  his  purposes,  he
can  not  in  any  way  be  considered  as  a  sanguinary
man.  After  "the  final  reconstruction  of  the  re-
public. Diaz  retired  to  his  ranche,  ••  Da  Noria,"  in
Oaxaca.  In  the  elections  of  October,  1867,  he
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  against  Juarez  for
the  presidency  of  the  republic,  and  from  that
time  he  continually  conspired  against  the  govern-
ment. After  the  revolutionary  revolt  at  Da  Ciuda-
dela  in  favor  of  Diaz,  the  latter  proclaimed  the
plan  of  ]m  Noria.  at  the  city  of  Oaxaca,  and.  ac-
companied by  (Jen.  Galvan.  disguise!  one  as  a
clergyman  and  the  other  as  valet,  he  directed  his
steps  to  Sierra  de  Alica.  district  of  Tepic,  with  the
intention  of  winning  over  to  his  cause  Dosada,
called  the  "Tiger  of  Alica";  but,  for  unknown
reasons,  Diaz  changed  his  mind  and  went  to  Mazat-
lan.  He  won  over  to  his  cause  Gens.  Garcia  de  la
Cadeiia.  Muerta,  Toledo,  Paz,  and  several  others.
and  after  fighting  several  battles,  the  most  imjM)r-
tant  one  being  that  of  Da  Bulla,  Diaz  left  Mexico
by  way  of  Matamoros  and  Hrownsville.  Juarez
died  at  the  city  of  Mexico  a  short  time  after  (1M  July.
1*7,!),  and  was  succeeded  by  Ijerdo,  who  issued
a  decree  of  amnesty  under  which  Diaz  then  re-
turned to  his  country  and  remained  some  time  at
the  estate  of  La  Candelaria,  located  in  the  canton
of  Tlaootatpaa,  stale  of  Vera  Cruz,  where  he  manu-
factured Migar.  He  was  elected  deputy  to  the  con-
gress of  the  union  by  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz,  and
occupied  that  position  during  I.erdo's  presidential
term. The  political  friends  of  Diaz  proclaimed  in

..  just  before  the  presidential  elections,  the
revolutionary  plan  of  Tuxtepec.a  village  belonging
to  the  state  of  Oaxaca,  a  plan  which  was  accepted
by  Diaz  and  reformed  at  I'alo  BlaOOO  in  IS78,
advocating  free  suffrage,  the  abolition  of  internal
revenue  ami  exoise  laws,  the  independence  of  the
federal  district,  and  the  ineligibility  of  the  pre-i-
dent  to  succeed  himself. He  won  over  the  mili-


■aaaadaf  of  Mataaotoa,  Toledo* aad  *ith
risoo  offered  battle  V  whom

pursued. Diaz Wa*  dcfe«te<|

and  em-H|N-d  to  K*i  Oriaaaaj  wt  named

until  called  by  his  partisani  to  t  laxaca.  the  centre
of  the  revolution  against Lerdo'

tin  the  voyage  to  v.m  Orua,  while  the  steamer
was  at  anchor  off  one  of  ti  i,  the  ftnast.

thinking that In-, praVSOOe had l»-en  dJe0O*BUBl,

and  that  he  would  be  arrested  by  government  offV
cials,  he  threw  himself  into  the  MM  with  the  inten-
tion  of  swimming  ashore,  but  he  <  up  by

a  boat and taken back  to  the  -team.  r. When bj

had  reaobed  the  barborof  Vera  Cm  he  disguised

himself  as  a  eoal-heaver,  and.  with  the  assistance
of  the  purser,  was  put  OBJ  shore,  (in  his  arrival  at
Oaxaca  he  was  acknowledged  by  the  chief*  who
favored  his  cans.-,  and  advanced  U|*»tl  l'uebln  at
the  head  of  7,<KM»  men.  The  bloody  Imttles  of  F.|>a-
t Dm  and  D  .lazmin  were  fought  and  lost  bj
generals/ and  were  fbilowOO  by  that  <if  Tecoac,
where  Diaz  himself  took  the  coniniainl  nnd  de-
feated the  Derdo  government  forces  il»»No\.,  !*;•;,.
and  occupied shortly  afterward the  capital  of  the

republic  live  days,  after  Lerdo'a  flight  t..  the  United

Btatea  When  Lerdo  and  tome  of  his  ministers,
among  whom  were  (Ien.  Ifaoobedo  and  Romero
Bobio, abandoned  the  oountiy,  Jose  Maria  Iglesias,

then  president  of  the  federal  supreme  court  of  jus-
tice, declared  himself,  in  eooordanoe  with  the  pn>-
visioiis  of  the  constitution  of  lx."»7.  president  firo
ft-mimre  of  the  republic,  and  was  supported  by  sev-
eral states  and  politkdans;  but  immediately  after-
ward (ien.  Diaz  marched  from  the  capital,  with  a
large  force,  toward  the  interior,  with  the  purpose
of  attacking  the  trix»ps  sustaining  Iglesias.  A  con-
ference was  held  between  Gen.  Diaz  and  Iglesias  at
the  estate  of  \m  Capilla,  but  they  could  not  agree,
(ien.  Diaz  said  he  had  no  alternative  but  revolu-
tion, whcreiipin  Iglesias  assured  the  general  that,
if  he  (Diaz)  obtained  dominion  over  the  republic
by  military  force,  he  would  be  a  "  fortunate  soldier,
but  never  a  constitutional  president."  Such  was
the  situation  at  the  l>eginning  of  1S77;  but  the
troops  who  were  still  faithful  to  the  OBUM  of  Igle-
sias were  quickly  put  to  flight  at  Union  de  Adobes
by  Diaz.  The  military  prestige  of  Diaz,  the  sups>
rior  force  at  his  command,  and  the  desire  to  seek
an  early  solution  to  the  existing  difficulties,  were
powerful  motives  for  the  recognition  of  the  "plan

of  Tuxte|Mc"  by  many  a*  the  only  practicable
remedy.  For  a  short  |>eriod  Mexico  had  four  presi-
dents at  once:  Lerdo,  Iglesias,  Mendea,and  Diaz.
Gen,  Mandei  waa  temporarily  Intrusted  with  the
management  of  the  government's  affairs  during
(ien.  Dia/.*s  absence  on  his  military  expedition,  and
OH  the  following  days  the  elections  took  place  for
deputies  to  the  OOnMrasj  of  the  union,  for  pP
i>f  the  republic, and  for  magistrates  of  the  supreme

court of  justice. (Jell. Dial  Was  elected president.

Congress  assembled  on  1  April,  and  on  5  Mav.
1^71.  Diaz  took  the  oath  of  office ,  and  was  duly
inaugurated  as  chief  magistrate  of  tin-  nation  until
80  Nov..  1880.  In  .lune  cx-curred  the  difficulties
with  the  I'nited  States  res|>ecting  American  troopj
on  the  frontier,  but  in  an  interview  at  Tiedras
.  in  July,  between  (bus.  Onl  and  Tr«\ifio.
these  difficulties  were  amicably  settled.  The  gOT-
erniiunt  of  QeO.  Diaz  by  the  nionth  of  Auc

been  officially  ro-ogniz.-d  by  thoaa  of  Oaramm

(iuatcmala,  San  Salvador,  and  Italy:  but  not  until
March,  1*7*.  was  it  finally  recognized  by  the  United

i-olts  in  different
f  the  country,  which  Diaz,  with  his  ■
ence  as  a  revolutionist  and  conspirator,  finally  sul>-


168


DfAZ


DlAZ


dued.  When  Diaz  assumed  the  reins  of  p<>\  em-
inent he  convinced  himself  of  the  impossibility  of
fulfilling  the  promises  he  made  in  the  Tuxtepec
plan,  knowing  that  they  would  bring  alxmt  a  com-
plete disorganization  of  the  public  finances,  which
were  then  in  a  very  precarious  condition,  and  he
confined  himself  to  carry  out  the  promise  which
personally  affected  him,  the  one  forbidding  the
presidential  re-election,  and  the  constitution  was,
therefore,  amended  accordingly.  This  amendment
was  again  amended  13  Oct.,*  1887,  permitting  a
president  to  be  elected  for  two  successive  terms,
and  another  amendment  is  now  pending  which
allows  re-election  without  any  limitation.  The
difficulty  of  satisfying  the  wishes  of  all  the  disor-
derly elements  of  the  country,  ready  always  to  sup-
port any  revolutionary  movement,  caused  several
of  Diaz's  friends  who  had  supported  the  Tuxtepec
revolution  to  oppose  and  even  to  pronounce  against
him,  as  Negrete,  Martinez,  and  others.  Diaz  then
tried  to  reorganize  his  own  party  with  the  rem-
nants left  to  him  of  the  old  revolutionary  partv,
and  additions  from  followers  of  Juarez  and  Lerdo
who  represented  order,  peace,  and  stability.  He
conferred  important  positions  upon  men  belonging
not  only  to  these  two  political  parties,  but  also
upon  persons  who  had  served  the  French  interven-
tion and  Maximilian,  thus  trying  to  erase  the  dif-
ferences produced  by  past  political  questions.  Gen.
Manuel  Gonzalez  was  elected  president  of  the  re-
public at  the  elections  held  in  July,  1880,  and  was
inaugurated  1  Dec.  of  the  same  year.  Diaz  was
appointed  secretary  of  public  works  of  the  new
administration,  and  afterward  elected  president  of
the  supreme  court  of  justice,  a  position  which  was
then,  according  to  the  constitution,  equivalent  to
that  of  vice-president  of  the  republic.  He  was
elected  soon  afterward  governor  of  the  state  of
Oaxaca,  a  post  which  he  occupied  for  some  time,
leaving  it  with  the  legislature's  leave.  About  that
time,  near  1883,  he  came  to  the  United  States,  where
he  was  well  received,  travelling  as  far  as  Boston.
Having  been  re-elected  president  in  1884  to  succeed
Gen.  Gonzalez,  he  was  inaugurated  1  Dec.  of  that
year,  and  began  his  second  constitutional  term  as
president  of  Mexico.  During  his  first  term  conces-
sions for  building  various  railroads  had  been  granted
by  him  to  American  corporations,  but  no  work  on
them  had  been  begun  till  the  beginning  of  Gon-
zalez's administration.  The  subsidies  that  had
been  granted  had  teen  paid  regularly,  but  on  Diaz's
second  inauguration  he  found  the  treasury  abso-
lutely empty.  Besides  this,  about  three  quarters
of  the  customs  revenues  had  been  pledged  by  his
predecessor.  The  first  official  act  of  Diaz  was  to
repudiate  these  pledges,  without  interfering  with
the  railroad  subsidies,  which,  however,  he  was
obliged  to  stop  in  June,  1885.  The  question  of
settling  the  public  debt  now  arose  anew.  In  the
"plan  of  Tuxtepec"  a  general  repudiation  of  the
sums  due  to  England  had  been  advised  by  Diaz,
but  this  was  afterward  rejected  as  impolitic,  and
during  the  administration  of  Gonzalez  a  proposi-
tion was  made  to  appropriate  a  vast  sum  of  money
for  the  payment  of  the  English  debt  alone.  The
apprehension,  more  or  less  grounded,  felt  as  to  the
integrity  of  Gen.  Gonzalez  caused  public  demon-
strations of  opposition  by  students  and  journalists.
After  the  beginning  of  Diaz's  second  term  a  plan
for  the  settlement  of  the  whole  debt  was  made  by
congress,  and  is  now  (1887)  in  process  of  execution.
In  1886  several  unimportant  revolts  broke  out  in
different  parts  of  the  country,  but  they  were  im-
mediately suppressed.  A  decree  was  issued  17
March,  lsstj.  suspending,  in  the  case  of  kidnappers


and  persons  guilty  of  crimes  committed  against
the  security  of  railways,  the  constitutional  guaran-
tees granted  to  individuals  and  establishing  very

summary  proceedings  for  the  investigation  of  such
crimes  and  the  death  penalty  for  the  offenders.
The  question  raised  by  the  arrest  of  Mr.  Cutting
threatened  to  cause  a  rupture  between  the  United
States  and  .Mexico.  Secretary  of  State  Bayard
made  an  official  demand  for  the  immediate  and
unconditional  release  of  Cutting,  who  had  bean  ar-
rested for  publishing  a  libel  in  a  newspaper  that
was  issued  in  El  Paso,  Tex.,  but  circulated  also  in
Mexico.  The  trial  continued,  and  Cutting  was
duly  convicted  and  sentenced.  The  sentence  pro-
nounced in  the  first  instance  was  sent  to  the  su-
preme court  of  the  state  of  Chihuahua  for  revision,
and  before  this  tribunal  could  act  upon  the  matter
the  plaintiff  withdrew  his  demand  and  the  case
ended  with  the  release  of  Cutting.  Gov.  Ireland,
of  Texas,  also  complained  that  Arrezures,  a  citizen
of  the  United  States,  had  been  "foully  murdered
by  the  Mexican  authorities,"  but  his  citizenship
was  denied,  and  the  affair  ended  amicably.  In  Oc-
tober, 1886,  a  letter  from  Diaz  was  published  in
Paris,  in  which  he  declared  that  the  ex-marshal,
Bazaine,  during  the  French-Mexican  war,  proposed
to  him  to  surrender  the  cities  occupied  by  the  im-
perialists, including  the  munitions  of  war,  together
with  the  emperor  himself  and  Gens.  Miramon  and
Mejia.  This  letter  caused  a  great  sensation :  Don
Leonardo  Marquez,  one  of  the  principal  leaders  of
the  reactionary  party  of  Mexico,  and  the  only  one
who  has  been  out  of  the  country  since  the  with-
drawal of  the  French  troops,  made  in  "El  Autono-
mista"  of  Havana  some  charges  against  Diaz,  stat-
ting  that  he  offered  to  surrender  the  city  of  Oaxaca
to  Bazaine  while  the  latter  was  besieging  it.  In
the  latter  part  of  1886  a  movement  was  set  on  foot
to  abolish  the  article  of  the  constitution  that  for-
bids a  president  to  be  his  own  successor,  with  the
intention  of  electing  Gen.  Diaz  for  a  third  term.
Under  the  administration  of  Diaz  manufactures
have  increased,  the  resources  of  the  country  have
been  developed,  commerce  has  multiplied,  educa-
tion has  been  advanced,  the  revenues  have  been
appropriated  to  the  purposes  for  which  they  were
designed,  travel  is  safe,  bandits  have  been  dis-
persed, and  railroads  and  telegraphs  are  extending.
While  it  has  been  far  from  perfect,  there  has  been
no  public  scandal  in  it,  and  it  has  been  as  clean  as
the  circumstances  of  his  surroundings  have  allowed.
— His  elder  brother,  F61ix,  better  known  by  the
name  of  "  El  Chato,"  was  governor  of  Oaxaca  in
1871.  Although  the  brothers  were  not  open  ene-
mies, there  always  existed  a  certain  discordance
and  rivalry  between  them ;  yet,  when  the  "  Plan
de  la  Noria"  was  proclaimed,  Felix  sided  with  his
brother,  and  pronounced  against  the  government
Juarez  sent  Gen.  Alatorre  against  Oaxaca,  who,
after  defeating  Gen.  Teran  in  the  bloody  battle  of
San  Mateo,  prepared  to  invest  the  city,  when  Felix
Diaz  abandoned  it,  and  fled  over  the  mountains
toward  Puerto  Angel,  but  was  overtaken  by  hostile
Indians,  and  killed  after  suffering  cruel  tortures.

DIAZ,  Ruy,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Seville,  Spain,
in  1503;  d.  in  Peru,  26  April.  1538.  He  went  to
Peru  with  the  expedition  of  Diego  de  Almagro  in
1532,  and  as  captain  took  part  in  the  conquest  <f
the  interior  of  the  country,  and  the  capture  of
Cuzco,  1534.  In  the  same  year  he  was  assigned  to
the  command  of  Sebastian  Velalcazar  in  his  con-
quest of  the  province  of  Quito,  where  he  became
Crominent  by  his  daring  shown  in  the  numerous
loody  encounters  with  the  troops  of  the  cacique
Kuiuinaliui. While reconnoitring,, he  was  sin


DfAZ

rounded  t>v  ft  large  BSJnhSf  <>f  Indians,  and,  BOfe*
withstan  ling  his  valiant  defence.  Would  I

aroahed  had  ba  sot  at  the  critical  moment  rials

tlic  principal  chief  in the midst of  his followers,

whereupon  tbe  enemy  Bad,  and  ever  afterward  they

In-fore  tin-  Spanish  troops  when  t ht*y  ftftw
Diaz.  In  the  same  year,  bang  in  the  advance
1  with  Vaaoo  Guevarra  and  three  ■oldian'M
was  surrounded  ami  furiously  attacked  by  Indiana,
urn!  only  by  a  desperate  fight  cueeeeded  in  awing
himself  and  joining  the  main  army.  When  Velal-
cazar  tried  febdi rar  the hiding^Jaoa of  the  im-
mense treasure  that  Uumimihui  was  said  to  |x>ssesB,
tins  cacique,  by  skilful moYementa,  evaded  the

:di  attack:  hut  while  he  was  on  the  march  to
surprise  Quito,  I>iaz.  with  sixty  cavalry-men. over-
took and  engaged  him  till  Yclalcazarwith  his  force
and  his  allies,  the  Cafiari  Indiana,  could  come  up.
and  routed  him  with  gnat  loss,  s<>  that  Kuminahui
took  refuge  in  the  Fumbo  mountains,  abandoning
his  train  with  a  juirt  of  the  treasure.  When  the
province  of  Ouito  was  invaded,  in  March.  1534,  by
tin-  fori m  of  Pedro  Alvarado  from  (iuatemala.  Al-
•  >,  by  order  of  Pizarro,  marched  with  Vehd-
cazar's  forces  to  defend  the  territory  in  July.  liut.
desiring  to  avoid  strife  lietween  Spanish  forces,  he
sent  lvjiy  Dial  with  Hartnlome  de  Segovia  and
DiagO  Aguero  to  make  jxacific  proposals  to  Alvara-
do, and  Diaz  obtained  a  settlement,  signed  by  Al-
magro ami  Alvarado.  M  Aug.,  by  which  Alvarado
turned  over  his  forces  to  Almagro  and  returned  to  \
(iuatemala.  When  Pizarro  resolved  to  build  near
the  coast  a  city  destined  to  be  the  capital  of  the
Spanish  jxwsessions  in  IVru,  he  sent  an  expedition
under  Diaz  to  explore  the  territory  of  the  cacique
of  the  valley  of  the  liimac,  and  Diaz,  finding  the
country  feriiloand  well  adapted  for  the  purpose,
made  a  favorable  report  to  Pizarro,  who  ordered
a  city  to  !»•  built  on  the  spot  designated  by  Diaz,
and  on  1*  Jan.,  1535,  the  foundation-stone  of  the
city  of  Los  Reyes  (now  Lima)  was  laid.  When  the
dissension  between  Pizarro  and  Almagro  concern-
ing the  l>oundary  of  their  respective  government-.
bagan,  Diaz  was  in  that  city,  and,  as  a  follower  of
Almagro,  -ustained  the  governor,  Hernando  de
Soto.  On  the  departure  of  Almagro  for  his  expe-
dition to  Chili  in  1686,  lie  ordered  Diaz  to  go  to
Lima  to  recruit  soldiers,  and  follow  him  with
these  forces.  Diaz  soon  Mined  Almagro  with  his
troops,  and  partici[>ated  in  the  campaign  in  Chili.
On  the  hitter's  return  in  the  beginning  of  1087,
he,  wishing  to  establish  an  alliance  with  Manco
Inca,  who  had  risen  again-t  Pizarro,  sent  Buy
Diaz  with  other  officers  as  envov  to  the  Indian
prince,  who,  regarding  all  Spaniards  as  his  natural
enemies,  retained  the  commissioners  M  prisoners,
tied  them  naked  to  a  stake,  painted  and  pelted
them  with  fruit  and  mud,  subjected  them  to  all
kinds  of  indignities,  and  forced  them  to  drink
lane  quantities  of  the  Indian  intoxicating  liquor,
chieha.  Almagro,  once  in  possession  of  Ouaoo,  Is
April,  1687,  U-gan  hostilities  against  Manco  Inca.
Daring  the  ftHtfoate  and  relentless  warfare  that
Olgofias  waged  against  Manco  Inca  till  the  final
destruction  of  his  hosts,  Diaz  tixdc  advantage  of  a
favorable  opportunity  to  escape,  and  joined  Or-
goftcz's  forces.  He  continued  to  light  for  Almagro
•gainst  Pizarro's  attack,  and  was  present  at  the
•rv  of  Abanoay,  18  July,  1537,  the  advance  to
Chindia  in  September,  and  the  retreat  to  CuBOO  in
NovciuImt.  In  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Salinas
86  April.  l')'.\H,  Diaz  was  in  command  of  the  e-coit
bearing  the  royal  standard,  and.  after  the  defeat  of
Almagro*!  forces.  Buy  Diaz  wst  overtaken  in  In-
flight by  Pizarro's  soldiers,  and  killed.


DI<K


160


IH  \/.  sebaMtlan.  olsnjySMB,  b.  in  Santiago,

Chili,  in 1710;  d.  there  m |H12. ||„  wa»  »  f)„-


ininican.  reread  in  all  the  MeSSM)  of  hi-  line
master  of  the  principal  ancient  and modern  lan-
guage*. He  assisted  in  founding  th<
Our  Lady  of  Bethlehem,  Santiago,  anil
|>ri«.r  in  \>\. He  was  again  .  I.«t.w|  ,,,  I  X.  and
)lni>hed  the  buildings  that  ln«  predaOSSKW  had  BOt
btSB  able  to  complete. His principal work*  nrv

••  Noticia  general  de  Us  oosm  del  Mando";  "Tra-

tado  contra  la  falsa Picdad  "  :  "Manual Do>.
co  "  ; ••  Vida  del  Padre  Manuel  Acuflft  ":  a,.
da  de  Sir  Maria  de  la  Pttriffescsfa  Vald

initltLK,  Sheldon,  missionary,  h.  in  81  aneate-
les.  N*.  V..  M  Jan.,  INK);  d. in LshsissluSI

sanas  islands.  It  Jan.  IMS, He  sis  padasted  at

Hamilton  college  in  1887, and  at  Auburn  tl.
cal  seminarvin  1H30;  wasonlained  at  Ctica

I  n,t.,  ikmi.  and  sailed  fr..,,,  .\.«  Bedford  for
Honolulu,  86  Deo,  1830,  arriving  on  '.♦Jut,..  1881,
with  the  fourth  coni|>any  of  mis-ioiiarii-  to  the
Hawaiian  islands,  lb-  sm  stationed  at  Hilo  until
1830;  but.  his  health  not  Ining  good,  he  was  as*
Signed  to  the  seininarv  at  I Jihainaluna.  on  the  i-|-
and  of  Maui.  Here  his  wife.  Maria  M.  TosdisaoS,
of  Trov.  N.  Y.,  b.  in  April.  iHtw.di.-d  20  Feb.,
On  80 Not.  of  that  year  Mr.  Dibble  relied  for  the
Cnitcd  States,  where  he  made  an  extended  tour,
delivering  lectures  opoo  the  islands  and  the  mis-
sionary work.  An  abstract  of  there  was  pubhehed
under  the  title  "Hawaiian  History"  (New  York,
1888),  He  married  Antoinette  TonuinSOU,  of  Man-
liu-.  N.  Y..  and  returned  with  her  to  his  station,
sailing  from  New  Vork.  i»  <M..  1888.  Mr.  Dibble
WSS  among  the  foremost  of  the  miSSOS  educators.
He  translated  a  part  of  the  Old  Testament,  pre-
pared eight  text-books  on  grammar,  natural  hb>
tory.  and  scripture  history,  in  the  Hawaiian  lan-
guage, and  wrote  a  "  History  of  the  Sandwich  [st-
ands Mission  "  (New  York.  1888).  and  a  u History
of  the  Sandwich  Islands"  (Lahainaluna.  1848*
which  have  peculiar  value  as  authentic  history.

DIKKKLL.  Ueorge  HIM*,  soldier,  b.  in  \Vhite
county,  Tenn.,  18  April.  1888;  d.  in  Sparta,  Tenn..
!»  May.  1KNM.  His  m-IiooI  education  was  supple-
uieuted  by  one  term  at  Kast  Tennessee  university,
lie  was  a  farmer  and  merchant.  I  to  the

constitutional  convention  of  Tennessee,  on  the
union  ticket,  in  1881,  and  to  the  legislature  of
Tennessee  in  August  Entering  the  Confederate
army  as  a  private,  he  was  elected  lieutenant-colo-
nel, and  was  promoted  colonel  and  brigade
eml  Of  cavalry  in  1884 He  was  detailed  t-

■utive 'officers  and  treasure  of  the  Conbsler-
ate  government  after  the  evacuation  of  Richmond.
and  took  charge  of  the  archives  at  GreeSSboro,  N.
C.  after  the  surrender  of  Lee's  army.  He  was  a
incmU-r  of  the  constitutional  convention  of  Ten-
nessee in  1870,  and  was  five  times  eleeti-d  a  repre-
sentative from  that  state  in  OOngTSM,  serving  from
(i  Dec.  is;:,,  till  4  March.  1-

DICK.  James  T..  artist,  b.  in  New  >,  ..rk  city  in
is;{4:  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.  Ill  Jan..  1888,  Hi
was  the  son  of  A.  I..  Dick,  whose  engraving  of
••  The  Uist  Bsnpsr"  was  regarded  as  a  ■spsiiar
work  of  art.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  his  son  gained
prizes  awarded  b\  tin-  Manchester.  Knglaiid.aoade-
II, v  of  design.  He  was  one  of  the  originators  of
the  Brooklyn  artaahOOl  and  a  founder  of  the
Acadeinv  of  design.  Among  his  Ust  efforts  an-
"Cooling  <MT." •  I.eap-Fn.g."  and  "  At  Mischief."

DICK.  Roharl  inventor,  b.  in  Itathgate.  Lin-
lithgow Jure,  S-otian.l.  12  Jan..  1^14.  At  the  age
,.f  s.veii  he  came  with  his  father's  family  fee
Canada. A short  time  after  their  arrival,  *  Idle


170


DICK


DICKEY


travelling  through  Canada,  the  father  and  mother
died,  leaving  elewn  children. The  eldest,  a  >i-t.r.

determined  <>n  keeping  the  brothers  and  sisters
together.  They  finished  their  journev.  and  settled
in  Lanark  county,  Canada  West.  Mr.  l)ick's studies
were  pursued  under  grave  disadvantages,  but  he
succeeded  and  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college,
Clinton,  N.  Y.,  in  1841.  He  devoted  himself  to
t«-a<  hing,  lecturing,  and  missionary  work  for  sev-
eral yean,  and  in  1854  established  the  "Gospel
Tribune,"  in  Toronto,  C.  W.  In  1856  he  invented
a  newspaper  mailing-machine,  the  capacity  of
which,  under  successive  improvements,  was  in-
creased to  20,000  labels  in  a  day  of  ten  hours,
pasted  and  attached  by  one  operator  to  wrappers
or  papers. This  invention  is  now  in  universal  use.

DICK,  Samuel,  b.  in  New  Jersey ;  d.  there  in
November,  1812.  He  received  a  classical  educa-
tion, studied  medicine,  and  practised  his  profes-
sion. He  was  a  delegate  from  New  Jersey  in  the
Continental  congress  in  1783-'4.

DICKENS,  Augustus  N.,  English  journalist,  b.
in  Landport,  near  Portsmouth,  England,  in  1826  ;
d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  4  Oct.,  1866.  He  was  a  brother
of  Charles  Dickens,  the  novelist,  and  the  original
"  Boz,"  this  being  the  pet  name  given  to  him  by
his  family.  He  was  for  some  time  a  correspondent
of  the  London  "  News."  Emigrating  to  the  United
States,  he  purchased  land  at  Am  boy,  on  the  Illinois
Central  railwav,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pur-
suits, but  failed.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Chi-
cago with  his  family  and  became  a  corresponding
clerk  in  the  land-office  of  the  Illinois  Central  rail-
way, a  place  which  he  held  till  his  death.

DICKERSON,  James  Stokes,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  July,  1825 ;  d.  in  Chicago  in
March,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Madison  uni-
versity in  1848,  and  in  1850  became  associated  with
Dr.  Martin  B.  Anderson  in  the  publication  of  the
New  York  "  Recorder."  After  several  years  spent
in  this  relation  and  in  the  service  of  the  American
Baptist  publication  society,  he  became  proprietor
and  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Christian  Chroni-
cle." While  thus  engaged  he  began  preaching,
and  in  March,  1861,  accepted  the  pastorate  of  the
2d  Baptist  church  in  Wilmington,  Del.  He  sub-
sequently served  as  pastor  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and
in  Boston,  Mass.,  till  failing  health  obliged  him  to
retire  from  the  pulpit,  and,  removing  in  1875  to
Chicago,  he  became  joint  proprietor  and  editor  of
the  "  Standard,"  a  Baptist  weekly  paper.  He  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.

DICKERSON,  Mahlon,  statesman,  b.  in  Han-
over, N.  J.,  17  April,  1770 ;  d.  in  Suckasunny,
Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  5  Oct.,  1853.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1789,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1793,  and  practised  with  success  in
Philadelphia.  In  1805-'8  he  was  quartermaster-
general  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1808-'10  recorder
of  the  city  court  of  Philadelphia.  He  returned  to
New  Jersey,  became  judge  of  the  supreme  court
and  chancellor,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  18ll-'13.  In  1815  he  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  New  Jersey,  and  at  the  close  of  his  term
was  sent  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  was  repeatedly  re-
elected, serving  from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till  2  March,  1833.
President  Jackson  appointed  him,  on  30  June,  1834,
secretary  of  the  navy,  in  which  post  he  was  con-
tinued by  President  Van  Buren,  serving  till  30
June,  1838,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  James  K.
Paulding.  He  subsequently  served  for  a  few  months
on  the  bench  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  for  the  dis-
trict of  New  Jersey,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1844.  In  1846-'8  he
was  president  of  the  American  institute. He  was


e$.$t,ctfmfa>


largely  interested  in  the  Billing  and  manufacture

<>f  bon  in  Morris  enmity,  ami.  although  a  stats*
rights  democrat,  advocated  the  protective  tarilT  in
congress. He  pub-
lished "  Speeches

in  Congress,  1888-

'46." — H  is  brother,
Philemon,  1>.  in
Morris  count  v.  N.
J.,  in  1788:  d.  in
Paterson,  N.  J.,  10
Dec.,  1862,  received
a  liberal  education,
studied  law,  and
practised  in  Pater-
son. He  served  a
term  in  congress
in  1833-'5,  and  was
re-elected,  but  re-
signed in  1836  to
accept  the  gover-
norship of  New
Jersey.  In  1838  he
was  again  elected

to  congress ;  but  his  election,  as  well  as  that  of  the
other  representatives  from  New  Jersey  except  one,
was  contested,  and  he  did  not  take  his  seat  till  10
March,  1840,  serving  till  the  following  March.  He
was  afterward  judge  of  the  United  States  district
court  in  New  Jersey.

DICKERSON,  William  Fisher,  A.  M.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Woodbury,  N.  J.,  18  Jan.  1844 ;  d.  in
Columbia,  S.  C,  in  December,  1884.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Lincoln  university  in  1870,  and  in  1876
appointed  to  represent  his  church  at  the  general
conference  of  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  de-
nomination. In  1880  he  was  elected  thirteenth
bishop,  and  given  charge  of  the  work  in  South
Carolina  and  Georgia.  He  founded  Allen  univer-
sity, Columbia,  S.  C,  in  1880,  of  which  he  was
president  for  four  years.  In  1881  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  oecumenical  council  in  London,  and  travelled
through  France  and  Switzerland.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wilberforce  university  in  1878.

DICKEY,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  near  Ox-
ford, Pa.,  12  March,  1772 ;  d.  in  Oxford,  Pa.,  31
May,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1792,  was  settled  over  the
churches  of  Oxford  and  Octoraro,  and  remained
pastor  of  the  Oxford  church  till  his  death.  In
1822,  with  Dr.  George  Junkin  and  most  of  the
associate  Reformed  clergy  and  their  churches,  he
entered  the  Presbyterian  connection.  Princeton
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1823.  He  pub-
lished a  "Tract  to  Parents,"  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  Plea  for  Christian  Communion,"  and  wrote  for
the  "Christian  Advocate"  a  series  of  letters  on
"Travels  in  Europe  for  Health  in  1820"  that  were
widely  read. — His  son,  John  Miller,  b.  in  Oxford,
Pa.,  15  Dec,  1806;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21
March,  1878,  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college
in  1824,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1827.  In  1828  he  was  employed  in  missionary
labor  in  northeastern  Pennsylvania,  and  the  fol-
lowing year  in  Florida  and  southern  Georgia.  In
1830  he  was  installed  pastor  at  Newcastle.  DsL
and  after  his  father's  death  assumed  charge  of  the
church  at  Oxford,  Pa.,  and  that  of  Upper  \\ '•  4
Nottingham.  He  conducted  the  Oxford  female
seminary  for  fifteen  years  in  addition  to  his  pas-
toral duties.  In  1856  he  resigned  his  pastorate
He  took  the  principal  part  in  establishing  the
Ashmun  institute  (afterward  Lincoln  university)
at  Oxford,  and  was  president  of  the  board  of
trustees  from  1854  till  his  death. He  was  also  a


DICK


.lir..t,.r of I'riiiift-.n thoologioal win i nary,  and

Ifiit  «>f  tin-  board  in

DI<  KEY,  .loini KeElrojr, clergyman,  l>.  in

i  district,  S.  c, 1«;  I;  .1.  near

hington,  Iinl.,  II N. n .. 1848. II.-  removed

with  his  parents  to  Livingston  eounty,  Ky.,  in  1806,

■ttd,  with  a  view  to  becoming  a  minister,  studied
tin'  classics  with  hi<*  coii-in,  a  cicrgviuan,  ill  tfaf
hborhood,  tad  afterward  at  Hardin  Creek,
where  he  watt  takt-n  into  tin-  family  of  a  pMH
whose  name  of  McKlroy  he  adopted,  out  of  grati-
tads,  as  a  part  of  his  own.  After  studying  theolo-
gy, be  was  Uoaoaad  to  preach  in  August,  1*11,  nnd
removed  to  the  territory  of  Imliana,  being  the
third  Presbyterian  minister  that  had  settled  then-.
His  rhureh  was  at  the  forks  of  White  river,  near
what  is  now  Washington,  Daviess  co.  In  the  fol-
lowing spring  he  went  for  his  wife  and  house-
hold goods,  and  in  1*1!»  removed  t<.  the  vicinity  of
Lexington,  Scott  co.,  to  take  charge  of  Pisgah
and  Lexington  churches,  of  the  latter  of  which  he
Was  pastor  till  1XI."),  and  of  the  former  till  within
two  years  of  his  death.  He  went  on  HliflfftlWJ
tours,  organized  many  new  churches  in  Indiana,
and  his  connection  with  the  U-ginnings  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  that  territory  caused  him
to  be  widely  known  in  his  denomination.  He  pub-
lished  a  "History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in
Indiana  "  (1886),  and  was  preparing  a  continuation
of  it  at  the  time  of  his  death.

IH<  h  I  \ .  Robert  Barry,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Amherst.  NovaScotia,  lONov.,  1811.  Hestudied
law  with  Judge  Stewart,  of  the  vice-admiralty
court,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1K54.  He
was  a  judge  and  registrar  of  the  probate  court  for
many  years,  was  a  director  of  the  Nova  Scotia
BOSOM  Telegraph  coiii|>aiiy,and  was  consular  agent
for  tlu>  United  States  at  Amherst.  N.  S.,  from
1H48  till  1n.-»n.  He  was  a  delegate  from  the  Nova
Scotia  government  to  Great  Britain  on  the  subject
of  the  Intercolonial  railway  in  1858,  and  to  the
Otiebec  union  conference  in  1864,  and  a  member  of
the  legislative  council  of  Nova  Scotia  in  lSQS-W,
when  he  was  called  to  the  Dominion  senate.

DICKEY,  Theophilus  I. vie.  jurist.  I».  near
Paris.  Ky..  12  Nov..  1S12;  d.  in  Atlantic  City.  N..I..
M  .1  illy.  1885.  He  read  law  in  his  native  state,  re-
moved" to  Ohio,  liberated  the  slaves  that  he  had
inherited,  and  afterward  established  himself  in
practice  in  Illinois.  During  the  Mexican  war  be
served  as  a  captain  in  Col.  Hardin's  regiment,  and
in  the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of  the  11th  Illinois
cavalry,  and  served  for  two  years  under  Gen.  Grant,
on  whose  staff  he  served  for  some  months  as  chief
of  cavalry.  From  30  July,  18(58.  till  the  dose  of
President  Johnson's  administration  he  was  assist-
ant attorney-general  of  the  United  States.  From
1876  till  his  death  he  was  judge  of  the  Illinois
supreme  court.  See  Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson's
"Sketches  of  Illinois  Officers"  (Chicago,  1863).

IUCKI.NS,  John,  (dergyman,  l>.  in  Ixmdon,
England,  24  Aug..  1747:  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa..
Sept,  1788.  He  received  a  good  education,
part  I  v  at  Eton,  and  came  to  this  country  before
the  Revolution.  He  united  with  the  Methodist
church  in  Virgin!*  in  1774.  and  in  177»!  preached
there  as  an  evangelist,  was  admitted  into  the  itiner-
ant ministry  in  1777,and  labored  in  North  (  "arolina.
In  1 780  he  suggested  to  his  intimate  friend,  Bishop
A-liury.  the  plan  of  Cokesbury  college,  New
Abingdon.  Md..  the  lir>t  Methodist  academic  in-
stitution in  this  count rv.  He  was  in  New  J
city  in  1788-'5and  1786-'9,  and  in  17*!l  rem
to  Philadelphia  where  he  published  a  Methodist
hjnn-book,  printing  a  large  \mrl  of it with  hi-


Dl<  K!


171


own  hand-.  Shortly  nfterwnrd  the  .  onfcrrnoe  a*-
sinned  the  Publication,  nml  appointed  hun  booh*
steward,  and  in  this  „(]],.,•  he  founded  the  Metho-
dist UM»k  conceni.  II.'  kmi.n1  the  \rroinian
ne" in Philadelphia in  ,,d  the

"Methodist Magazine"  fn.ni 17!»7 till hi*
Mr.  Dickins  na-  tin-  llr-t nmsfjnail  prcaohl  I
<ti\e  ThOBBM  Coke  and  approve hi- scheme for
organizing  the  Methodist  denomination. He  w„.
a  member  of  the  "Christmas  ooni
and  suggested the name  H Methodist Kpiseooal
Church,"  which it adopted. During  the yellow-
fever  epidemics  of i7!»:;,  17°7.  and I
mained  at  his  post  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  last
year  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease. Mr.  I»i«  kins  was

apowerful  preajoher and  oj f  the  beat  *  hoiamof

his  chunh  at  the  time  of  his  ministry
in  his  memory  was  delivered  by  the  I,
Cooiier  an<l afterward published  (Philadelphia.
1790). Ne  also  John  Atkinson's  ••  c,  i, teiuiial  His-
tory of  American  Methodism"  (New  York.  1-
His  s.,,,,  .\shiiry.  s,.,  rotary  of  the  C s.  s. ,,at.-.  i,
in  North  Carolina, 98 July,  1780:  d.in  Washington
2:5  Oct..  iNHi.  pasxd  his 'early  life  in  Philadelphia,
and  afterward  s|N-nt  sereml  years  in  Europe, In

1H()1  he  was  associated  with  Joseph  Dennis  in
founding  the  "Port  Polio"  at  Philadelphia.  He
was  a  clerk  in  the  treasury  department  onder
Secretary  Crawfard  from  lHlil  till  1K«,  and  while
there  OOmposed  and  read  Secretary  Crawford's  BOO-
OSSaful  vindication  of  himself  against the  charges

S referred  by  Ninian  lvlwards,  then  minister  to
lexico.  He  was  chief  clerk  of  the  st;it,.  depart-
ment in  i8:{3-'»;,  and  became  secretary  of  the
United  States  senate  in  is;}*!,  an  office  that  he  re-
tained until  1861.  He  published  an  oration  on
Washington  (Philadelphia.  1*00;  New  York.  1885}
DICKINSON,  AHreil  Klijah.  oiergyman,  b.  in
Orange  county.  \'a.,  3  IW.,  I860.  He  was  edu-
cated  at  Richmond  college  and  the  University  of
Virginia,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Paptirl  chunh
in  Charlottesville.  He  subsequently  si»ent  several
years  in  promoting  Sunday-school  ami  oolportage
work,  and  then  became  pastor  of  the  Leign  street
Baptist  church.  Richmond,  Vn.  Still  later  he  as-
sociated himself  with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Jeter  as  Joint
owner  and  editor  of  the  "Religious  Herald,"  and
since  the  death  of  Dr.  Jeter  has  been  editor-in-
chief  of  that  journal,  whose  circulation  and  influ-
ence he  has  greatly  extended. He  has  received  the

degr >f  D.  D.  from  Kurman  university.

DICKINSON.  Anna  Elizabeth,  orator,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  88  Oct,  1*42.  Her  father  died
when  she  was  two  years  old.  leaving  ber  in  poverty,
and  she  was  educated  in  the  flee  schools  Of  the  so-
ciety of  Friends,  of  which  her  parents  were  iaean-
Ihts.  Her  early  days  wen-  a  continuous  struggle
against  adverse  circumstances,  |,ut  sh,.  read  eagerly,
devoting  all  her  earnings  to  the  purchase  of  booka,

she  wrote  an  artideon  slavery  for  the  ••  Liberator  "
when  only  fourteen  rears  old,  and  mad.-  hat  first
appearance  aaa  public  speaker  in  1867,  at  meetings

for  discussion held by  a  body  calling theflBSatvaS

•■  Progressive  Friends',"  chiefly  interested  in  the
anti-sl.i\erv  movement.  A  sneering  and  ins.. lent
tirade  against  women,  by  a  panon  pn>minent  at
these  meetings.  oaOed  from  the  spirit. s:l  girl  a  with-
ering reply,  her  maiden  BpoOOh. From  this  tune

she  spoke  frequently,  chiefly  on  temparanee  and

slaverv. She  taught school  in Bsrkl  OOOBt

I  i^».  and  was  employed  in  the  I".  S.  mint
in  Philadelphia  from  April  t'o  December.  186L  but
was  dismissed  for  saving,  in  a  speech  in  wesf
Chester.that  thebattle'of  Ball's  Hluff  "was|oat,not
through  ignoramv  and  iiutimpetence,  but  through


172


DICKINSON


DICKINSON


erfl^^. Z^uAJ^ul^^


the  treason  of  the  commanding  general  "  (Mb-
Clellan).  She  then  made  lecturing  her  profession,
speaking  chiefly  on  political  subjects.  William
Lloyd  Garrison  heard  one  of  her  anti-la  very
speeches  in  an  annual  meeting  of  the  Progressive
1<  riends,  held  at  Kennett,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,with  great
delight,  and  on  his  return  to  Boston  spoke  of  the

"girl  orator"  in
such  terms  that
she  was  invit-
ed to  speak  in
the  fraternity
course  at  Music
Hall,  Boston,  in
1862,  and  chose
for  her  subject
the  "  National
Crisis."  From
Boston  she  went
to  New  Hamp-
shire, at  the  re-
quest of  the  Re-
publican state
committee,  to
speak  in  the  gu-
bernatorial can-
vass, and  thence  was  called  to  Connecticut.  On
election  night  a  reception  was  tendered  her  at
Hartford,  and  immediately  thereafter  she  was  in-
vited to  speak  in  Cooper  institute  by  the  Union
League  of  New  York,  and  shortly  afterward  in
the  Academy  of  Music,  Philadelphia,  by  the  Union
League  of  that  city.  From  this  time  to  the  end  of
the  civil  war  she  spoke  on  war  issues.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1863  she  was  asked  by  the  Republican
state  committee  of  Pennsylvania  to  speak  through-
out the  coal  regions  in  the  canvass  to  re-elect  Cur-
tin,  the  male  orators  at  the  committee's  command
being  afraid  to  trust  themselves  in  a  district  that
had  recently  been  the  scene  of  draft  riots.  Ohio
offered  her  a  large  sum  for  her  services,  but  she
decided  in  favor  of  Pennsylvania.  On  16  Jan.,
1864,  at  the  request  of  prominent  senators  and  rep-
resentatives, she  spoke  in  the  capitol  at  Washing-
ton, giving  the  proceeds,  over  $1,000,  to  the  Freed-
men's  relief  society.  She  also  spoke  in  camps  and
hospitals,  and  did  much  in  aid  of  the  national  cause.
After  this  her  addresses  were  made  chiefly  from  the
lyceum  platform.  On  the  termination  of  the  war
she  spoke  on  "  Reconstruction  "  and  on  "  Woman's
Work  and  Wages."  In  1869-'70,  after  a  visit  to
Utah,  she  lectured  on  "  Whited  Sepulchres."  Later
lectures,  delivered  in  the  northern  and  western
states,  were  "  Demagogues  and  Workingmen,"
•'  Joan  of  Arc,"  and  "  Between  us  be  Truth,"  the
last-named  being  delivered  in  1873  in  Pennsylvania
and  Missouri,  where  obnoxious  bills  on  the  social
evil  were  before  the  legislatures.  In  1876  Miss
Dickinson,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  many  of  her
friends,  left  the  lecture  platform  for  the  stage,
making  her  first  appearance  in  a  play  of  her  own.
entitled  "  A  Crown  of  Thorns."  It  was  not  favor-
ably received  by  the  critics,  and  Miss  Dickinson
afterward  acted  in  Shakespeare's  tragedies,  still
meeting  with  little  success.  "  Aurelian  "  was  writ-
ton  in  1878  for  John  McCullough,  but  was  with-
drawn by  the  author  when  the  failing  powers  of
the  great  tragedian  made  it  apparent  that  he  would
be  unable  to  appear  in  it.  It  has  never  been  put
upon  the  stage,  but  Miss  Dickinson  has  given  read-
ings from  it.  She  lectured  on  "Platform  and
Stage  "  in  1879,  and  in  1880  wrote  "  An  American
Girl  "  for  Fanny  Davenport,  which  was  successful.
Miss  Dickinson's  |  nil  dished  works  are  "What  An-
swer!" a  novel  (Boston,  1868); "A  Paying  In-


vestment" (1876);  and  "A  Ragged  Register  of
People,  Places, and  Opinions"' (New  Fork,  1879).

DICKINSON,  Baxter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Am-
herst, Ma--..  1 1  April.  1790;  <l.  in  Brooklyn,  V  Y..
7  De&,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  lsi;
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1881.  After"
DAYing  pastoral  charge  of  Congregational  churches
at  I."iigmeadow,  Mass.,  and  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  he
was  in  1835  appoint ..1  professor  of  sacred  rhetoric
and  pastoral  theology  in  Lane  seminary,  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  where  he  remained  until  1839.  From
1839  till  1847  he  held  a  similar  chair  in  Auburn
seminary,  and  served  as  acting  professor  at  An-
dover in  1848.  He  was  subsequently  engaged  for
nine  years  in  Boston  in  the  sendee  of  the  Ameri-
can and  foreign  Christian  union  and  of  the  Ameri-
can board.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Letters  to  St  u-
dents,"  which  was  republished  in  England^

DICKINSON,  Daniel  Stevens,  statesman,  b.
in  Goshen,  Conn.,  11  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  April,  1866.  In  early  life  he  was  taken  by
his  father  to  Guilford,  Chenango  co.,  N.  V..  where
he  obtained  a  public-school  education.  In  addi-
tion to  this,  with  but  slight  assistance,  he  acquired
the  Latin  language  and  made  himself  acquainted
with  the  higher  mathematics  and  other  sciences
while  apprenticed  to  a  clothier.  When  he  became
his  own  master  he  occupied  himself  for  a  time  in
teaching  and  surveying,  then  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828,  beginning  practice  in
Guilford.  In  1831  he  removed  to  Binghamton,
which  thenceforth  became  his  home.  In  1836  he
was  chosen  state  senator,  and  his  great  ability  as  a
debater  soon  made  him  the  leader  of  his  party.
Among  the  questions  that  came  up  for  discussion
were  several  measures,  such  as  the  small-bill  law
and  the  general  banking  law  that  arose  out  of  the
recent  overthrow  of  the  U.  S.  bank,  the  construc-
tion of  the  Erie  railway,  and  the  enlargement  of
the  Erie  canal.  His  strongest  oratorical  effort  at
this  time  was  his  speech  in  opposition  to  the  repeal
of  the  usury  laws,  10  Feb.,  1837.  In  1840  he  was
nominated  for  the  office  of  lieutenant-governor  by
the  democrats,  and,  although  defeated  that  year,
he  was  elected  in
1842.  He  thus
became  ex-officio
president  of  the
senate,  of  the
court  of  errors,
and  of  the  canal
board.  At  the
expiration  of  his
term  of  office
in  1844,  Gov.
Bouck  appoint-
ed him  to  fill  a
vacancy  in  the
U.  S.  senate,  and
on  the  meeting
of  the  legislature
the  appointment
was  ratified  and
he  was  elected
for  a  full  term.
Mr. Dickinson

held  for  several  years  the  chairmanship  of  the  senate
committee  on  finance.  In  discussing  the  exeiting
issues  of  the  day  he  took  strong  conservative  ground,
and  from  that  standpoint  spoke  frequently  on  the
annexation  of  Texas,  the  joint  occupation  of  Ore-
gon, the  Mexican  war,  the  Wilmot  proviso,  and  the
compromise  measures  of  1850.  In  December,  1847,
he  introduced  two  resolutions  regarding  the  BOflj
ernment  of  the  territories,  which  vistually  embod-


t^-^\d&C*^^^*~^


"**£?


DICK'H


dicki:


178


||d  tin-  doctrine  afterward  known  as  "  popular  sov-
*  e  Bl'TTS,  I  BODg  the  meas-

ures that  have  since  been  adopted,  Mr.  DiokittSOU
earnestly  advocated  the  free  passage  of  weekly
ipapars  through  tin-  mail*  iii  the  county  whets
published.  His  conservative  course  In  thi  senate
not  only  ■soured  bin  the  vote  "t  Virginia  fur  the

dcntial  nomination  in  tin-  Democratic  ...nven-
Hon  of  1*52,  hut  a  strongly  commendatory  letter
from  Daniel  Webster,  87  Sept..  ik,v»,  in  which  the
writer  asserted  that  Mr.  Dickinson's,  "noble,  able,
manly,  ami  patriotic  ooodnat  in  sii|»jM>rt  of  thi-
great  measures  "  of  that  session  ha«l  "entirely  won
Mart  "  ami  received  his  ••  highest  regard."  In
lidenl  Picric  nominated  Mr.  Dickinson
for  OoUeotor  of  the  |>ort  of  New  York,  and  the
Domination  was  confirmed  hv  the  senate;  bttl  the
ofhot  was  declined.  At  the  licgiuningof  the  civil
war  in  1861,  Mr.  Dickinson  threw  all  his  iufliiem  •«•
on  the  side  of  the  government  regardless  of  party
considerations,  and  for  the  first  three  vears  de-
•I  himself  to  addressing  public  assemblages  in
New  York.  Pennsylvania,  and  the  New  Fngland
•  s.  In  is<ll  he  was  nominated  for  atlornev-
gencral  of  his  state,  and  was  elected  by  lOO.OfX)
majority.  He  whs  nominated  hv  President  Lincoln
to  settle  the  northwestern  boundary  question,  but
declined,  as  he  also  did  a  nomination  by  Gov.  Pen-
ton  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  court  of  appeals  of  the
state  of  New  York.  He  subsequently  accepted  the
otlice  of  district-attorney  for  the  southern  district
of  New  York,  and  performed  its  duties  almost  till
the  day  of  his  death.  In  the  Republican  national
convention  of  ism.  when  President  Lincoln  was
renominated,  Mr.  Dickinson  received  100  votes  for
the  vice-presidential  nomination.  As  a  debater  be
was  clear,  profound,  and  logical,  and  not  infre-
quently overwhelmed  his  opponents  with  scathing
satire.  His  speeches  were  ornamented  with  classi-
cal allusions  and  delivered  without  apparent  ef-
fort. Among  his  happiest  efforts  are  said  to  have
been  his  speech  in  the  National  democratic  conven-
tion at  Baltimore  in  1852,  in  which,  having  re-
ceived the  vote  of  Virginia,  he  declined  in  favor  of
<  i<n.  Cuss,  and  his  eulogy  of  Oen.  Jackson  in  1845.
Mr.  Dickinson's  brother  has  published  his  "Life
and  Works"  (J  vols..  New  York.  1H«7).

DICKINSON,  Kd  ward,  lawyer,  b.  in  Amherst,
Mass..  i  j,m.,  1N<>3:  d.  in  Boston,  16  June,  1874.
He  was  the  son  of  Samuel  Fowler  Dickinson,  one
of  the  founders  of  Amherst  college.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1828,  and  opened  a  law-omoo  in
Amherst  in  1886,  when-  he  continued  the  practice
of  his  profession  until  his  death.  A  few  months
previous  to  that  event  ha  resigned  in  favor  of  his

son  the  trcasurcrship  of  Amherst,  an  office  lie  had
held  uninterruptedly  since  1835.  In  1888-'9  and
ls7o  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  Masaaohusstta
assembly,  and  was  elected  state  senator  in  l848-*8.
In  ls4«>-'7  he  served  as  a  mcmltcrof  the  governor's
council,  and  from  1*.*>:{  till  1806  eat  in  the  lower
house  <>f  congress,  having  been  elected  bv  the  whig

party. Havawbeen  elected  to  the  legislature  in

1878  that  be  might  secure  to  his  native  town  the
advantages  of  the  Massachusetts  Central  railroad,
he  delivered  an  able  address  in  the  interests  ,,f
that  road  in  connection  with  the  FffrOOac  tunnel,
and  died  of  apoplexy  on  the  earns  day.

DM  KINSON,  John,  publicist,  b.  in  Maryland,

II  Nov..  1788;  d.  in  Wilmington,  DeL  14  Feb..

lie was  the  sou  of  Samuel D. Dickinson.

who  removed  to  Delaware.  Itccallic  chief  justice of

tl inity  of Kent,  and  died,  <>  .Inly. l?»SO,  aged

eeventv-oiic.  John  Studied  law  in  Philadelphia.
and  subsequently  passed  three  years  in  reading  in


the  Temple  jr,  Loudon.  <  >n  hi- return  hepracttanl
successful!*  in  Philadelphia.  I  lis  dot  appearance*
in  public  life  were  as  a  m<  ml>  r  of  tl..

emblj  in  1764,  and  of  tl.,-  Colonial  <-ongreat
BOnraned  m  New York  to  op|M«e  the  stamp

In  the  hitter  year  he  l<cgan  to  write  against
the  policy  of  the  British  government,  and,  >Jm  a
member  of the 1st Continental OOngreSi
was  the  author  of  a  series  ,.<  ,,  f,irtn'

by  that  body,  which  won  for  him  a  glnwii
from  Ixml  Chatham. Among  them  were  the  *
dr.s,  t.,  the  Inhabitants  of  6uebec,"  the  fir«t
tition  to  the  King:"  the  ••  Address  t.,  the  are

the  second  "  Petition  to  the  Kim:."  and the

dress" to the Several states. <|f the fi-

tion,"  which  has  been  audited  t..  I it  has  been

said  that  "it  will  remain  an  imperishable  monu-
ment to  the  glory  of  its  author  and  of  t|„.  assem-
bly of  which  he  was  a  member,  so  long  as  fervid
ami  manly  eloquence  and  chaste  and  elegant 0OB>

position  shall  be  appreciated." In  June,  1776,  be

op|»ose<l  the  adopt  ion  of  the  Declaration  .,f  Inde-
pendence because  he  doubted  the  wicdoOl  of  the
measure "without some prelttSOry trials .,f our

strength,"  and  before  the  terms  of  the  eonfador*
ation  were  settled  and  foreign  aasistanei

certain.  When  the
question  came  to  be

voted iijMin. he  hIh

sentod  himself  inten.

tionally,  but  proved
that  his  patriotism
was  not  inferior  to
that  of  those  who
differed  with  him,
by  enlisting  as  a
private  in  the  army
ami  remaining  un-
til 'he  end  of  his
term  of  service.  He
served  again  as  a
private  in  the  sum-
mer of  1777  in  Del-
aware, and  in  <  ><t<>-
ber  of  the  same  year
was  commissioned
as  a  brigadier-gen-
era! In  April.  1779.  be  was  elected  to  congress  from

Delaware,  and  in  May  wrote  another  "  Address  to
the  States."  In  1780  he  was  chosen  a  member  of
the  Delaware  assembly,  and  in  the  followini

elected  president  of  the  state.  From  1781  till  17X5
he  filled  the  same  otlice  ill  Pennsylvania,  and  served

as  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
Federal  constitution.  In  17**  he  wrote  nine  letters
over  the  signature  of  ••  Fabius,"  urging  the  adop

tion  of  the  constitution,  and  these  were  followed  in
1797  by  a  series  of  fourteen,  written  to  promote  a
friendly  feeling  toward France. In 17*1  he  was

influential  in  founding  and  bagarj  endowed  Dioh>

insoii  colleire,  Carlisle.  Pa.  At  this  time  he  was
living  in  Wilmington.  DeL,  when'  he  Collected  his
political  Writings  in  1801  The  remaining  seven
vears  of  his  life  were  paSSSd  in  retirement.  Be-
sides the  writingi  mentioned,  he  was  the  author  of

•■  Letters  from  a  Pennsylvania  Fanner  t<>  the  In-
habitants of  the  British  Colonies"  (Philadelphia,
ITU? ;  reprinted,  with  a  preface  by  Dr.  Franklin,
London.  1  To* ;  French  translation.  Pans.  i;»;:n.
In  1771  appeared  his  ••  Kssav  on  the  Constitutional
Power  of  Ureal  Britain  over  the  Colonies  in  Ameri-
ca*" I"  1786  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

from the College of New .lePn-y.- -His l.p.thiT.

Philemon,  soldier,  b.  in  Croissnora,  Talbot  co,
M.I..  ")  April.  1  ?:«» :  d.  near  Trenton.  N.  J..  I


0Jm&6*t*


*7U02t>


174


DICKINSON


DICKINSON


1809,  wont  to  Dover,  Del.,  with  his  father  to  1740,

ami  studied  under  Dr.  Allison  in  Philadelphia.
He  then  went  to  live  on  his  farm  near  Trenton,
N.  .1..  ami.  though  possessed  of  an  ample  fortune.
banned  it  i>\  embracing  the  patriot  cause.  Hi
entered  tin-  army  as  colonel  of  the  Hunterdon

count v  battalion  in  July.  1?">,  and  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general  on  19 Oct  In  L776hewae
a  delegate  to  the  provincial  congress  of  New  Jer-
sey and  meml>er  of  a  committee  that  drafted  a
constitution  with  a  clause  affirming  the  independ-
ence of  New  Jersey,  which  was  adopted  on  2  Julv,

1776,  On  20  Jan.,  1777,  with  about  400  raw  troops,
who  had  to  wade  waist-deep  through  a  river  to
make  the  attack,  he  surprised  and  defeated  a  large
foraging  party  near  Somerset  Court-House,  N.  J.,
capturing  a  few  prisoners,  forty  wagons,  and  about
a  hundred  English  draught-horses.  He  was  made
major-general  of  the  New  Jersey  forces  on  6  June,

1777,  and  on  27  Nov.  made  an  attack  on  Staten
Island,  for  which  he  was  thanked  by  Washington.
During  the  occupation  of  Trenton  by  the  Hessians,
Gen.  Dickinson's  estate  was  plundered  by  the  ene-
my. He  led  the  New  Jersey  troops  at  the  battle
of  Monmouth,  where  he  displayed  great  bravery,
and  was  specially  mentioned  by  Washington  in  his
report  to  congress.  In  1778-'9  he  was  chief  signal
officer  for  the  middle  department. On  4  July,

1778,  he  was  second  to  Gen.  Cadwalader  in  his  duel
with  Gen.  Conwav.  He  was  a  delegate  to  congress
in  1782-'3  from  Delaware,  where  he  owned  prop-
erty, and  in  1 783-'4  was  vice-president  of  the  New
Jersey  state  council.  He  was  a  member  of  the
commission  appointed  by  congress  in  December,
1784,  to  select  a  site  for  the  national  capital,  and,
on  the  resignation  of  William  Patterson  as  U.  S.
senator  from  New  Jersey,  was  chosen  to  fill  his
place,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1790,  till  2  March,  1793.
Prom  this  time  till  his  death  he  lived  quietly  at
his  country-seat,  "  The  Hermitage,"  which  was  the
resort  of  all  the  distinguished  men  who  passed
through  Trenton.

DICKINSON,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hat-
field, Mass.,  22  April,  1688;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,
N.  J.,  7  Oct.,  1747.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1706,  and  in  1709  was  installed  pastor  of  the  church
at  Elizabethtown,  where  he  had  gone  the  year  pre-
vious, and  in  charge  of  which  he  remained  nearly
forty  years,  or  until  his  death.  The  adjoining
townships  of  Rahwav,  Westfield,  Union,  Spring-
field, and  a  part  of  Chatham,  were  included  in  his
parish,  to  which  he  ministered  not  only  in  spiritual
things,  but  also  in  things  temporal,  as  he  was  a

Sractising  physician.  After  the  separation  of  the
'ew  Jersey  churches  from  the  synod  of  Philadel-
{)hia  in  1741,  a  charter  was  obtained  for  the  Col-
ege  of  New  Jersey  (originally  known  as  Nassau
hall),  the  first  classes  were  opened  in  Elizabeth-
town,  and  Dr.  Dickinson  was  chosen  president,  22
Oct.,  1746.  In  assuming  this  office  he  did  not
change  his  habits,  as  he  had  been  accustomed  dur-
ing a  portion  of  his  ministry  to  receive  young  men
for  instruction  in  different  branches  preparatory  to
their  entering  on  the  study  of  some  profession.
lb'  died  the  year  following,  out  lived  long  enough
to  leave  upon  the  institution  the  permanent  im-
press of  his  character.  His  works  are  largely  con-
troversial, being  written  in  defence  of  what  he  con-
sidered fundamental  truths.  Among  them  are
"  Reasonableness  of  Christianity :  Pour  Sermons  "
(1732);  "The  True  Scripture  Doctrine  Concerning
some  Important  Points  of  Christian  Faith,"  etc.
(1741);  and  "Familiar  Letters  to  a  Gentleman"
(1745;  3d  ed.,  Edinburgh,  1757).  A  collection  of
many  of  his  writings  was  published  in  1793.


DICKINSON,  Mary  Clare,  superior  of  Carmel-
ites, b,  in  London.  England,  in  1766;  d.  in  Haiti-
more,  Md.,  in  1880,  She  was  educated  in  Frame,
where  she  joined  the  order  of  the  (arnielii.
afterward  a  member  of  that  order  in  Antwerp,  and
was  one  of  the  four  Carmelites  that  left  Europe  to
establish  a  branch  of  the  community  in  the  United
States  in  1790.  They  landed  at  Port  Tobacco.  Md..
and  took  possession  of  their  house,  which  was  tin-
first  conventual  establishment  in  the  United  States.
In  1800  Sister  Mary  Clare  Dickinson  was  elected
superior,  which  office  she  held  for  thirty  years.

DICKINSON,  Moss  Kent,  Canadian  capitalist,
b.  in  Denmark,  Lewis  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  June,  1N-J2.  He
is  the  son  of  the  late  Barnabas  Dickinson,  who  re-
moved from  the  United  States  to  Canada  about
1812,  and  was  the  founder  of  Dickinson's  Landing
on  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  the  first  contractor  for
the  conveyance  of  the  mails,  then  carried  on  men's
backs,  from  Montreal  westward.  His  son  was  edu-
cated at  the  schools  of  Cornwall  and  Prescott.  and
at  the  academies  of  Lowville  and  Denmark.  X.  Y.
He  began  the  business  of  forwarding  in  1844  be-
tween Montreal  and  Kingston,  and  subsequently
extended  his  line  to  Quebec  and  Lake  Champlain,
with  branch  offices  at  Kingston,  Ottawa,  Montreal,
Quebec,  Burlington,  and  Whitehall.  His  fleet  now
consists  of  sixteen  steamers  and  sixty  barges.
From  1850  till  1857  he  was  associated  with  J.  M.
Currier  in  the  manufacture  of  lumber  at  Ottawa.
In  1869  he  retired  from  the  forwarding  business.
In  1864  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Ottawa,  and  was
re-elected  by  acclamation  the  two  succeeding  years.
At  the  general  election  of  1882  he  was  elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament.

DICKINSON,  Richard  William,  b.  in  New
York  city,  21  Nov.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Fordham,  N.  Y.,
16  Aug.,  1874  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1823,
and,  after  studying  for  two  years  at  Princeton  semi-
nary, was  ordained  as  a  Presbyterian  minister  on
24  Oct.,  1828.  He  held  pastorates  in  Philadelphia,
New  York  city,  and  Brooklyn  till  1845.  when  he
retired  on  account  of  failing  health,  and  devoted
himself  to  literary  work.  From  1859  till  1872  he
was  pastor  of  a  church  at  Inwood,  New  York  city.
The  University  of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1842.  Besides  articles  in  periodicals,
Dr.  Dickinsonpublished " Scenes  from  Sacred  His-
tory "  (New  York,  1849) ;  "  Responses  from  the
Sacred  Oracles"  (1850);  "Religion  Teaching  by
Example  " ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Howard  " ;  and
"  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  Historically  and
Logically  Viewed  "  (Philadelphia,  1865).

DICKINSON,  Rodolphus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Deerfield,  Mass.,  in  1787;  d.  there  in  1863.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1805,  studied  law  in
Northampton,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1808,
and  practised  his  profession  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
till  1811,  acting  as  clerk  of  the  courts  in  his  native
county  for  eight  years.  On  leaving  this  office
he  was  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  Griswold,  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  removed  to
South  Carolina,  where  he  founded  the  parishes  of
Greenville  and  Pendleton.  During  the  first  eight-
een months  he  travelled  more  than  7,000  miles
on  horseback.  He  was  advanced  to  the  priest*
hood  in  1822,  and  returned  the  following  year  to
Deerfield,  which  residence  he  retained  till  the
close  of  his  life.  For  six  years  he  preached  at
Montague,  Mass.,  after  which,  in  1839,  he  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress.  He  published
his  own  translation  of  the  New  Testament,  with
notes  (Boston,  1833),  and  several  law,  geographi-
cal, and  other  text-books,  including  a  "Geographi-
cal and  Statistical  View  of  Massachusetts  Proper."


DICK


hick


it:.


i>ii  hsoy Ininm I  linn,  clergyman,  b.  in

Charleston.  S.  '  • :  <l. in  Tuscaloosa,

II.-  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  i
studied  theology  at  Lane  and  Yak  seminaries,  and

edained  ata  Presbyterian  in  1888.  Bis  Aral
church  vm  ui  John's  uland,  s.  c„  when  nine-
tenths  <>(  ins  eougragatiaa  were  Bncroee.  Hs  thai
held  iimngeburg,  S.  <'..  New  Orleans,

Wilmington,  N.  c„  and  Chatter,  s.  •  '.,  was
districl  secretary  <>f  1 1 »•  -  American  Sunday-school
union  in  1855-T,  nhaplaln  in  tin-  Confederate
iiriny  iii  l881-'5,  and  bad  charge  of  the  Southern

¥-n»-ml  assembly's oolorod  theological  institute  at
aloosa, Ala.,  tr I^Ti;  till  his  death. He

published  M  Plantation  Sermons "(1858-'80);  "The
Temptation  in  the  Desert"  (ls?.»);  and  "The
Light,  b  it  Waning?"  which  gained  a  prise  offered
hard  Fletcher  (1878).
IM<  KSON,  {  \  ins.  clergyman,  l>.  in  Erie  county,
Pa.  2  Hit; :  ,1.  in  Ihiltimore,  11  S-pt.,  188L

lie was  graduated  at Jefferson college in 1K57,

Uesosed  to  praaoh  be  Krie  presbytery  fan  in.'**,

ami held  pastorates  in Franklin. Pa.,  Wheeling,

and  Baltimore,  McL  Washington  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  lx.'>n.  After  the
union  of  the  old-  and  iiew-seliool  Iminehes  of  the
l'n -l-vterian  chureh,  in  1*711,  I >r.  Dickson  was
ohosea  permanent  clerk  of  the  general  assembly,
ami  soon  afterward  secretary  of  the  board  of  home
nii'sic.ns,  also  representing  the  board  at  the  Pan-
Presbyterian  OOUnoU  in  Kdinburgh.  Scotland,  in
1877.  His  death  was  the  result  of  overwork.  A
memoir  of  him  was  published  l>\  Rev.  Samuel  J.
M.  Baton,  D.D.  (New  York,  1882).

DICKSON,  James  A.,  actor,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1774;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  April.
186%.  He  made  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage
in  Boston.  Mass.,  in  17!»4,  as  Saville in  "The  Belle's
Stratagem,*  and  first  appeared  on  the  New  York
stage,  at  the  John  street  theatre,  18  Aug..  1797,  as
John  in  "The  Spoiled  Child."  Afterward  he  be-
came eminent  as  an  actor  of  comic  old  nun.  He
was  manager  of  the  Boston  theatre  in  1 80(1,  and
continued  so,  with  various  partners,  for  many
years.  He  married  Miss  Harrison,  sister  of  the
celebrated  Mrs.  Pownall,  and  retired  from  the
stage  in  the  character  of  Kit  Cosev  in  "  Town  and
Country, "  11  April.  1817.

DICKSON,  James  Anderson  Ross,  Canadian
clergyman,  b.  in  Tranent,  Scotland.  88  <»<t..  1888.
HeoaflM  to  Canada  in  1857,  was  educated  at  the
Congregational  college,  Toronto,  and  at  lleCHll
college.  Montreal,  being  graduated  in  1865.  Im-
mediately afterward  he  was  called  to  the  Con-
gregational church  in  London.  Ontario,  where  he
remained  for  six  years,  during  three  of  which  be
edited  the  "  (iospel  Message.  In  1871  he  was
called  to  the  Northern  Congregational  church,
Toronto,  where  he  remained  until  1879,  when  he
became  a  Presbyterian.  While  in  Toronto  he  was
given  the  highest  otliceinthe  gift  of  the  Congre-
gational church.  being  elected  chairman  <>f  the
Congregational  union  of  Ontario  and  Quebec  in
1H77.  In  1N7!)  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  Gait.  He  has  bean  ■  pro-
lific writer  for  religious  journals,  and  many  of  his
sermons  and  essays  have  lieen  published.

DICKSON,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Keene,  N.  H.,
in  17*5;  d.  in  West  Bloomfleld.  N.  Y.,  88  l-VI...
.'.  He  was  graduat.-d  at  Middlebury  in  1808,
and  while  reading  law  at  Milton.  N.  Y..  in  1808-U2,
taught  languages  and  mathematics.  He  wa
mitted  to  the  liar  and  practised  law  in  West
Bloomfleld,  N.  Y..  from  1818  till  1825.  in  Rochester,
v.,  from  ih-25  till  1888,  ami  subsequently  in


West  Bloomfleld. He  was  a  im-ml-r  of  tl.
York  assembly  "' 1888  "80,  and
1881 till 1^.:  ..„,|  1o

have  made  M  the  tlrst  import

ever  made  in grass." 11. mm*  km-

•  st  John  Dickson,'* and  was  the  author  of  .
entitled  *•  Remarks  on  the  Preeentatioi
1'etitions f,>r the Abolition of -  rid the

Slave-trade  m  the  Districl  of  Columbia (1886).

DICKSON,  John  Robinson,  physfaau
Dnngannon,  county  fyrone,  Inland.  r>
ihiii;  ,j.  ,,,,  Wolfs  island,  BL  Lnwi

Canaila.  '?.l  Nov..  1888. Hi

fast  ami  Olasgow.  studied medicine  in his  native

town,  and  came  to  Canada  with  Ids  family  b

He  was  gradnated  at  the  medical  depart  man!  of

the I'niversity  of  New  York  in 1848,  returned t"

Canada,  settled  in  Kingston,  and  bsoaaM  promi-
nent as  a  surgeon.  Prom  1848  till  ikvi  be  **s
visiting  physician  to  the  Kingston  general  boapi*

tal,  then  for  two  years  visiting  surgeon.  U-coiiiiiig.
in  1888,  clinical  tectum,  which  place  he  resigned
in  ihw\  to  !«•  iwappointed  clinical  lecturer  on
surgery  in  1881.  In  1H.VI  be  was  aotiTe  in  found-
ing the  medical  department of  the University  of

Queens  college,  where  he  was  chosen  dean  of  the
medical  faculty  and  professor  of  surgerv,  and
during  his  visit  to  Great  Britain,  in  18801  lie  ob>
tained  a  recognition  of  the  medical  degree  of
Queens  university.  In  lwi'J  be  was  appointed
surgeon  to  the  provincial  penitentiary  in  Kings-
ton, and  in  1Wi!»  became  medical  superintendent
of  Hock  wood  lunatic  asylum.  While  holding
these  offices  he  pre |»arcd  regularly  "Prison  Re-
ports "  and  '•  Asylum  Reports,"  and,  in  accordance
with  his  suggestions,  the  condition  of  those  con-
fined there  was  materially  Improved  Chief
among  the  reforms  was  the  introduction  of  a  sys-
tem of  voluntary  labor  among  the  Insane,  and  the
abolition  of  the  use  of  alcohol  and  beer.  In  \xtu\
the  medical  department  of  Queens  college  b

the  Royal  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  m
connection  with  Queen's  university,  for  which  he
obtained  the  necessary  charter,  and  of  which  be
was  appointed  president  and  professor  of  surgery,
offices  which  he  held  through  his  lifetime.  Or.
Dickson  was  a  member  of  numerous  soeietii
held  the  degrees  of  M.  H.  C.  P.,  London,  M.  K.  a  s..
England;  also  K.  C.  P.  S.,  Kingston,  and  K.R.C
8,,  Edinburgh. He  published  numerous  scientific

papers  and  public  addresses  in  English  and  Cana-
dian medical  journals.

DICKSON.  Samuel Henrv. physician,  b.  in
!<l  S'pl
.  1874

grated  from  Ireland  before
ti.,  Revolution,  and  fought  in  that  contest  under
Qen. Lincoln. Samuel  was  graduated  at Yale  in

1*14.  ami.  after  studying  medicine  In  Charleston
ami  at  the  Qniveraitv  of  Pennaylrania,  n

his  diploma  from  tOe  latter  in  l^ist.  Be  soon  had
a  huge  practice  in  Charleston,  and  in  1888 delivered

a  course  of  lectures  on  phvsiology  and  jwthology
in  that  citv  before  about  tliirty  medical  students.
He  was  active  in  securing  the  establishment  of  a
medical  college  in  Charleston,  and  OB  its  ot_

tion.  in  is-*b  became  pnafaasorof  the  institutes  and

Kractioeof  medicine. He  waigned  biscbsii
ut  in  the  following  year,  on  the  reorganization  of
tin-  institution  as  the  "medical  college  of  Smith  Caro


Charleston.  S.  C.  20  Sept,  17'.^:  d."  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  81  March.  I  is  father,  who  was  of
Boottish  descent,  emu


lina.

ties


was  re  eseoted. He  was  profsssorof  the  j

of  medietas  in  the  I'niversity  of  New  York  in
,o.  but  in  the  latter  year  resumed  his  chair

in  Charleston. Kn-m  1*.V<  until  his  death  he  held
the  same  chair  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  Phila-


176


DICKSON


D1ELMAN


delphia.  The  University  of  New  York  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1853.  Dr.  Dickson  WTOte
not  only  on  professional  but.  on  literary  and  cur-
rent topics,  and  added  a  graceful  style  to"  thorough-
ness of  learning.  He  published  *"  Dengue ;  its
History,  Pathology,  and  Treatment"  (Philadel-
phia. 1 826) ;  "Manual  of  Pathology";  "Practice
of  Medicine"  (2  vols.,  New  York);  "Essays  on
Pathology  and  Therapeutics"  (2  vols.,  1S4."));"-  As-
says on  Life,  Sleep,  Pain,  etc. "  (1852);  "  Elements
of  Medicine"  (1855);  and  "Studies  in  Pathology
and  Therapeutics"  (1867).  He  also  contributed
largely  to  medical  and  other  current  literature,  and
published  many  occasional  essays  and  addresses,
including  an  address  before  the  Yale  Phi  Beta
Kappa  society  in  1842,  on  the  "  Pursuit  of  Happi-
ness," !inu*  a  pamphlet  on  slavery,  asserting  the  es-
sential inferiority  of  the  negro  race  (1845).— His
daughter,  Jeanie  A.,  has  contributed  largely,  in
prose  and  verse,  to  current  literature.

DICKSON,  Thomas,  capitalist,  b.  in  Lauder.
Scotland,  26  March,  1822 ;  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,
31  July,  1884.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Scottish  ma-
chinist, and  emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Canada
in  1835.  Afterward  they  settled  in  Carbondale,
Pa.,  where  young  Dickson  received  an  indifferent
education,  and  at  the  age  of  thirteen  had  charge
of  the  horses  and  mules  of  the  canal  company.  In
1838  he  entered  the  employ  of  Charles  T.  Pierson
in  Carbondale.  This  business  passed  through  the
hands  of  several  persons,  including  Joseph  Benja-
min, whose  partner  he  became  in  1845.  In  1852  he
turned  his  attention  to  iron  manufacture,  and  pur-
chased an  interest  in  a  foundry  and  machine-shop.
Four  years  later  he  established  the  Dickson  Manu-
facturing company  for  the  building  of  steam-en-
fines  and  the  construction  of  mining  machinery,
'he  corporation  was  very  successful,  and  its  capital
increased  in  twenty  years  from  $30,000  to  $1,350,-
000,  and  its  business  grew  until  it  became  one  of  the
most  important  locomotive  works  in  the  United
States.  In  1860  he  retired  from  this  organization
and  became  superintendent  of  the  coal  department
of  the  Delaware  and  Hudson  canal  company.  Four
years  later  he  was  made  general  superintendent  of
the  company,  then  vice-president,  and  president  in
1869,  which  office  he  held  continuously  until  his
death.  During  his  connection  with  the  company
its  annual  output  of  coal  increased  from  500,000  to
over  4,000,000  tons.  Its  mining  operations  were
gradually  extended  over  an  area  of  forty-four
miles,  and  it  acquired  control  of  an  extensive  rail-
road system.  In  1873  Mr.  Dickson  organized  a
company  for  the  purchase  of  a  large  tract  of  iron
land  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Champlain.  Furnaces
were  erected,  and  the  best  quality  of  pig-iron  and
Bessemer  metal  was  produced.  Besides  controlling
the  affairs  of  these  corporations,  he  was  a  director
in  twenty  other  companies.  His  home  was  in  Scran-
ton,  where  he  gathered  a  large  collection  of  books
and  fine  paintings,  and  was  known  as  a  liberal
donor  to  various  charities.

DIDIER,  Franklin  James  (dy'-deer),  author,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1794;  d.  there  in  1840.
He  became  a  physician  in  Baltimore,  and  was  a
frequent  contributor  to  the  periodicals  of  his  time.
In  1831  he  published  a  paper  foretelling  a  civil
war  between  the  northern  and  southern  states,
caused  by  the  slavery  question.  Dr.  Didier  was
the  author  of  "  Didier  s  Letters  from  Paris  "  (New
York,  1821),  and  "Franklin's  Letters  to  his  Kins-
folk" (Philadelphia,  1822).— His  son,  Eugene
Lemoine,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  22  Dec,
1838,  spent  several  years  at  Loyola  college,  but  was
not  graduated. After  five  more  years  of  private


study  he  began  a  mercantile  career,  but  gave  it
up  to  devote  himself  to  literature.  In  1867  he
founded  in  Baltimore  a  weekly  journal  entitled
"Southern  Society."  and  in  1869-70  was  deputy
maishal  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  being  specially
detailed  to  act  as  secretary  to  Chief-Justice  Chase.
He  has  written  much  over  the  signatures  "  Le-
moine"  and  "  Timon."  As  a  critic,  his  style  is
aggressive  and  fearless.  He  has  published  "  Life
of  Edgar  A.  Poe "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  Life  and
Letters  of  Madame  Bonaparte  "  (1879 ;  repuhli>hcd
in  London,  and  translated  into  French  and  Italian) ;
and  a  "  Primer  of  Criticism  "  (1883).

DIEGO  Y  MORENO,  Francisco  Garcia,  Mexi-
can R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Lagos,  Mexico,  about  1800;
d.  in  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.,  in  1846.  He  received
his  early  education  in  the  seminary  of  Guadalajara,
and  finished  his  ecclesiastical  studies  in  the  Apos-
tolic college  of  Our  Lady  of  Guadalupe  in  Zacatecas.
He  joined  the  order  of  St  Francis,  and  was  or-
dained in  1824.  In  1832  he  was  appointed  prefect
of  the  missions  for  the  conversion  of  the  Indians
in  California,  and  set  out  for  the  post  assigned  him
with  ten  Franciscans ;  but,  owing  to  the  difficulties
of  the  journey,  did  not  reach  the  missions  till  1833.
He  divided  his  fellow-laborers  among  the  Indians,
while  he  himself  made  Santa  Clara  the  centre  of
his  labors,  and  endeavored  to  protect  the  Indians
from  the  rapacity  of  the  Mexican  governors.  The
passing  of  a  law  in  1834,  which  went  into  operation
in  1837,  for  the  secularization  of  the  missions,  ren-
dered his  efforts  unavailing.  He  made  a  journey
to  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  procured  an  order  for
the  restoration  of  the  mission  to  the  church ;  but
this  change  of  policy  came  too  late  to  restore  pros-
perity to  the  Indians,  many  of  whom  had  lapsed
into  barbarism.  He  was  about  to  return  to  Cali-
fornia when  he  received  tidings  that  he  had  been
nominated  bishop  of  California.  He  was  conse-
crated in  1840,  reached  San  Diego  in  1841,  and
found  his  diocese  in  a  state  of  desolation.  The
Indian  population  was  reduced  from  30,000  to
4,500,  and  these  scattered  and  demoralized,  while
the  flocks  and  herds  had  disappeared  and  agricult-
ure was  ruined.  He  restored  some  of  the  missions
and  erected  a  seminary  at  Santa  Ines,  and  his  pas-
sionate appeals  to  the  government  of  Mexico  in
behalf  of  the  Indians  were  sometimes  effective,  but
his  health  was  destroyed  by  his  incessant  labors.

D1ELMAN,  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in  Hanover,
Germany,  25  Dec,  1847.  He  came  to  this  country
when  a  child,  was  graduated  at  Calvert  college,
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1864,  and  in  1866-'72  served  as
a  topographer  and  draughtsman  of  U.  S.  engineers
in  Fortress  Monroe  and  Baltimore,  and  in  the  sur-
vey of  canal-routes  over  the  Alleghanies  of  Vir-
ginia. He  then  studied  art  under  Diez  in  the  Royal
academy,  Munich,  gaining  a  medal  in  the  life  class,
and  afterward  opened  a  studio  in  New  York  city,
taking  a  prominent  place  as  a  genre  painter  and
illustrator  of  books  and  magazines.  He  has  con-
tributed largely  to  editions  de  luxe  of  Longfellow,
Hawthorne,  George  Eliot,  and  other  writers,  and
to  the  various  publications  of  the  Tile  club,  of
which  he  is  a  member.  Mr.  Dielman  was  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  Society  of  American
artists,  was  made  a  National  academician  in  1883,
and  is  also  a  member  of  the  American  water-color
society,  the  New  York  etching  club,  and  the  Sal-
magundi sketch  club.  Among  his  pictures  shown
at  National  academy  exhibitions  are  "  The  Patri-
cian Lady"  (1877);  "  Young  Gamblers"  (1885);  and
a  "  Head  "  (1886).  One  of  the  best  known  of  his
illustrations  is  that  entitled  "A  Girl  I  Know,"
which  has  been  engraved  by  Cole. •


mi  :n


DK..


177


Dl  I  NTK.Juan  ih  soldier,  b.

in  Peflaranda,  Spain,  about  1497;  d.  in  Uuams
. 1648. II. tarred  In  the  win
Italy  tad  Flandara,  and  distinguished  biatttlf  by

■its  iii  tin  camp. *  >wing

to  In--  i  \t inordinary  swiftness  asa  runner,  in  which
he  outstrip|x'«l  a  horse,  he  was  called  "  t In-  -liii<i- -w ."

Walk  Mill  an  ensign,  Diente  want  t<>  Dariai

loml.ia.  with  Pedrarias,  ami.  commanding  a  com-
pany, took  part  in  the  conquest  of  Nucva  Cranada.
afterward  he  joined  Diego  de  Almagro,  and
arrival  in  Pan  in  February.  [588,  commanding  ■
company,  [n  October  of  that  year,  near  Hilcas.  In-
had  >  'iigagemcnts  with  the  Indians,  killing  a  chief
in  am  "t  them. The  agility  that  he  displayed,

and  his  |teculiar  way  of  fighting  the  Indians,  gave
rise  taiong  them  to  the  baUaf  that  Diente  was  a
supernatural  being.  Diente  won  his  greatest  dis-
tinction at  the  memorable  siege  of  t  'u/.co,  in  Feb-
ruary, 1584 Daring  the  terrible  aighl  of  the  86th

Of  that  month,  in  which  th«'  Indians  surprised  and
set  Are  to  the  city,  Diente  was  seen  jumping  from
rixif  to  roof,  in  pursuit  of  the  incendiaries,  across
the  streets.  In  this  BUM  night, assaulting  out  of
the  Indian  forts,  he  was  the  first  to  enter  it.  In
this  assault  .luan  I'i/arro  died.  In  April,  1535,
Diente  joined  Diego  de  Almagro  in  the  conquest  .if
Chili,  and  tarred  during  the  whole  rumpaign,  O0B>
manding  the  infantry.  In  1686  he  distinguished
himself  in  the  battle  of  Yucay,  and  from  that
date  he  served  under  Almagro,  taking  part  in  sev-
eral engagements  with  the  Indians,  and  also  in  the
civil  war  of  1537  Ix'tween  Almagro  and  Pizarro.
On  2(5  April,  1538,  he  participated  in  the  battle  of
Salinas.  Some  time  afterward  he  went  to  Lima
and,  finding  himself  in  reduced  circumstances,  took
part  in  the  conspiracy  against  Pizarro,  receiving
from  Itada,  who  conducted  the  assassins  in  the  as-
sault on  the  palace,  26  June,  1541,  the  command  of
the  reserve.  Pizarro  having  been  killed,  Juan  Diente
wte  chosen  by  Diego  de  Almagro  to  carry  commu-
nications of  this  event  to  Ouamanga  y  Cuzco.
Diente  travelled  900  miles  over  a  mountainous  coun-
try.  arrived  at  Cuzco,  and  with  eighty  of  Almagro 's
followers  proclaimed  Almagro's  son  as  the  legiti-
mate governor,  exacted  from  the  city  corporation
the  acknowledgment  of  the  new  government,  and
compelled  the  dependent  towns  to  accept  it.  He
.served  during  the  whole  campaign  against  the
roval  troops,  commanded  by  ( '.  Vaca  de  Castro,  and
filled  important  commissions  from  Almagro's  son.
On  16  Nov..  1648,  at  the  battle  of  Chupas,  lost  by
Almagro's  party,  Diente  was  at  the  head  of  a  col-
umn, and.  falling  a  prisoner,  was  summarily  tried
by  J  udge  (iama,  and  banged  at  Quamanga  as  an  ac-
complice in  the  murder  of  I'i/arro.

DIEREYILLE,  Jean.  French  traveller,  b.  in
Pont- 1. •  -veque,  Normandy,  about  1670.  He  had
become  noted  as  a  poet  through  his  contribution!
to  the  "Metonre  galtat,"  when  he  embarked  as
Bupercargo  on  a  vessel  l>ound  for  Canada  in  1699.
Be  reached  Acadia  after  a  voyage  of  fifty-four
•  lavs,  and  exchanged  the  greater -part  of  the  mer-
chandise he  had  brought  for  the  products  of  the
colony.  Although  he  gained  great  popularity
among  the  fishermen,  who  supplied  him  with  more
Bab  in six  months  than  the  privileged  companies

ware  able  to  obtain  in  twenty  years,  be  was  badb

treated  by  the  tttonletjon  for  which  he  acted,  and
returned t<> France  in  17(H). lie  published
lation du voyage  du I'<>rt Boyd  de 1'Acadie.  og
Nouvelle-France,  dans  laquelle on  voit uu  detail
des  divers  mouveiueuts  de  la  iiii-r  dans  une  tn

see  de  long  ooan;  la  dotorintion  da  para,  k  -
ttkmt  des Franeais  qui y lOBi etablis, les

VOL. II. — 12


manicres  des  different** nation**  Muvagra,  leurs

tOptntitiOtti  et lelir*  cha-HMM  If.

te  Mir  le  cantor"  (Paris  and  I;
vised  ed..  Amster.lam.  1180),

t«.  write  his  narrative  in  rant]  but.  when  t..)d
that  if  he  did  k>  it  would  be  looked  on  u  a  fable,
he  compromise!  by  writing  his  account pari.

• and  BOrtly  in  prose. Mis  f In.ss f. ,r  pent

rhymes  did  not present  him  from  giving  a  rtrld
i<lca  of  Acadia, lie  does  justice  to  the  inhabitant*
and  to  their  tttaohliicnt  to  their  mother  country,
and  attributes  the  jM.verty  of  the  ooaal
obstacles  placed  in  the  way of  <  ..nun.  r«-.-.' While

he  deeoribee  very  fully  thetaimale  of  Aeedia  and

the  manners  of  the  savages,  he  says  but  little  of
itsb.tanv.  although  he  was  charged  with  the  .lutv

of  collecting  plants  for  the  garden  of  the  I

He  brought  to  France  a  new  shrub,  which  lot
fort  called  the  Ihririllu,  and  which  i>  noted  f.,r
tohatatifUl  yellow  flowers.  Linnn-us,  while  pre-
serving  the  s|>ecinY  name  given  be  his  predecessor,
has  assigned  it  t>>  the  gonna  Laaeatna  -lus-i.  g  re-
stored the  genus  l>u  n  riltti.  Tournefort  says  that
Dicreville  was  a  surgeon.  Haller  that  he  was'a  mer-
chant. The  probability  is  that  be  was  both.

DIKSKAl, Jean Krdmaii, Baron,  Uertnan

soldier,  b.  in  Saxony  in  17(»1  ;  d.  in  Surenne,  mar
Paris.  H  Sept.,  17(»7.  lie  was  aide-de-camp  of
Marshal  Maurice  de  Snxe,  and  visit,  d  St.  Peters-
burg in  that  officer's  interest  in  1741.  He  also
tarred  in  the  Netherlands,  and  in  i?4*  i<-<-ame

major-general  of  infantry  and  commander  of
Brest.  He  was  sent  to  Canada  00  88  Feb..  ]".
at  the  head  of  French  troops,  to  conduct  the  cam-
paign against  the  Knglish.  With  000  savages,  as
many  Canadians,  ami  200  regulars,  he  teooodod
Lake  Champlain  to  its  bead,  niajgnint  to  attack
Fort  Edward;  but  the  guides  took  the  road  to
Lake  George  by  mistake.  On  n  Sept.  he  was  in-
formed by  scouts  that  a  detachment  of  1.000  men
under  Col.  Kphraim  Williams,  of  Massachusetts,
had  lieen  sent  against  him.  and.  **y*flg  hi*  men
in  ambush  in  the  form  of  a  horteehoe,  be  sarprietd
the  enemy  and  put  them  to  Might.  After  pursuing
their  opponents  to  the  British  camp,  the  Indians
halted,  the  Canadians  became  alarmed,  and  Dieskau,
with  his  200  regulars,  was  forced  to  sustain  the
fight.  For  five  hours  the  Kew  Kngland  militia
"kept  up  the  most  violent  lire  that  had  yet  U-cn
known  in  America."  Almost  all  the  French  0  |
lars  perished,  and  Dieskau  himself  was  thrice
wounded;  but  he  refused  to  retire,  and  seated
himself  on  a  stump,  tip"— ^  to  the  bullets.  Final-
ly. s,,ing  a  soldier  approaching  a>  if  to  capture
but,  Dieskau  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket  for  his
watch,  which  he  intended  to  give  to  hi*  captor;
but  the  man.  sup|M,sing  that  he  WM  drawing  I  pis-
tol, shot  him,  inflicting  a  wound  that  ultimntclr
caused  his  death.  Dieskau  «as  kept  a  prisoner  till
17(>;{,  when  he  was  exchanged  and  returned  to
Frame,  when-  he  ate  given  »  pooaiaa.

DIG0E8,  Sir  Dudley.  Knglish  politician,  b.  in
i">s;;:  ,1.  in  1188,  ii,  was  the  ton  Of  Sir  Thomas
Digjet,  the  oelebrated  gaotaattEj  was  ambassador
to  Russia  in  ltU*.  and  in  1881  was  elected  to  |«ar-
liainent,  wh.  t«  be  Wit  active  in  the  impeachment
of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham. Ht  was  at  one  time

iinprisone.l  in  the  Fleet by  Charic*  L  »l i he

had  offended,  bul  was  released  «>n  apologizing  to
the  kiiiL-.  and  in  1630  was  apiiointcd  master  <>!  the
rolls,  fie  wis  a  Mend  of  Henry  Hadaon,and  bj
1610  was  one  .-f  those  who  titt.sl  oat  that  explorer
for  his  last  voyage.  In  1681  he  was  one  ..f  the
commission  ap|»ointed  by  the  privy  council  "to
■jtaid.  r  how  the  plantation  of  \  irginia  now  stand-


178


DILLKR


DILLoN


eth,  and  to  consider  what  commodity  may  be  raised
in  thOM  narts."  He  published  several  political
works. — 1  lis  son,  Edward,  governor  of  Virginia,
b.  in  England  in  1690;  d.  in  Virginia,  15  March,
1075.  introduced  the  culture  of  the  silk-worm  into
Virginia,  giving  attention  to  it  at  Denbigh,  on
James  river,  and  at  Bellfield,  eight  miles  from
Williamsburgh,  and  employing  two  native  Arme-
nians skilled  in  the  business.  He  was  given  a  seat
in  the  council  in  November,  1044,  "  having  given  a
rignaJ  testimony  of  his  fidelity  to  this  colony  and
commonwealth  of  England."  He  was  elected  gov-
ernor by  the  assembly  in  March,  1055,  and  received
a  salary  of  25,000  pounds  of  tobacco,  with  the
duties  levied  on  vessels,  and  marriage-license  fees.
In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  he  gave  up  his  office,
and  was  sent  as  one  of  the  colony's  agents  to  Eng-
land to  i nut  with  prominent  merchants  about  the
price  of  tobacco,  and  also  to  secure  the  rights  of
the  colony.  He  bore  a  letter  to  Cromwell  from  the
assembly,  and,  by  his  social  position,  did  much  to
settle  the  long-pending  controversy  between  the
colony  and  Lord  Baltimore. — Another  son,  Dud-
ley, b.  about  1612:  d.  in  1043,  published  a  treatise
on  "  Illegality  of  Subjects  taking  up  Arms  against
their  Sovereigns"  (1043).

Dl  LI. IK.  Joseph  Silas,  geologist,  b.  in  Plain-
field,  Pa.,  27  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at
Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1879,  and
spent  two  years  in  post-graduate  studies  at  Har-
vard and  at  the  university  in  Gottingen.  From
1873  till  1877  he  taught  in  the  State  normal  school
in  Westfield,  Mass.,  and  from  1881  till  1883  was
geologist  of  the  Assos  expedition.  In  1883  he  be-
came assistant  geologist  on  the  U.  S.  geological
survey,  and  in  that  capacity  has  travelled  exten-
sively throughout  the  United  States.  He  is  a
member  of  several  scientific  societies,  and  author
of  numerous  papers  that  have  been  published
in  scientific  journals  in  the  United  States  and
in  Europe,  the  principal  of  which  are  "  Notes  on
the  Geology  of  the  Troad  "  (1883) ;  "  Diamonds  in
the  United  States  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Notes  on  the  Geol-
ogv  of  Northern  California"  (1880).

DILLON,  Arthur,  Count,  French  soldier,  b.  in
Braywick,  Ireland,  3  Sept.,  1750;  d.  in  Paris,  10
April,  1794.  He  was  colonel  of  the  Dillon  regi-
ment of  the  Irish  brigade.  When  the  court  of
Versailles  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  United
States  in  1778,  his  regiment  was  one  of  those  ob-
taining the  privilege  of  being  the  first  to  fight  the
English.  Count  Dillon  embarked  at  Brest,  in  the
squadron  of  La  Motte  Picquet,  with  the  first  bat-
talion of  his  regiment,  for  the  West  Indies,  on  5
April,  1779.  The  junction  of  Picquet  and  D'Estaing
enabled  the  latter  to  carry  out  his  design  of  con-
quering the  island  of  Grenada  from  the  English.
An  attack  was  made  on  the  British,  after  landing,
in  which  Count  Dillon  distinguished  himself  at  the
head  of  his  column,  and  was  wounded,  but  did  not
withdraw  until  after  the  action.  The  French  were
successful.  Count  Dillon  also  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  capture  of  St.  Eustache,  Tobago,  and
St.  Christopher,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  the
latter  in  1782. He  drew  up  a  code  of  laws  for  the

fovernment  of  the  island  so  excellent  that  the
Inglish,  on  recovering  possession,  did  not  interfere
with  them.  When  he  appeared  at  a  levee  of  George
III.,  the  lord  chancellor  said  to  him  :  "Count  Dillon,
we  knew  you  to  l)e  a  brave  and  able  soldier,  but  we
were  not  aware  that  you  were  so  good  a  lawyer.
We  have  investigated  and  confirmed  all  your  judg-
ments and  all  your  decrees  delivered  during  your
fovernment."  The  count  was  elected  deputy  from
lartinique  to  the  states-general  in  1789. He  de-


fended the  interests  of  the  colonists  although  he

opposed  the  freedom  of  the  slaves  as  inopportune.

lie  was  chosen  commander  of  a  division  in  1792,
and  fought  successfully  <>n  the  plains  of  Champagne
and  in  the  forests  of  Argone,  but  was  accused  of
negotiating  with  the  enemy.  He  justified  him>elT.
and  gained  an  important  advantage  over  the  Prus-
sians. He  was  arrested  and  condemned  in  IT'.M.
At  the  foot  of  the  scaffold  )„.  cried  with  a  firm
voice,  "  Vive  le  roi!"  He  wrote  "Comptfl  rendu
an  ministre  de  la  guerre,  suivi  de  pieces  iustifloe-
tives,  et  eontenant  des  documents  militaires  deal
la  connaissance  est  necessaire  pourapprecier  la  par-
tie  la  plus  interessante  de  la  memorable  campagne
de  1792.'"  He  wrote  also :"  Expositions  des  prin-
oipauz  evenements  qui  ont  en  le  plus  d'influence
sur  la  revolution  francaise  "  (1792).

DILLON,  Charles,  actor,  b.  in  England;  d.
in  Harwich,  England,  24  June,  1881.  Both  his
parents  were  prominent  actors.  In  his  fourteenth
year  he  was  engaged  at  a  London  minor  theatre  as
stage-manager  and  to  act  juvenile  characters.  In
this  place  ne  remained  two  years.  His  next  en-
gagement was  at  the  Surrey  theatre  under  Davage,
where  he  appeared  in  small  parts  and  in  the  ballet.
After  this  he  left  the  stage  for  a  time  and  wrote
several  melodramas  and  magazine  articles.  He
returned  to  the  stage  and  made  a  tour  of  the  prov-
inces, going  to  London  and  appearing  at  the  City  of
London  theatre  as  Hamlet.  His  next  engagement
was  with  Mr.  Douglas  at  the  Marylebone  theatre,
where  he  was  stage-manager,  leading  man,  and
dramatist.  At  this  period  of  his  life  he  made  a
resolution  that  he  would  leave  London  and  not  re-
turn to  it  until  he  had  "starred"  in  every  town  and
city  of  importance  in  Great  Britain.  This  resolve
seems  to  have  been  kept.  During  his  absence  from
London  he  was  for  a  season  manager  of  the  Shef-
field theatre.  He  returned  to  London  in  1856
and  made  his  first  appearance  at  Sadler's  Wells
theatre,  and  afterward  took  the  Lyceum  theatre,
where  he  revived  "  Belphegor,"  in  which  character
he  had  become  quite  famous.  At  first  he  met
with  great  success,  as  the  theatre  was  crowded
nightly.  After  a  time,  being  compelled  to  close
the  theatre  for  lack  of  patronage,  he  travelled
again  through  the  provinces.  In  1800  Mr.  Dillon
again  appeared  in  London  at  Drury  Lane,  the  St.
James,  Sadler's  Wells,  Marylebone,  and  Standard
theatres.  In  1801  he  came  to  the  United  States
and  opened  at  the  Winter  Garden,  New  York,  24
Jan.,  as  Belphegor,  and  then  "  starred"  through
the  country  until  1803,  when  he  went  to  Australia.
He  returned  here  in  1800  and  opened  at  Niblo's
Garden,  and  again  went  on  a  tour  of  the  country.
He  re-appeared  in  London,  England,  at  Sadler's
Wells  theatre,  17  Feb.,'  1808,  as  King  Lear.  I  It-
then  acted  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  when  Bvron's
"  Manfred"  was  revived.  He  re-appeared  at  Drury
Lane  theatre,  28  Sept.,  1878,  acting  Leontes  in  "  A
Winter's  Tale."  After  this  engagement  he  acted
only  in  the  provinces.  Mr.  Dillon  was  an  excel-
lent actor,  but  was  considered  much  better  in
melodrama  than  in  tragedv.

DILLON,  John  Blake',  b.  in  Mayo,  Ireland,  in
1814;  d.  in  Killiney,  Ireland,  in  1800.  He  studied
for  the  priesthood  in  the  Royal  college  of  May-
nooth,  and  for  the  law  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,
where  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  young  men
that  afterward  formed  the  Young  Ireland  party.
He  was  a  member  and  auditor  of  the  Histories!
society.  In  1842  he  was  called  to  the  bar.  and
shortly  afterward  took  part  in  establishing  the
"Nation"  newspaper.  He  was  opposed  to  an  in-
surrection, but  felt  bound  in  honoato  follow  Smith


DIU.oN


IUMITUV


170


oUri-n  iter  tin-  failure  of  this  attempt

he  escaped to tin- Arrnri island-,  where bs  was
eoted  by  the  peasants,  although  a  large  reward
was  i  ire. He  went lo  Prance,

ami  theme  to  tin-  United  State*,  and  wm  admit-
to  ill.-  bar  in  N.w  York.  Iii  1888  ho  retnrnad
t<>  Irvluiul,  and  in  1865  was  elected  a  member  of
tin-  British  parliament,  where  In-  < l«*f«-n* i«*«  1  t lit-  in-
tOfirrt*  of  his  country  up  to  his  .hath.

DILLON,  .loim Porrwt,  jurist,  •>.  in  Mont-

rv  ooootj,  N.  V..  SO  Deck,  1881, Ho  wont  to

Iowa  when  abool  aim  years  old,  anil  was  gradu-

i  at  the  medical  department  of  fowa  university.

hut.  after  prafftirmg  aimut  six  motitlis,  liegan  the
.-t inly  of  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  l«r  in  1K.V2.
lie  was  in  the  same  year  elected  state  prosecuting
attorney,  and  in  1858  became  judge  of  the  ?th
judicial  district  of  Iowa.  He  was  elected  in  lsiij
for  a  second  term,  but  before  its  expiration  was
chosen  to  the  supreme  liench  of  the  state  for  six
years,  during  the  last  two  of  which  he  served  as
chief  justice.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  state  su-
premo banco  in  1869,  but  in  Deoaasbarof  that  rear
was  commissioned  by  President  Grant  LT.  S.  circuit
judge  for  the  8th  judicial  circuit.  He  held  that
office  till  1871),  when  he  accepted  the  professorship
of  real  estate  and  equity  jurisprudence  in  the  Co-
lumbia law-school.  He  held  this  professorship  for
three  years,  when  he  resigned  it,  and  gave  his  at-
tention wholly  to  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
I  York  city.  Judge  Dillon  is  a  member  of  the
Institut  de  droit  international,  and  of  the  Asso-
ciation for  the  reform  and  codification  of  the  law
of  nation-.  He  i-  the  author  of  "  V.  S.  Circuit
Court  Reports"  (.")  vols.,  1871-*80);  "Municipal
(*orj)orations  "  (Chicago.  1872);  "Removal  of
Causes  from  State  to  Federal  Courts"  (1875);  and
"  .Municipal  Bonds"  (1876).

IHLMVYN,  George,  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  88  Feb.,  1738;  d.  23
.lune.  188L  He  entered  into  business  in  Philadel-
phia in  1759,  but  did  not  succeed.  Afterward  he
became  a  Quaker  preacher,  and  in  this  capacity
visited  the  southern  states.  In  1784  he  went  to
Finland,  where  he  resided  for  the  next  eighteen
years,  his  religious  services  being  limited  to  Lon-
don and  its  vicinitv.  In  1802  he  returned  to  the
I'nited  States  and  settled  at  Burlington,  X.  .1.
He  claimed  to  have  a  foreknowledge  of  events,  and
this  gift  was  conceded  to  him  by  the  members  of
his  denomination.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Dill-
wyn's  Reflections."  A  memoir  of  his  life  has  been
published. See  "  Friends'  Library,"  vol.  viii.

DIM  AN.  Byron,  governor  of  "Rhode  Island,  b.
in  Bristol.  U.  I.,  in  1795;  d.  there,  1  Aug.,  1865.
He  was  educated  under  the  private  tuition  of
Alexander  V.  Griswold,  afterward  Mahopof  Massa-
chusetts, and  at  an  early  age  entered  the  counting-
house  of  James  De  Wolf.  He  afterward  engaged
e\ti  n-ively  in  the  whale-fishery,  and,  as  that  de-
clined, turned  his  attention  to  manufacturing'.
He  was  for  many  years  either  a  state  senator  or  a
member  of  the  lower  bouse,  and  was  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state  for  three  years.  In  1846  he
was  elected  governor,  in  the  exciting  canvass  at-
tending the  disruption  of  the  ••  Law-and-Urder "
party,  ami  served  oik-  term.  Got,  Diman  had  a
remarkable  memory,  and  was  fond  of  antiquarian
research. — His  son.  Jeremiah  Lewis,  clergyman,
b.  in  Bristol,  K.  I.,  1  May,  ls:il  ;  d.  in  Proviaenee,
EL  1..  ::  !•'.  I'..  1881,  was  gradual ei  1  at  Brown  in  1851,
and  afterward  studied  in  the  universities  of  Halle.
Heidelberg, and  Berlin.  Returning  to  America,  he
was  graduated  in  lN.Viat  the  tiMOtOgioal  seminary
in Andover,  Mass.,  and  was pastor  of the 1-t


ObnsMmrJonal  church  in  Fall  Hirer  in  I*.'**-'*),

and  of  the  Harvard  church  at  BrOoUfM  in  lHfl0-"4.

i  be  was  appointed  professor  of  history  and
political  economy 'in  Brown  university. In  ;
received  the  degree  of  I).  I». Itanj  of  Ml  s-rmom
ami  addresses  nave  beeo published,  ami  he  con-
Iributed  man)  articles  toperiodii
in  book-form  "The  Tl  rumenl '  (Boston,

1MH1),  and "Orations and |

"  Memoir-"  have  been  written  in  Caroline  Hazard
(Boston.  186

IMMICk.  .Iii-lin.  soldier,  b.  iii  Hail
ty.  Conn..  r>  Aug..  ink);  d.  in  Philadelphia,

Oct.,  1m;i.  lb- was  graduated  at  the  l".  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  181$  and  assigned  to  the  light

artillery.  After  BSVTittg  at  various  jM.sts,  and  an
asMstant  instructor  of  infantry  tactic-  at  \\  .  •
Point  for  a  few  mouths  in  1888,  he  was  promoted
to  1st  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillery.  1  Max.  1884
and  brcvetteil  captain.  1  May,  1884,  flir  ten  \.ar-'
faithful  service  in  one  grade He  was  given  hit

full  ooninlanon  in  19m,  and  brsratted  major,  h
May,  1836,  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  Florida  war.
having  on  that  date  killed  two  Seminole  Indians
in  persona]  encounter  while  skirmishing  near
Hernandez plantation. He was  engaged in  sup-

Iiressingthe  Canada-border  disturtiances  at  House's
'oint,  N.  Y.,  in  1838-'9,  and  in  the  perfbraanee
of  his  dutv  seized  a  vessel  laden  with  ammuni-
tion for  the  Canadian  insurgents.  For  this  act
he  was  called  spofl  in  1881-^8  to  defend  a
civil  suit  in  the  \  ermont  court-.  II.-  Barred  BS
lieutenant-colonel  of  an  artillery  battalion  of  the
army  of  occupation  in  Texas  in  1845-*Q\  and  dur-
ing the  Mexican  war  received  two  brevet  s,  that  of
lieutenant-colonel,  20  Aug.,  1K47.  for  gallantrv  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  that  of  ooloool  on
13  Sept.,  for  his  services  at  the  storming  of  Cha-

Eultepee,  where  he  was  wounded.  Besides  these
uttles.  he  was  at  BeaaOB  do  la  Pal  ma,  Li  Hoja,
and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  Berried
again  against  Florida  Indians  in  1848-110  and
1856-'7,  was  made  major  in  the  1st  artillery.  1
April,  1850,  lieutenant-colonel.  .">  Oct.,  1*.">7.  and
commanded  the  Fort  Monroe  artillery  Bchool  in
1859-'61.  lie  was  promoted  to  colonel'  on  88  <  kst,
1861,  and  commanded  the  depot  of  prisoners  of
war  at  Fort  Warren.  Mass.,  until  1  Jan..  1884  lb-
was  retired  from  active  service  on  1  Aug..  1868,
and  in  1864-'8  was  governor  of  the  soldier-  bosoa
near  Washington, I). C. On 18 March. 1868,  he

waabreretted  brigadier-general  U.  s.  army, -for

long,  gallant,  ami  faithful  services  to  his  country."
—His  son.  Justin  K..  d.  DearChanoaUorsrilia,  Na.,
5  Mav,  1863,  was  graduated  at  the  I'.  S.  military
acad.miv  in  1881,  BBTTed  a-  1-t  lieuteiiau'  of  the  1st
artillery,  and  received  mortal  wounds  m  the  battle
of  Chancellorsville.

M.HITRY,  Alexander,  educator.  l>.  in  New
Orleans,  La*,  7  F.i...  1806;  d.  there,  80  -bo.
His  father.  Andr.a  I>.  uietrios.  a  native  of  (he  isl-
and of  Hv.lra,  on  the  OOast  of  QreeOS,  went  I
Orleans  in  1791.  and  was  for  many  years  a  mer-
chant there.  Alexander  was  graduated  at  George-
town college,  l>.  ('..  and  BOOH  afterward  became
editor  of  the  New  Orleans  "  Baa."  He  was  a  fine
pistol  shot  and  an  accomplished  fencer,  and  in  his
BOrly  manhood  t.K.k  |>art  in  several  duel-,  etlh.  r  as
principal  or  second.  He  was  subsequently  a  pro-
fessor in  Baton  RoogS  college,  and  m  l*'t4  was
employed  in  the  general  post-office  depart  flaant
On  hi-  return  to  Luiisiana  in  1881  tad  and

organized  the  has  aohool  system  there,  and  was
state  superintendent  of  schools  in  1848-'51.  In
1856 he  became  translator  to  the  state  depart-


180


I)IMM«M'K


DINSMonK


raent  in  Washington.  He  was  appointed  1
minister  to  Costa  Itica  and  Nicaragua  in  1858,
and  served  till  1861,  when  he  became  chief  of
a  bureau  in  the  Confederate  post-office  depart-
ment. He  was  made  assistant  superintendent  of
Um  N'w  Orleans  public  schools  in  1868,  and  in
1870  professor  of  ancient  languages  in  Christian
college,  at  Pass  Christian,  La.  Prof.  Dimitry  was
master  of  eleven  languages,  and  his  favorite  study
was  philology.  He  wrote  many  short  stories  for
annuals  in  is:J0-'5,  under  the  signature  of  "Tobias
Guarnerius,"  and  subsequently  contributed  to
magazines  and  delivered  many  lectures,  chiefly  on
historical  subjects.  Previous  to  1846  he  had  pre-
pared, after  many  years  of  research,  a  "  History  of
English  Names,  but  the  manuscript  was  de-
stroyed by  a  fire  at  the  St.  Charles  institute,  La.,
of  which  he  was  then  the  principal. — His  son,
John  Bull  Smith,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  27
Dec,  1835,  was  educated  at  College  H ill,  near  Ray-
mond, Miss.,  and  accompanied  his  father  to  Cen-
tral America  as  secretary  of  legation  in  1859.  He
served  in  the  Confederate  army  of  Tennessee  in
1861-'4,  and  was  dangerously  wounded  at  Shiloh.
In  1864-'5  he  was  chief  clerk  in  the  Confederate
post-office  department.  He  travelled  in  Europe
in  1869,  and  in  1874-'6  lived  in  the  United  States
of  Colombia,  where  he  was  professor  of  languages
in  Colegio  Caldas,  Barranquilla. He  was  for  seven

{'ears  dramatic  and  literary  editor  of  the  New  Or-
eans  "Times,"  and  has  been  connected  with  the
Eress  in  Washington,  Philadelphia,  and  New  York,
eing  for  several  years  with  the  "  Mail  and  Ex-
F>ress."  Mr.  Dimitry  has  contributed  to  current
iterature,  and  has  published  a  "  History  and  Geog-
raphy of  Louisiana  "  (New  York,  1877),  which  has
since  been  used  in  the  public  schools  of  that  state.
— Another  son,  Charles  Patton,  journalist,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  31  July,  1837,  was  educated  at
Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  and,  although  not  grad-
uated, received  from  it  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1867.
He  served  in  the  Confederate  army  as  a  private  in
the  Louisiana  guard.  Since  the  war  he  has  been
connected  with  the  press  in  Richmond,  Va.,  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  Baltimore,  New  York,  and  New  Or-
leans. Mr.  Dimitry  has  contributed  to  current
literature,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  sometimes
under  the  pen-names  of  "  Tobias  Guarnerius,  Jr.,"
and  "  Braddock  Field."  His  writings  include  sev-
eral novels,  but  the  only  one  issued  in  book-form  is
"  The  House  in  Balfour  Street "  (New  York,  1868).
DIM  MOCK,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts in  1800 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  27  Oct.,  1863.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1821,  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery,  and  served  as
assistant  professor  of  engineering  at  West  Point  in
1821-2.  He  was  attached  to  the  artillery  school
at  Fort  Monroe  in  1825-6  and  1828-'9,  being  ad-
jutant of  the  school  in  the  last-named  year.  He
was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant  in  1828,  was  assist-
ant quartermaster  in  1831-'6,  and  superintended
operations  at  Delaware  breakwater  in  1831-'3.  He
was  made  captain  on  6  Aug.,  1836,  but  resigned  on
30  Sept.,  and  became  a  civil  engineer  in  the  south,
being  employed  on  many  important  railroads,  and
in  1837-8  in  the  location  of  a  U.  S.  military  road
to  Fort  Smith,  Ark.  In  1843-'7  he  was  director  of
the  James  river  and  Kanawha  canal.  He  was
captain  of  Virginia  militia  in  1839-40,  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1841-'2,  and  superintendent  of  the  state
armory  in  1843-'(il.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Richmond  city  council  in  1850, 1854,  and  1858,  and
at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  entered  the  Con-
federate service,  became  brigadier-general,  and  was
chief  of  the  ordnance  department  of  Virginia.


DIMMOCK,  George,  naturalist.  1).  in  Spring-
field, M—l,  17  May,  18U.  11'-  WM  u'raduated  at
Harvard  in  1*77.  taking  tptciki  studies  there  for
two  years  after  graduation,  and  continued  his
zoological  studies  in  (icrinany  and  France,  ret  unk-
ing to  Cambridge  in  the  latter  part  ol  L888.  His
wife,  Anna  K.  Hofmann,  whom  he  married  b
studied  with  him  abroad,  and  has  written  zoologi-
cal articles.  Mr.  Dimmock  is  the  publishing  editor
of  "  Psyche,"  a  iournal  of  entomology,  issued  since
1874  in  Cambridge.  He  is  secretary  and  librarian
of  the  entomological  club  of  that  place,  councillor
of  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history,  and  of  the
Appalachian  mountain  clul>.  He  has  been  a  con-
tributor to  Cassino's  "Standard  Natural  History,"
the  "  Science  "  journal,  and  other  periodicals,  for
which  he  has  written  papers  on  zoological  subjects.
The  degrees  of  A.  M.  and  Ph.  D.  were  conferred
upon  him  by  Leipsic  university  in  1881.  He  is  au-
thor of  a  work  called  "  The  Anatomy  of  the  Mouth-
parts  of  some  Insects  of  the  Order  of  Diptera"
(Boston,  1881),  and  is  now  (1887)  preparing  for
publication  the  genealogy  of  the  Dimmock  family.

1)1  MOCK,  Susan,  physician,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina in  1847 ;  lost  on  the  "  Schiller,"  which  was
wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Cornwall,  England,  9  May,
1875.  When  only  twelve  years  old  she  told  her
father  she  wished  to  study  medicine  and  become  a
physician.  During  the  civil  war  her  family  went
north,  and  twice  she  applied  for  admission  into  the
medical  school  of  Harvard  university,  but  was  re-
fused. She  went  to  Zurich,  Switzerland,  where
she  graduated  with  honors,  and  afterward  studied
at  Vienna.  Returning  to  Boston,  she  became
physician  of  the  Hospital  for  women  and  children.

DINGLEY,  Nelson,  Jr.,  journalist,  b.  in  Dur-
ham, Me..  15  Feb.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1855,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1856,  but  never  practised.  He  be-
came proprietor  and  editor  of  the  Lewiston,  Me.,
"  Journal,"  holding  this  post  for  more  than  twenty
years.  Between  1862  and  1873  he  was  six  times
elected  to  the  Maine  legislature,  serving  as  speaker
in  1863  and  1864,  and  was  governor  of  the  state  in
1874  and  1875.  He  has  always  been  a  pronounced
advocate  of  temperance.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Republican,  12  Sept.,  1881,  to  fill  the  va-
cancy caused  by  the  election  of  William  P.  Frye  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  and  re-elected  in  1882,  1884,  and
1886.  He  has  served  on  the  committees  on  banking
and  currency  and  shipping  traffic.  He  has  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Bates  college.

DINNIES,  Anna  Peyre,  poet,  b.  in  George-
town, S.  C,  in  1816.  Her  father,  W.  F.  Shackel-
ford, an  eminent  lawyer,  removed  to  Charleston,
where  she  was  educated  by  the  Misses  Ramsay.  At
the  age  of  fourteen  she  married  John  C.  Dinnies,
of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  she  resided  until  1846,
when  the  family  removed  to  New  Orleans,  La.
Before  her  marriage  she  had  written  many  of  the
poems  that  she  published  later  under  the  pen-name
"  Moina,"  among  them  the  "Charnel  Snip."  In
1854  she  contributed  to  the  "  Catholic  Standard,"
a  weekly  edited  by  her  husband,  a  series  of  di-
dactic articles  entitled  "  Rachel's  What-Not."  She
contributed  also  to  the  literary  periodicals  of  the
south.  In  1847  she  published  a  collection  of  one
hundred  poems,  arranged  in  twelve  groups,  typify-
ing bouquets  of  flowers,  under  the  title  of  "  The
Floral  Year"  (Boston).  The  domestic  affections
form  the  subject  of  most  of  her  verses.

D1NSM00R,  Robert,  poet,  b.  in  Windham,
N.  H„  7  Oct.,  1757;  d.  there,  16  March,  1836.  He
was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  his  family  having  im-
migrated from  the  north  of  Ireland  about  the  b#


DINSMOKE


IHON


L81


ginning  "f  lli'- lslli century,  and.  after  a  rough

•  i.ii'«-  <>f  Imliiiii  captivity  in the  wood*
na,  settled  in  Londonderry,  N.  II. He  received
a  scanty  education. For  a  short  while  he  was  under
the  tuition  "f  an  old  Britiah  soldier,  and  afterward

n<li<il  with  Master  MoKeen,  who  ipanl  mneh
of  his  time  hunting  squirrels  with  his  pupils.  At
tin- age  of  eighteen  be  enlisted  in  the  Bevolution-

innv,  ami  served  at  tin-  (tattle  of  Saratoga,
lit'  became  a  farmer  at  Windham,  was  a  zeal<>n*

•\i.  rian.aml  used  to  make  verses,  in  tin-  Sot-
tish dialect  or  in  simple  English,  on  topics  arising
fn>in  personal  incidents  or  his  subjective  emotions.

died  himself  the  "  I£ii»t  i<-  Hani."  and  published
in  1888.  al  Haverhill,  Mass., a  volume  entitled  "In-
cidental Poems,"  accompanied  with  Utters  ami  a
|aw  select  pJOOf  tor  their  illustration,  with  a  sketch
of  the  author's  life.  In  hi>  "Olil  Portraits  and
rn Sketches."  John  <i.  Whittier  says:  "  lie

lived  to  a  good  old  age,  a  home  loTing.  unprstsad-

iiii.'  fanner,  cultivating  his  acres  with  his  own
horny  hands  and  fthffnng  the  long  rainy  days  and
winter  evenings  with  homely  rhyme.  Most  of  his
pieces  were  written  in  the  dialect  of  his  ancestors,
which  was  well  understood  by  his  neighbors  and
friends  the  only  audience  upon  which  he  could
venture  t<>  calculate.  He  lo veil  all  old  things,  old
language,  old  customs,  old  theology.  .  .  .  He  wrote
sometimes  to  amuse  his  neighbors,  often  to  soothe
their  sorrow  under  domestic  calamity,  or  to  give
expression  to  his  own.  With  little  of  that  delicacy
of  taste  which  results  from  the  attrition  of  fastidi-
ous and  retined  society,  and  altogether  too  truthful
and  matter-of-fact  to  call  in  the  aid  of  imagination,
he  describes  in  the  simplest  and  most  direct  terms
the  circumstances  in  winch  he  found  himself,  and
the  impressions  which  these  circumstances  had
made  on  his  own  mind.  .  .  .  Never  baring  seen  a
nightingale,  he  makes  no  attempt  to  describe  the
fowl;  but  he  has  seen  the  night-hawk,  at  sunset,
cutting  the  air  above  him,  and  he  tells  of  it.  Side
by  side  with  his  waving  corn-fields  and  orchard-
blooms,  we  have  the  barn-yard  and  pig-sty." — His
brother.  Samuel.  governor  of  New  Hampshire,  b.
in  Londonderry.  N.  11..  1  July,  1766;  d.  In  Keen.-.
N.  EL,  I")  Manh.  1885,  WSS  graduated  at  Dartmouth
la  1781),  studied  law.  and  practised  at  Kit>ne.  Be
entered  the  militia,  and  rose  to  be  major-general.
In  1810  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  war  demo-
crat, but  was  defeated  at  the  next  election.  In  182 1
he  was  a  state  councillor  and  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Monroe  ticket.  He  was  defeated  as  a  candi-
date for  governor  by  Levi  Woodbury.  He  was
judge  of  probate  for  Cheshire  county  from  1823  till
|s!i,  when  he  was  elected  governor,  and  served  two
years.  In  1896  he  served  on  the  nrmrnisafrrn  to  fix
the  l>oundary-line  between  New  Hampshire  and
Massachusetts.  —  Samuel's  son.  Samuel,  b>  in
no,  N.  II..  8  May.  1 7i#S* :  d.  there,  J4  Feb..  I860.
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1*1 4. ami  admitted
to  the  liar  in  1*1*.  |[(.  passed  some  time  in  Arkan-
sas, going  there  in  1819.  From  1888  till  1KB  be
was  clerk  of  the  senate  of  New  Hampshire,  and  he
was  elected  governor  of  the  afeata  in  1840,  and  re-
elected  in  1851.

DINSMOKE,  Samuel  P.,  journalist,  b.  in  Bris-
tol. Me.,  ahool  1888;  d.  in  New  York  city,  tt
March,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoln  in
184  \.  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  t»ar  in
Bangor.  Shortly  afterward  be  beoame  editor  of  the
Bangor  M  Men  ury."  He  took  an  active  part  ii
presidential  canvass  for  John  ('.  Fremont  in  1*">i'..
lie  rfe  t<>  practise law  in  1867,  was

appointed to  a place in the war  department b\
President  Lincoln,  and  subsequently  became  finan-


cial editor  of  ■■  rk  "Evening  p..  •." ||,.

contributed  to  the  ••  North  Am  and

other  periodicals.

DINWIDD1E, i:..Im  ,  i.  oolooial  i
\  Irginia,  b.  m  Bootland  about  1680;  d  in  Clifton,
England,  1 Aug.,  17701 While  „.  |.  rk  in  lie
tome  department,  he  detected  bis  principal,  a
lector  of  customs  in  the  West  Indies,  m  k'n«s  frauds
on  the  government,  and  as  a  r.-ward for  thin  gar-
lie  was  made  mrVOVOr  of  custom,  forth.-
nies,  and  soon afterward UoateaantgOVSraOf of
ma. lb-  arrived  in  the  colony  in  1752.  and
in  DecemUr  nf  that year  transmitted  to  the  Umrd

oftmde  an  elaborate  re|M.rt  in  (nvorof  annexing

the  Ohio  valley  for  the  extension  of  British  *,
tnents.  and  of  constructing  a  line  of  forts,  and  mak-
ing an  alliance  with  the Miami Indians,  to  aasafS
the  settlements  against French  aggressions. He
discerned the military capacity of Washington,

whom  in  1788  he  appointed  adjutant-general  "f

one  of  the  four  militarv  districts  of  Virginia,  with
the  rank  of  major,  ami  sent  as  a  commissioner  to

expostulate  with  St.  Pierre, the  Preneb  commander

on  the  Ohio,  for  his  eggraanbtM  apoo British  ter-
ritory, and  to  demand  the  withdrawal  of  the  French

troops. Maj.  Washington  delivered  to  the  Preneb

commander  Dinwiddle's  letter,  asserting  that  the
lands  on  the  Ohio  belonged  to  the  British  crown,
demanding  to  know  by  WDOM  authority  an  armed
force  had  crossed  the  lakes,  and  insisting  on  their
speedv  departure.  The  governor  was  ineenoed  at
the  French  soldier's  reply,  t<»  the  effect  that  it  did
not  become  him  t«>  discuss  treaties,  and,  calling
council  together,  determined,  by  their  advice.  t<.
expel  the  French  from  the  disputed  territory.
Washington's  expedition  followed.  The  capture
of  Fort  Trent  by  the  French  was  the  first  overt
act  of  the  war.  The  British  government,  after
seeking  explanations  at  the  French  court,  teal
Braddook  with  two  regiments  to  aid  the  colonists.
Dinwiddle  met  live  of  the  Other  Colonial  governors
at  Annapolis,  and  afterward  at  Alexandria,  and
planned  expeditions  against  Fort  Duquesne.  Ni-
agara, Frontenac.  and  Crown  Point.  He  was  highly
incensed  at  the  tardineee  of  the  boose  of  burgessee
in  voting  money  for  the  public  defence,  and  at  their
refusal  to  put  it  under  his  absolute  disposal.  In
1754  he  suggested  t<>  the  British  Umrd  of  trade  the
propriety  of  taxing  the  colonics  for  the  pnrpoi
raising  funds  t<>  carry  on  the  war.  and  in  the  suc-
ceeding year  was  one  of  the  live  colonial  governors
who  memorialized  the  ministry  to  the  same  .  :'
He  urged  the  imposition  by  the  British  parliament
of  a  general  DOu-taX  and  a  general  land-tax  in
\inerica.  on  the  ground  that  it  W8S impossible  t«»
1  obtain  joint  efforts  of  the  colonies  by  ■ppaalll  _
their  assemblies.  After  the  defeat  of  Braddoca  he
continual  to  busy  himself  with  the  military  o|«c ra-
tions on  the  frontiers,  displaying  great  inoapai  ity.
and  wearying  Washington,  then  in  command  of
the  colonial  troops,  by  frequent  exhibitions  of  ill

temper,  folly.  «>r  caprice. His  arrogance  braagkl

him  into  collision  with  the  legislature,  while  his
avarice  led  him  to  exact  illegal  or  OBI
and  he  was  at  length  nsalled.  having  Virgtnia  in
January.  1788.  At  the  time  of  his  departure  he
was  Canned  with  appropriating  t"  hi*  own
180400  placed  in  his  hand*  to  compensate  'he  Vir-
ginians for  money  expended  in  excess  of  their  pn>-
portion  of  the  cx|>enscs  of  the  war.  for  which  he

never  ratisfaetorilj  acoonntedi

DION,  (')rille.  billianl  plaver.  b.  in  Montreal,
Canada.  22 March. 1848; «1.  there, 1 0
His  hist pnhlie  appearance  was  in  Mont]
July,  I860,  when  he  won  the  championship  of  Can-


182


DIIH'K


DITSON


ada  by  defeating  every  competitor  in  the  tourna-
ment. The  year  following  be  gained  the  cham-
pionship one  in  New  York,  then  fii--t  offered,  which
he  loci  by  being  defeated  by  Decry  and  Rudolphe
in  succeeding  tournamente,  bn1  regained  in  is?i
from  Prank  Foster,  and  held  until,  after  three  es-
says, Maurice  Daly  defeated  him.  Me  (untested
the  championship  In  fifteen-hall  pool  with  Wahl-
strom  in  1877,  but  was  worsted.

DIRCK,  Cornelius  Lansing,  clergyman,  b.  in
LsiiMngburg.  K.  V..  8  March,  1785;  d.'  1!»  March.
1857.  He  studied  theology,  was  ordained  at  Onon-
daga, N.  Y.,  in  December,  1807,  and  held  various
pastorates  in  the  northern  states,  in  addition  to
which  he  was  connected  with  Auburn  seminary  as
trustee  in  1820-'30  and  1835-'57,  vice-president  of
the  board  of  trustees  in  1820-4,  and  professor  of
sacred  rhetoric  and  pastoral  theology  in  1821-6.
He  served  without  salary,  and  as  financial  agent
raised  large  sums  for  the  seminary.  He  published
"Sermons  on  Important  Subjects"  (1825).

1HSBROWE,  Samuel,  magistrate,  b.  in  Eltis-
lev,  Cambridgeshire,  England,  30  Nov.,  1619 ;  d.  in
Elfworth.  Cambridgeshire,  England,  10  Dec,  1690.
He  was  the  brother  of  John  Disbrowe,  who  gained
distinction  by  his  marriage  with  the  sister  of  Oliver
Cromwell  and  by  his  active  service  during  the  com-
monwealth, becoming  major-general  in  1648  and
governor  of  the  west  in  1650.  During  the  civil
war,  Samuel  Disbrowe  and  a  number  of  colonists
sailed  from  England  in  a  ship  of  350  tons  for  Con-
necticut. After  a  long  voyage  they  arrived  in  New
Haven  about  1  Julv,  1639.  In  August  they  pur-
chased from  the  Indians  the  tract  of  land  compris-
ing the  present  town  of  Guilford,  the  contract  be-
ing formally  made  on  26  Aug.,  and  the  deed  dated
30  Sept.,  1639.  These  papers  and  a  map  made  by
the  Indians  of  the  territory  sold  and  of  the  adjoin-
ing coast  are  still  preserved  in  the  Massachusetts
historical  society  in  Boston.  The  first  settlers  of
Guilford  came  to  New  England  when  the  hold  of
the  Dissenters  was  broken  from  the  mother  coun-
try, so  that  they  settled  as  an  independent  repub-
lic. Their  constitution  is  on  record  in  the  hand-
writing of  Samuel  Disbrowe.  This  document  is
complete  in  all  its  parts,  providing  for  executive,
legislative,  and  judiciary  departments,  the  order  of
its  courts,  manner  of  holding  its  meetings,  etc.
In  1650  he  returned  to  England,  and  through  the
influence  of  his  brother  was  sent  to  Scotland  in  the
employment  of  the  state.  Soon  after  his  arrival
he  was  appointed  to  represent  the  town  of  Edin-
burgh in  parliament,  ana  on  4  May,  1655,  was  chosen
by  Cromwell  to  be  one  of  the  nine  counsellors  of
Scotland.  In  the  following  year  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  British  parliament.  Cromwell  was  so
pleased  with  his  services  that,  on  16  Feb.,  1657,  he
gave  a  patent  for  the  office  of  keeper  of  the  great
seal  of  Scotland  to  him  or  to  his  deputy  during  his
lifetime,  "  subject  to  such  regulations  with  regard
to  fees  or  otherwise  as  should  be  made  by  his  high-
ness or  his  succe&sors  with  the  advice  of  the  privy
council  of  England."  Disbrowe  was  continued  in
all  his  offices  by  the  protector,  Richard  Cromwell,
and  prudently  embraced  the  royal  proclamation
sent  from  Breda.  On  21  May,  1660,  he  signed  his
submission  to  the  king,  and  on  12  Dec  obtained
his  pardon.  After  that  he  retired  to  his  home  in
Elfworth,  Cambridgeshire.

DISNEY,  Richard  Randolph,  Canadian  cler-

Wrman,  b.  in  North-East,  Cecil  co.,  Md.,  in  1835.
is  parents  had  formerly  been  slaves,  but  at  the
time  of  his  birth  were  free.  When  he  was  eight
years  old  his  father  died.  Afterward  he  was  a
barber  in  Baltimore,  and  while  there  united  with


the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  Be  was
graduated  with  honofi  at  I  legood  seminary,  Spring-
field, in  1897,  and  at  once  began  his  ministerial

work.  He  soon  removed  to  Chatham,  Ontario,
wlnre  a  large  colored  population  was  settled,  and
subsequently  was  stationed  us  a  preacher  at  Peel,
Buxton,  Windsor,  Hamilton.  St.  Catharines,  To-
ronto, and  Chatham.  <>n  the  death  of  Bishop  Naz-
rev  he  was  appointed  to  the  vacant  bishopric  in  the
African  Methodist  Episcopal  church.

DISOSWAY,  Gabriel  Poillon,  antiquary,  b.
in  New  York  city, 6 Dec,  1799;  d.on  Staten  Island,
9  July,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1819,  "went  to  Petersburg,  Va.,  where  he  resided
for  several  years,  returned  to  New  York,  and  be-
came a  merchant.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Randolph-Macon  college,  established  at  Ashland,
Va.,  in  1832.  He  contributed  frequently  to  the
newspaper  and  periodical  press,  and  published
"  The  Earliest  Churches  of  New  York  and  its  Vi-
cinity "  (New  York,  1865).

DISSTON,  Henry,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Tewkes-
bury, England,  21  May,  1819;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
16  March,  1878.  He  came  to  the  United  States  at
the  age  of  fourteen  with  his  father,  who  died  soon
after  landing  in  Philadelphia.  The  boy  turned
his  attention  to  mechanics,  and  began  business  in
Philadelphia.  It  is  said  he  wheeled  the  coal  that
he  required  from  the  wharf  to  his  place  of  busi-
ness. He  was  the  first  manufacturer  that  competed
successfully  with  the  English  in  hand  and  back
saws,  and  to  him  belongs  the  credit  of  effectually
checking  the  importation  of  foreign  saws.  He  in-
vented more  than  twenty  improvements  in  saw
manufacture,  among  them  the  movable  or  inserted
teeth.  His  business  increased  until  his  buildings
covered  more  than  250,000  square  feet  of  ground
and  contained  over  400  workmen.  He  was  the  in-
ventor and  manufacturer  of  the  Disston  saw.

DISTURNELL,  John,  compiler,  b.  in  Lansing-
burg,  N.  Y.,  6  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1
Oct.,  1877.  He  began  life  as  a  printer  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  but  removed  to  Troy  and  afterward  to  New
York  city,  where  he  opened  a  book-store  and  be-
came a  map-publisher.  In  1829  he  issued  the  first
Troy  Directory.  In  1840  he  compiled  and  printed
"The  Traveller's  Railroad  Guide,"  which  was  the
first  work  of  the  kind  that  was  published  in  the
United  States.  He  was  the  author  of  "  New  York
as  it  was  and  as  it  is,"  and  for  twenty  years  pub-
lished annually  the  "  United  States  Register  or
Blue  Book."  He  published  also  a  work  on  the
"Influence  of  Climate  in  North  and  South  Ameri-
ca" (New  York,  1859);  "  The  Great  Lakes  or  Inland
Seas  of  America "  (1863) ;  and  "  The  Traveller's
Guide  to  the  Hudson  River"  (1864).

DITSON,  George  Leighton,  traveller,  b.  in
Westford,  Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1812.  He  was  educated
at  Westford  academy,  and  began  the  study  of
medicine  in  Boston,  but  gave  it  up  on  account  of
impaired  health.  After  many  years'  absence  from
the  United  States  he  returned,  and  took  his  medi-
cal degree  at  Vermont  university  in  1864,  but
never  practised.  Dr.  Ditson  has  travelled  widely
in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.  While  in  Russia  he
crossed  the  Caucasus  range,  a  feat  that  had  been
accomplished  by  no  other  foreigner  not  connected
with  the  Russian  army.  While  living  in  the
island  of  Cuba  he  was  several  times  acting  U.  S.
consul  at  Nuevitas  under  Presidents  Tyler  and
Polk,  and  he  opened  and  developed  the  copper
mines  at  Bayatavo.  While  a  resident  of  Puerto
Principe,  in  1842-'3,  he  was  professor  of  English  in
the  Dupuis  college  there.  Dr.  Ditson  is  a  member
of  the  Geological  society  of  France,  ftie  Theosophi-


D.  Appleton  8c  Co


MTSON


I  MX


183


i.iy,  the American  oriental
Other  learned  societies,  ami  has  published
cassia,  >>r  n  Tour  t"  the  Caucasus"  iN.w York.

"The  Pen  rV

Kd France,  Egypt, and Ethiopia"
-<■( nt ami French Cnu
(New  V<>rk, 1  *.">!); reissued  as  "  A<1\ <-nt tires  and
Oboei  retium  on  the  Northern Coeet of  Africa"):
and  "Tli.'  Kederati  of  Italy"  (Boston, 1871). lie
preparation  (1887)  a  "  History  of  Ohio."
DITSON.  Oliver,  publisher,  b.  in  Iioston.  Mass.,
11;  .1.  there,  II Deo,  I86BL Be  im
educated  in  public  school*,  end  at  the  en  of  thir-
teen entered the  service  of  Samuel II.  Parker  in

the  book  and  music  business.  In  1884  bt  btoMM
a  partner  of  his  employer,  under  the  flrm-nemo

of  Parker  &  Diteon.  They  continued  together  in
a  small  way  until  1844,  when  the  senior  withdrew
from  th.'  OOBOern,  leaving  Mr.  DiteOB  to  follow
his  own  fortune.  In  IM.">(|  one  of  bJl  employees,
J.  ('.  Haynes,  became  interested  in  the  htisiness,
and  the  (inn-name  was  permanently  changed  to
Oliver  Diteon  &  Ob.  In  1867  a  branch  house  was
QstebUohorl  l>y  his  eldest  son  in New York city.

under  the  otyu
of  C.  II.
&  Co.,  and  in
1876  another  in
Philadelphia,  J.
E.  Ditson  &  Co.
The  publiehedj
catalogue  of  the
Diteonennmben
over  80,000  dif-
ferent pieces  of
sheet-music  and
more  than  8,800
music  -  l>ooks.
Of  piano  -  forte
methods  they
have  puhlished
the enormous

Bomber  <>f  ill.
and  of  l>ooks  for  the  organ,  about  100.  In  18M7
the  Boston  house  employed  about  100  clerks  and
book-keepers.  They  have  twenty  printing-presses
t.intlyat  work.  Application,  method,  econo-
my, and  acute  hneinem  judgment  secured  Mr.  Dit-
son s  success,  and  he  absorbed  the  patronage  and
the  publications  of  many  rival  publishers.  Mr.
Ditson  was  officially  connected  with  several  mone-
tary institutions,  and  president  of  the  Continental
bank  in  his  native  city  for  nearly  twentv-flve  years
prior  to  his  death.

DIVEX,  Alexander  S.,  lawyer,  l>.  in  Catherine,
Tioga  co.,  N.  Y..  10  Feb.,  1809.  He  received  an
academical  education,  ami  studied  law.  After
bJe  irtmlorion  to  the  bar  be  settled  in  Klmira,.and
acquired  a  large  practice.  He  was  elected  a  state
•anator  In  186$  and  then  was  sent  to  congress  as  a
Republican, serving  from  4  July.  1*01.  till  U  March.

186:$. Boon  afterward  1 ntcrcd the  volunteer

army,  becoming  captain  in  May.  lsitf,  ,,nd  rose  till
he  was  made  brevet  brigadier-general  in  August,
l^l.  In.laniiarv,  1868, he  resigned  his  commission
and  returned  to  Bunira,  Subeequently  he  become
rice-president  of  the  Erie  railway  company.

DIVOL,  Ira,  instructor,  b.  iii  Tophatn,  \'t..  in
Ootober,  I860;  <1.  in  Bamboo,  Wis.,  a  June,  is?i.
lb-  loel  both  parents  while  still  a  child,  and  was
fitted  for  college  by  an  elder  brother.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Dmvenity  of  Vermont  in  l-
end,  going  to  Hew  Orleans,  beoeme  principal  of  a
grammar-school.  In  1862  be  turned  his  attention
to  law,  but  remored  to  St.  bona  in  1806,  and  wee


(Kc^t*"  ^OxJC^o-


tru.


'  superintendent  .,f  t|„.  public  Mhoola,  bold*
ing  thi«  office  for  iian  failing  health

compelled his  withdrawal lb «,,» Hf
-ii|M-rinti-iulent  of  public  who.,
firm  pohc>  carn.d  the  mhBoll  nrfelj  thruugb  the

-  of  the  civil  war.  and  prevented  their  die*

■  Mot,.  Be  also  I„id  the  foundation  ,.f  th..
public-school  library,  which  afterwanl  bootJM  tht
public  library  in  St.  l/.uis.

IH\. Dorolhca l.»nde. philanthropist,  b.  in
Worcester.  Mass..  about  1784;  ,1.  ,„  Trenton
1!>  July, 1887. After the  death,  m DC>1.  of  her
father,  a merchant in lU.-i.-n.  she  established «
sch.N.l  for  girls  in  that  city. Hearing  of  the  neg-

•  ondltion  of  the  convict*  in  th.
she  \isjted  them,  and  beOMM  int.  rest.-d  in  t  fie  wel-
fare of  the  unfortunate  class,.,,  f,,r  whose  dera-
il.>n  si„.  labored  until  ikm.  vfcon.  hot  health  be-
coming impaired,  she  gave  up  h.-r  ■dbool  and
riotted  BOfOpe,  having  inherited  from  a  relative
sufficient  property  to  render  her  illdopendent.  She
returned  to  BortOB  in  1K17  and  devoted  li.rs.-lf  to
iiiN.sii-ating  the  condition  of  nonpew,  lunatics,
and  prisoners,  encouraged  by  her  friend  and  pastor,
K.v.  Dr.  Chemung,  of  whose  children  she  had  U.n
governess.  In  this  work  she  hits  visited  every  state
of  the  I'nion  east  of  the  Rooky  mountains,  endeav-
oring to  neieoode  legislatures  to  take  measures  for
the  relief  of  the  ]»oor  and  wretched.  S(
es|M-cially  influential  in  procuring  legislative  action
for  the  establishment  of  state  lunatic  usvlum-  in
New  York.  Pennsylvania.  North  Carolina'.  Illinois,
Indiana,  anil  other  states.  In  April.  l86<in00O>
■eqnenceof  bernnweeried  exertion*  end  petition*
that  she  presente<l  to  congress  in  IS4*  and
bill  peaeed  lx>th  booom  appropriating  10^)00.000
eore*  to  the  several  states  for  the  relief  of  the  in-
digent insane;  but  the  bill  was  vetoed  by  President
Pierce,  on  the  ground  that  the  general  government
had  no  constitutional  power  t<>  make  such  oppffO-
priations.  During  the  civil  war  she  we*  superin-
tendent of  hospital  nurses,  having  the  entire  con-
trol of  their  a|>|Hiintment  and  assignment  to  duty.
After  its  close  she  renamed  her  laltors  for  the  in-
sane. Miss  l)j\  published  anonymously  "T1
land  of  Flora"  (Host  on.  1886k  and  "  Conversation*
about  Common  Things,"  ••  Alice  and  Huth,"  "  Bren-
ing  Hours,"  and  other  bookl  for  children:  al*0,
"  Prisons  and  Prison  Discipline"  (Boston,  1848);
and  a  variety  of  tracts  for  prisoners.  She  is  also
the  author  of  many  memorials  to  legislative  lulu-*
on  the  subject  Of  lunatic  asylums  and  reports  on
philanthropic  subjects.

BIX,  John  Adams,  l>.  in  DoooBwen,  N.  II..  24
July.  17*8;  d.  in  New  York  <ity.*Jl  April.  1818,  His
early  education  was  received  at  Salisbury,  Philliiw
Exeter  academy,  and  the  College  of  Montreal,  in
Deoembor,  1*12.  bo  was  appointed  cadet,  and  going
to  Baltimore  aided  his  father.  Maj.  Timothy  Dix
of  the  14th  U.  S.  infantry,  and  also  studied  at  St.
Mary's  college.  He  was  made  ensign  in  1818,  and
accompanied  his  regiment,  taking  |>art  in  the  oi>-
erations  on  the  Canadian  frontier.  Subsequently
beeertod  in  the  21st  infantry  at  Port  ('.institution,
N.  II.,  when-  he  boOOJM  2d  lieutenant  in  Man  h,
1814,  was  adjutant  to  Col.  John  Ik-  It.  Wallwrk,
and  in  August  was  transferred  to  the  :U\  artii.
In  1H1SI  he  was  eppolnbld  aide-de-camp  to  (ien.
Jacob  bVown,  then  in  command  of  the  North-
ern military  department,  and  stationed  at  Hmwiis-
ville.  where  he  studied  law,  and  later,  under  the
guidance  of  William  Wirt,  was  admitted  t«»  the
bar  in  Washington.  He  was  in  1826  sent  as  special
messenger  to  the  curt  of  Denmark.  On  his  re-
turn he  was  stationed  at Fort  Monnw.  but  eont in-


184


DIX


DIX


ued  ill-hoalth  le<l  him  to  resign  his  commission  in
the  army,  29  July,  1828,  after  having  attained  the
rank  of  captain.  He  then  set  the  1  in  Cooperstown,
N.  Y.,  and  began  the  practice  of  law.  In  1830  he
removed  to  Albany,  having  been  appointed  adju-
tant-general of  the  state  by  Gov.  Knot  B.  Throop.
and  in  1833  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  and
superintendent  of  common  schools,  publishing  dur-
ing this  period  numerous  reports  concerning  the
schools,  and  also  a  very  important  report  in  rela-
tion to  a  geological  survey  of  the  state  (1830).  He
was  a  prominent  member  of  the  "Albany  Regency,"
who  practically  ruled  the  Democratic  party  of  that
day.  Going  out  of  office  in  1840,  on  the  defeat  of
the  democratic  candidates  and  the  election  of  Gen.
Harrison  to  the  presidency,  he  turned  to  literary
pursuits,  and  was  editor-in-chief  of  "  The  Northern
Light,"  a  journal  of  a  high  literary  and  scientific
character,  which  was  published  from  1841  till  1843.
In  1841  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly.
In  the  following  year  he  went  abroad,  and  spent
nearly  two  years  in  Madeira,  Spain,  and  Italy.
From  1845  till  1849  he  was  a  U.  S.  senator,  being
elected  as  a  Democrat,  when  he  became  involved  in
the  Free-soil  movement,  against  his  judgment  and
will,  but  under  the  pressure  of  influences  that  it
was  impossible  for  him  to  resist.  He  always  re-
garded the  Free-soil  movement  as  a  great  political
blunder,  and  labored  to  heal  the  consequent  breach
in  the  Democratic  party,  as  a  strenuous  supporter
of  the  successive  Democratic  administrations  up  to
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  In  1848  he  was
nominated  by  the  Free-soil  Democratic  party  as

fovernor,  but  was  overwhelmingly  defeated  by
Iamilton  Fish.  President  Pierce  appointed  him
assistant  treasurer  of  New  York,  and  obtained  his
consent  to  be  minister  to  France,  but  the  nomina-
tion was  never  made.  In  the  canvass  of  1856  he
supported  Buchanan  and  Breckenridge,  and  in
1800  earnestly  opposed  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln,
voting  for  Breckenridge  and  Lane.  In  May,  1860,
he  was  appointed  postmaster  of  New  York,  after
the  defalcations  in  that  office.  On  10  Jan.,  1861,
at  the  urgent  request  of  the  leading  bankers  and
financiers  of  New  York,  he  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  treasury  by  President  Buchanan,  and  he  held
that  office  until  the  close  of  the  administration.
His  appointment  immediately  relieved  the  govern-
ment from  a  financial  deadlock,  gave  it  the  funds
that  it  needed  but  had  failed  to  obtain,  and  pro-
duced a  general  confidence  in  its  stability.  When
he  took  the  office  there  were  two  revenue  cutters
at  New  Orleans,  and  he  ordered  them  to  New  York.
The  captain  of  one  of  them,  after  consulting  with
the  collector  at  New  Orleans,  refused  to  obey.
Secretary  Dix  thereupon  telegraphed :  "  Tell  Lieut.
Caldwell  to  arrest  Capt.  Breshwood,  assume  com-
mand of  the  cutter,  and  obey  the  order  I  gave
through  you.  If  Capt.  Breshwood,  after  arrest,
undertakes  to  interfere  with  the  command  of  the
cutter,  tell.  Lieut.  Caldwell  to  consider  him  as  a
mutineer,  and  treat  him  accordingly.  If  any  one
attempts  to  haul  down  the  American  flag,  shoot
him  on  the  spot."  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  formation  of
the  Union  defence  committee,  and  was  its  first

E resident ;  he  also  presided  at  the  great  meeting  in
fnion  square,  24  April,  1861.  On  the  president's
first  call  for  troops,  he  organized  and  sent  to  the
field  seventeen  regiments,  and  was  appointed  one
«of  the  four  major-generals  to  command  the  New
York  state  forces.  In  June  following  he  was  com-
nii->iuiicd  major-general  of  volunteers. and  ordered
to  Washington  by  Gen.  Scott  to  take  command  of
the  Arlington  and  Alexandria  department. By  a


successful  political  intrigue,  this  disposition  was
changed,  and  he  was  sent  in  .Inly  to  Baltimore  to
take  command  of  the  Department  of  Maryland,
which  whs  considered  a  post  of  small  comparative
importance;  hut. on  the  defeat  of  the  Federal  forces
at  Bull  Run.  things  changed;  Maryland  became'
for  the  time  the  centre  and  key  of  the  national  po>
sition.  and  it  was  through  Gen.  Dix's  energetic  and
judicious  measures  that  the  state  and  the  city  were
prevented  from  going  over  to  the  Confederate
cause.  In  May,  1862,  Gen.  Dix  was  sent  from
Baltimore  to  Fort  Monroe,  and  in  the  summer  of
1863,  after  the  trouble  connected  with  the  draft
riots,  he  was  transferred  to  New  York,  as  com-
mander of  the  Department  of  the  East,  which  place
he  held  until  the  close  of  the  war.  In  1866  be  was
appointed  naval  officer  of  the  port  of  New  York,
the  prelude  to  another  appointment  during  the
same  year,  that  of  minister  to  France.  In  1872  he
was  elected  governor  of  the  state  of  New  York  as
a  Republican  by  a  majority  of  53,000,  and,  while
holding  that  office,  rendered  the  country  great
service  in  thwarting  the  proceedings  of  the  infla-
tionists in  congress,  and,  with  the  aid  of  the  legis-
lature, strengthening  the  national  administration
in  its  attitude  of  opposition  to  them.  On  a  re-
nomination,  in  1874,  he  was  defeated,  in  conse-
quence partly  of  the  reaction  against  the  president
under  tne  "  third-term  "  panic,  and  partly  of  the
studious  apathy  of  prominent  Republican  politi-
cians who  desired  his  defeat.  During  his  lifetime
Gen.  Dix  held  other  places  of  importance,  being
elected  a  vestryman  of  Trinity  church  (1849),  and
in  1872  comptroller  of  that  corporation,  delegate
to  the  convention  of  the  diocese  of  New  York,  and
deputy  to  the  general  convention  of  the  Episcopal
church.  In  1853  he  became  president  of  the  Mis-
sissippi and  Missouri  railway  company,  and  in  1863
became  the  first  president  of  the  L'nion  Pacific  rail-
road company,  an  office  which  he  held  until  1868,
also  filling  a  similar  place  for  a  few  months  in
1872  to  the  Erie  railway  company.  He  married
Catharine  Morgan,  adopted  daughter  of  John  J.
Morgan,  of  New  York,  formerly  member  of  con-
gress, and  had  by  her  seven  children,  of  whom
three  survived  him.  He  was  a  man  of  very  large
reading  and  thorough  culture,  spoke  several  lan-
guages with  fluency,  and  was  distinguished  for
proficiency  in  classical  studies,  and  for  ability  and
elegance  as  an  orator.  Among  his  published  works
are  "  Sketch  of  the  Resources  of  tne  City  of  New
York  "  (New  York,  1827) ;  "  Decisions  of  the  Super-
intendents of  Common  Schools  "  (Albany,  1837) ;
"A  Winter  in  Madeira,  and  a  Summer  in  Spain
and  Florence "  (New  York,  1850 ;  5th  ed.,  1853) ;
"  Speeches  and  Occasional  Addresses "  (2  vols.,
1864) ;  "  Dies  Irae,"  translation  (printed  privately,
1863;  also  revised  ed..  1875);  and  "Stabat  Mater."
translation  (printed  privately,  1868). — His  eldest
son,  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  1
Nov.,  1827,  received  his  early  education  and  train-
ing in  Albany,  where  he  resided  till  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1848,  and  at  the  general
Theological  seminary  of  the  Episcopal  church  in
1852,  was  ordained  deacon  the  same  year,  and  priest
in  1853.  In  September,  1855,  he  was  appointed  an
assistant  minister  in  Trinity  parish.  New  York.  In
1859  he  was  chosen  assistant  rector  of  the  same

Sarish,  and  on  Dr.  Berrian's  death  became  rector.  10
fbv.,  1862.  Dr.  Dix  has  been  indefatigable  in  the
labors  of  his  office  as  rector  of  the  largest  parish
in  America,  as  well  as  in  the  service  of  the  E pis-
copal  church  in  general,  and  was  chosen  president
of  the  house  of  deputies  at  the  general  conven-
tion that  was  held  in  Chicago  in  Oetober,  1886.


MX


188


II. •  has  juiblish.  d  a  "Commentary  on  the Kpistlc
t<> lli.' Koiiian  in  <>f  the

to  tin'  (Jalatians  iiinl  Col.

•  Inn- nil the
Pantheistic III. a ..f

III! llllIMTMIIMl-Sul*-

stani  e  Deitj  "  I-
"Essav  on  Christ  ian
Art  "  ('lN-Vli;  "L.ct-

tates: that of the

Wedded  in  the  Lord,

ami  that  of  tin-  Sin-
gle for  the  Kingdom
of Heaven's  Sake"
..;  "Memoirs of

John  A. lams  I)i\"
(New  York.  1mh;{):
(jtiarto  edition  >.f
saiin-  (printed  pri-
vately. IS*');  "The
(ios|M-l  ami  Philoso-
phy, Six  Lectures"

(1896);  ami  two  vol  -

umes  of  Sermons
(1878,1889}  H,.  has
also  issued  several  manuals  of  devotion,  and  occa-
sional sermons. — Another  no,  Charles  Temple,
artist.  1 1.  in  A II. any, -J.")  Feb..  ls:{M;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,
11  Kerch,  1878,  studied  at  I'nion.aml  early  turned
his  attention  to  art.  He  had  made  good  progress
in  his  studies  when,  at  the  In-ginning  of  the  civil
war,  he  was  chosen  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of
his  father,  and  won  credit  from  his  faithful  per-
formance of  duty.  On  the  return  of  peace  he  de-
voted himself  anew  to  his  profession,  and  soon
established  u  name  among  the  most  promising  of
our  marine  painters.  His  "Sunset  in  Capri"  is  a
spirited  study  of  sea  and  shore.

1HX.  John  Homer,  author,  b.  about  INK);  .1.
in  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1888,
and  as  M.  D.  at  Jefferson  pedicel  college,  Phila-
delphia, in  1896,  and  settled  in  Boston,  where  he
was  highly  successful  as  an  aurist  and  oculist.
He  was  a  meml>er  of  the  American  ophthalmic
society,  the  American  otologfcttl  society,  the  Mas-
sachusetts medical  benerolent  society, and  the  Bos-
t-.n  society  of  natural  history.  In  1  Moil-' 7  be  built
the  Hotel  Pclham  in  Boston,  the  first  family  hotel
ted  on  this  continent.  He  was  the  author  of
"Changes  of  the  Blood,"  translated  from  the
French  of  M.  Til>ert  for  Ihmglison's  medical  li-
brary (Philadelphia):  "Treatise  on  Strabismus  "
(Boston.  1*111:  "  Kssay  OB  Morbid  BensJbJlitT  of
the  K.iina."  Boylston  prize  essay  (Boston,  1N1!»>:
and  "  The  Ophthalmoscope  and  its  USCS  "  (1856).

IHXKY.  Henrv  K.,  actor,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass..
6. Ian..  ls.V.).  In  is«;s  he  attached  himself  to  the
variety  stink  at  the  Howard  Athemeum  in  his  na-
tive city,  and  made  his  |ir~t  I  in  -cess  as  Peanuts  in
"  Under  the  Qeelight.M  In  lN?."i  he  played  the
Heifer  iii  ••  Kvanu'cline."  at  the  Globe  theatre.
Other  n.les  in  which  be  has  been  teen  are:  I>r.
Syntax  in  "Cinderella  at  School,''  Lorenzo  in
"The  Mascot."  Sir  Mincing  Lane  in  ••  BiUec  Tay-
lor," Biinthorne  in  "Patience."  Sir  Joseph  Porter
in  "  Pinafore."  Peter  Papyms  in  "The  New  F.van-
p-liiie."  Boss  Kniv.tt  in  "The  Romany  Bye,"  the
Chancellor  in  uIolenthe,n  William  Crank  in
"  Pounce  \  ('...."  John  Wellington  Wells  in  ■•  The
r,"  Brabazon  Sykes  in  "The  Merry  Duch
ess,"  Cerriokfergus  in  "  The  Dnke'l  Motto,"  Frip-

|Ml|H.||||e in "Lieut. Helelle." Henry Nervine III

"Distinguished  Foreigners,"  and  Christopher  Bliz-
zard in  M  Confusion." In  one  or  another  of  these


parts  he  has  been  seen  in  all  the  large  cities  of  the
United  States. I  n  1  *88  hs  began  an  engagement

at  the  Bijou  th<  York,  in  the  burlesque

..f  ••  Adonis,"  and  acted  it  till  the
when  he  ap|>earcd  in  the  name  piece  in  Ti^mdcft,
Kngland.  with  considerable  success. In  September
of  the  same  vear  he  returned  t..  Aim  1
appeared  at  the  Fifth  avemi

DIXON,  Alexander,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  Longford.  Inland,  about  1890,  I|.  HnigTBted
to  Canada  with  Iii-  parent*,  and  nettled  in I

(then  Little  Yorki.  fin  m  giedesiod  ellh  dis-
tinction at  KhurteollefB,  Toronto,  and.  after  ]mm-
ing  through  a  divinity  course,  was  orda
con  in  Hamilton.  After  serving  for  a  f.  w  months
as  curate  to  the  Rev.  I)r.  Atkinson,  in  m.  Catha-
rines, in  [880  he  was  appointed  reotorof  Louth  and
Port  Halhoiisie.  where  he  remained  on  til  appointed
rector  of  (Juelph,  in  lMT.l.  While  in  Gfuelpfa  be
was  for  a  time  joint  ••<litor  with  the  Bor.  I,  <•
I).  McKcnzie  of "The Church,"  was  f.,r

years  s|M-<iai  oorrcspondriil  <>f  "The  London  Gunr-

dian."  likewise  of  a  New  York  paper,  and  also
wrote  reviews  for  a  Toronto  daily.  In  1883  be  was
appointed  archdeacon  of  (iuelph.

1UX0.N,  Archibald,  senator,  b.  in  Caswell
county.  N.  C.  |  April,  1801;  d.  in  BeadetfOB,  Ky..
88  Ai.ril.  ls7f*>.  His  grandfather,  OoL  Henry,  re-
ceived a  wound  at  the  I  wit  t  le  <>f  Kutaw  which
Oaosed his  death;  and Wyiin, his father,  served

gallantly  through  the  Revolutionary  war.  In  i^».*)
he  removed  with  his  father  to  Henderson  county,
Ky..  where  he  received  a  common-school  education,
studied  law.  was  admitted  t<>  the  l«r  in  IBM*  and
attained  high  rank  as  a  criminal  lawyer.  II
a  member  of  the  legislature  in  IKH)  and  1*41,  of
the  state  senate  in  1886, and  lieutenant-governor  in

1843-'7. In  1848  he  was  the  choice  of  a  majority

of  the  Kentucky  Whigs  for  governor;  but  on  the

nomination  of  John  J.  Crittenden  by  a  taction  of
them  he  withdrew  from  the  candidacy,  in  order  to
heal  dissensions  m  the  party.  When  a  candidate
for  governor  he  defended  the  American  protective

Jtoliey,  and  made  that the  principal  subject  of  his
done. In l*l!». when the proposlUOB for

gradual  emancipation  <>f  the  slaves  was  before  the
people,  he  vehemently  opposed  the  scheme,  and.
being  chosen  e  member  01  the  Constitutional  con-
vention, proposed  a  resolution,  which  was  substan-
tially incorporated  in  the  new  constitution,  declar-
ing that  whereas  the  right  <>f  the  citizen  to  be  se-
cure in  his  |>erson  and  property  lies  at  the  Uittom
of  all  governments,  and  slaves,  and  children  here-
after Ix>rn  of  slave  mothers,  an-  property,  there-
fore the  convention has not the  power  nor the

right  t<>  deprive  the  citizen  of  his  properly  ex-
cept for  the  public  good, end  <>ulv  then  by  making
to  him  a  just  compensation Be  was  the  wing

candidate  for  governor  in  1851,  but  the  Whigs  who
w.re  emancipationists  withdrew  their  ■upporl  psj

account  of  us  views  on  the  slevery  quoouon,  end

put  in  nomination  Osseins  M.  Clay.  which  resulted
in  the  election  of  a  Democrat.  He  had  end.  ■
to  unite  the  perky  bj  deottniag  the  nomination;
but  his  friend-  in  the  convention  insisted  ujnui  his
taking  it.  Hi-  canvass wascontem|>oraneOUS  with
the  agitation  for  the  dissolution  of  the  I'nion.  and

be ekwueutiy esoonded  baton  the  peonla  tbeep-

peals  for  its  preservation  uttered  in  ^

by Clav  and Webster. He and Mr. Crittenden

were  rival  candidate-.  U-fore  the  legislature  for  the
ii  that  fell  vacant  in  the  V.  S.  senate:  but
both  withdrew for  the  sake  of  harmony. When*
Henrv  Clay  died,  shortly  afterward,  Mr. D
friends  elected him  for  the  unexpired term. He


186


DIXON


DIXON


took  his  scat  on  20  Dec,  1852,  and  served  till  3
March,  ls.Vi.  During  the  civil  war  he  WM  an  ad-
vocate of  peace,  and  in  1868  was  a  delegate  to  the
peace  convention  lield  at  Frankfort.  Ky.

DIXON,  (ieorge,  British  navigator,  d.  about
1800.  He  discovered  .several  small  islands  near  the
northwest  coast  of  America,  and  a  strait  that  he
named  Dixon'fl  Kntrancc  lie  was  the  author  of
"Voyage  Round  the  World,  but  more  particularly
to  the  Northwest  Coast  of  America,  1785-'88''
(London,  1789);  "Voyage  of  Meares " (1790) ;  and
"The  Navigator's  Assistant"  (1791).

DIXON,  George  Washington,  comic  singer,  b.
about  1808;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  March,
1861.  He  first  appeared  in  1827  as  a  comedian,  in
small  parts,  at  the  amphitheatre  in  Albany,  N.  Y.
In  1830,  for  the  first  time  in  that  city,  ho  assumed
the  character  of  a  negro  minstrel,  with  the  accom-
paniment of  the  banjo.  Thence  he  went  to  New
York,  Philadelphia,  and  other  large  cities,  singing
his  famous  songs,  "The  Coal-Black  Rose"  and
"Zip  Coon,"  to  admiring  throngs. Dixon  may

i'ustly  be  termed  the  pioneer  of  negro  minstrelsy.
Jut  he  lacked  enterprise  and  industry:  his  BODga
were  without  character,  had  little  melody,  and  be-
came time-worn.  For  years  he  produced  noth-
ing new,  until  he  was  supplanted  by  novelty.  In
1839  he  published  in  New  York  a  weekly,  called
the  "  Polvanthos,"  and  for  a  libel  therein  on  Rev.
Dr.  Hawks  he  suffered  six  months'  imprisonment.
His  life  closed  in  a  charity  hospital.

DIXON,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Enfield,  Conn.,
5  Aug.,  1814;  d.  in  Hartford,  27  March,  1873.  He
was  graduated  at  Williams  with  distinction  in  1834,
studied  law  in  his  father's  office,  and  began  prac-
tice in  Enfield,  but  soon  rose  to  such  eminence  at

the  bar  that  he  re-
moved to  Hart-
ford, and  there
formed  a  partner-
ship with  Judge
William  W.  Ells-
worth. Earlv  com-
bining with  his'
legal  practice  an
active  interest  in
public  affairs,  he
was  elected  to  the
popular  branch  of
the  Connecticut
legislature  in  1837
and  1838,andagain
jy  in  1844. In  1840

CJ^_  )&n^~- ~  he  married  Eliza-
4^  t*-*«-~-  XnVa.  L.,  daughter

of  the  Rev.  Dr.
Jonathan  Cogswell,  professor  in  the  Connecticut
theological  institute.  Mr.  Dixon  at  an  early  date
had  become  the  recognized  leader  of  the  Whig
party  in  the  Hartford  congressional  district,  and
was  chosen  in  1845  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  house  of
representatives.  He  was  re-elected  in  1847,  and  was
distinguished  in  that  difficult  arena  alike  for  his
power  as  a  debater  and  for  an  amenity  of  bearing
that  extorted  the  respect  of  political  opponents  even
in  the  turbulent  times  following  the  Mexican  war,
and  the  exasperations  of  the  sectional  debate  pre-
cipitated by  the  "  Wilmot  Proviso."  Retiring
from  congress  in  1849,  he  was  in  that  year  elected
from  Hartford  to  a  seat  in  the  Connecticut  senate,
and,  having  been  re-elected  in  1854,  was  chosen
president  of  that  body,  but  declined  the  honor,  be-
cause the  floor  seemed  to  offer  a  better  field  for  use-
fulness. During  the  same  year  he  was  made  presi-
dent of  the  Whig  state  convention,  and,  having  now


reached  a  position  of  commanding  influence,  he  was
in 1857  elected  l*.  S.  senator,  and  participated  in

all  the  parliamentary  dabatea  of  me  epoch  that
preceded  the  civil  war.  He  was  remarkable  among
Ids  colleagues  in  the  senate  for  the  tenacity  with
which  he  adhered  to  Ids  political  principle^  arid  for'
the  clear  presage  with  which  he  grasped  the  drift  of
events.  Six  years  afterward,  in  the  midst  of  the  civil
war,  he  was  re-elected  senator  with  a  unanimity  that
had  had  no  precedent  in  the  annals  of  Connecticut.
During  his  service  in  the  senate  he  was  an  active
member  of  the  committee  on  manufacture-,  ami
during  his  last  term  was  at  one  time  appointed
chairman  of  three  important  committees.  While
making  his  residence  in  Washington  the  seat  of  an
elegant  hospitality,  he  was  remarkable  for  the  assi-
duity with  which  he  followed  the  public  business  of
the  senate,  and  for  the  eloquence  that  he  brought  to
the  discussion  of  grave  public  questions  as  they
successively  arose  before,  during,  and  after  tin  civil
war.  Among  his  more  notable  speeches  was  one
delivered  25  June,  1862,  on  the  constitutional  sta-
tus created  by  the  so-called  acts  of  secession — ■
speech  that  is  known  to  have  commanded  the  ex-
press admiration  of  President  Lincoln,  as  embody-
ing what  he  held  to  be  the  true  theory  of  the  war
in  the  light  of  the  constitution  and  of  public  law.
To  the  principles  expounded  in  that  speech  Mr.
Dixon  steadfastly  adhered  during  the  administra-
tion alike  of  President  Lincoln  and  of  his  succes-
sor. In  the  impeachment  trial  of  President  John-
son he  was  numbered  among  the  Republican  sena-
tors who  voted  against  the  sufficiency  of  the  arti-
cles, and  from  that  date  he  participated  no  longer
in  the  councils  of  the  Republican  party.  With-
drawing from  public  life  in  1869,  he  was  urged  by
the  president  of  the  United  States  and  by  his  col-
leagues in  the  senate  to  accept  the  mission  to
Russia,  but  refused  the  honor,  and,  without  re-
turning to  the  practice  of  his  profession,  found  oc-
cupation for  his  scholarly  mind  in  European  travel,
in  literary  studies,  and  in  the  society  of  congenial
friends.  From  his  early  youth  he  had  l>een  a  stu-
dent and  lover  of  the  world's  best  literature.  Re-
markable for  the  purity  of  his  literary  taste  and  for
the  abundance  of  his  intellectual  resources,  he
might  have  gained  distinction  as  a  prose  writer  and
as  a  poet  if  he  had  not  been  allured  to  the  more
exciting  fields  of  law  and  politics.  While  yet  a  stu-
dent at  college  he  was  the  recognized  poet  of  his
class,  and  even  his  graduation  thesis  was  written  in
verse.  His  poems,  struck  off  as  the  leisure  labors  of
a  busy  life,  occupy  a  conspicuous  place  in  Everest's
"  Poets  of  Connecticut,"  while  five  of  his  sonnets,
exquisite  for  refinement  of  thought  and  felicity  of
execution,  are  preserved  side  by  side  with  those  of
Bryant,  Percival,  and  Lowell  in  Leigh  Hunt's
"  Book  of  the  Sonnet."  He  was  also  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  "  New  England  Magazine  "  and  to  the
periodical  press.  Trinity  college  conferred  upon  him
in  1862  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  Deeply  imbued  with
classical  letters,  versed  in  the  principles  and  the
practice  of  law,  widely  read  in  history,  and  possess-
ing withal  a  logical  mind,  Mr.  Dixon  alwavs  pre-
ferred to  discuss  public  questions  in  the  light  of  a
permanent  political  philosophy,  instead  of  treating
them  with  paramount  reference  to  the  dominant
emotions  of  the  hour.
DIXON,  Jeremiah.  See  Mas<  \,  Cham
DIXON,  Joseph,  inventor,  b.  in  Marblehead,
Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1799:  d.  in  Jersey  City.  N.  .1..  17
June,  1869.  He  was  entirely  self-educated,  and
early  showed  unusual  mechanical  ingenuity,  in-
venting a  machine  for  cutting  files  before  he  was
twenty-one. Subsequently  he  became  a  printer,


DIXON


Im.AK


LOT


itn<l  then  aoouired  a  proficient  knowledge  of

engravim;  Bad  lithography. II**  also  studied  iik<Ii-

I  In  that  connection  obtained  an  intimate
enqraaintance  irithobeinietry,  which  be  applied  with

great  ability  in  hi-*  Inventions,  ilia  knowledge  of  op-
ties  was  unusual,  and  lie  had  DOaoperiof  in  familinri-

ty  with  photography'.  In  MM  ha  took  mtheexperi*

men t »of  ;i  ne  of  the  first  | m * r— . 1 1 -

ikr  jM>rt  ntit -.  by  the  camera.  The  application  of

a  reflector,  so  that  the  picture  rbflnM  not  appear
rscd.  is  credited  to  him,  ami  Samuel  P.  1*5.  Hone,

t<>  whom  he  confided  the  method,  endeavored  to  have

it  patented  in  Bnrope. Rebuilt  the  first  looomotiTe

wiih  thr<ioiiiiii- crank,  nring  wooden  wheels.  That
astcaiu-eugineeould  he  run  on  wheels  and  |>erform
t  ho  service*  of  n  carrier  was  considered  absurd.  Mr.
Dixon  originated  the  pnK'ess  of  transferring  <»n
■tone,  now  everywhere  used fov lithographers,  and

invented  the  proeeai  of  photo-Lithography,  pubHett-

ing  it  years  In-fore  it  was  In-lieved  to  he  of,  any
value,  "  By  his  process  of  transferrin';,  the  old
bank-notes  were  easily  counterfeited,  and  it  was  to
prevent  the  abuse  of  his  process  that  he  devised  the
method  of  printing  the  bills  in  colors.  He  patented
this  process,  but  never  received  any  benefit  from  it.
as  alt  the  banks  oaed  it  without  pay.  The  preaani
method  employed  by  the  l\  S.  government  for
printing  hi  colors,  for  which  a  large  sum  is  paid  to
patentees,  is  the  old  process  invented  by  Mr.  Dixon.
of  which  the  patent  had  long  since  expired.  He
perfected  the  method  of  Banking  collodion  as  need
in  photography,  and  his  suggestions  led  to  the
adoption  of  a  true  system  for  grinding  the  lensei
<>f  cainera-tuU's.  It  is  claimed  that  the  anti-friction
metal,  known  generally  tinder  the  name  of  "  Hah-
bitt  metal,*'  was  originally  discovered  bv  him.  He
is  the  originator  of  the  steel-melting  business  in
the  United  States.  Mr.  Dixon  became  most  widely
known  in  connection  with  the  crucible  works  that
bear  his  name,  having  invented  the  plumbago,  or
\  graphite,  crucible  as  now  made.  He  established  his
factory  in  Salem.  Mass..  in  1X27,  removing  it  to
Jersey  City  in  1847,  and,  with  improvements  and
additions,  i*  has  grown  into  the  largest  factory  of
its  kind  in  the  world.  The  crude  material  comes
largely  from  mines  near  Fort  Ticonderoga,  N.  Y.,
and  is  also  very  extensively  used  by  the  Joseph
Dixon  crucible  works  in  the  manufacture  of  lead-
pencils,  an  industry  that  has  been  developed  simul-
taneously with  the  production  of  crucibles.  Mr.
Dixon  invented  a  great  number  of  machines  and
processes,  never  failing  in  his  mechanical  under-
takings, and  l>ecame  very  wealthy.

DIXON,  Nathan  Fellows,  senator,  b.  in  Plain-
field,  Conn.,  in  1774;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.  88
Jan..  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  17!'!'.
studied  law,  and  in  lKlr2  settled  in  Rhode  Island.
Be  was  elected  a  member  of  the  general  assembly
of  that  state  in  1818,  and  served  in  that  cajmcitv
until  ls:50.  From  lHM  till  1S4-'  he  was  a  U.  S.
senator. — His  son.  Nathan  Fellows,  lawyer,  h.  in
Westerly.  R.  I..  1  May.  1818;  <1.  there.  11  April.
1881,  was  graduated  at  RfOWn  in  1NW,  attended
the  law-schools  at  New  Haven  and  Cambridge,  and

invariant!  his  profession  in  Connecticut  ami  Rhode
■land  from  is4<)  till  1848.  He  was  elected  tooon-
M  from  Rhode  Island  in  1K4!>.  and  was  one  of
tin-  governor's  council  appointed  Dt  the  general  as-
sembly during  the  Dorr  troubles  of  is f.\  In  1H-41
he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in  lHol  m
elected  as  a  Whig  to  the  general  assembly  of  hi«
stat.-.  where,  with  the  exception  of  two  years  he
held  office  until  1888. In  1888  he  want  to  congress

as  a  Republican,  and  served  as  a  ■ember  of  the  com-
mittee on  commerce. He  wasa  meml>er  of  the  :{ilth.


HMh.  and  »l«t  songr—ai, and  declined  re-election
mi  1870. lb-,  however,  resumed  his  nervier  m  tl„-
general  assembly.  Uing  elected  socceosiveh
1M7-J  till  is;

DIXON.  William  Henwnrttt,  Brttfefc  author,
b.  in  tL  line  of  Yorkshire,  :t"  June,  1881;

&  81  D  Though  he  had  few  ad*

ail  vantages,  he  early  display*
tiOM l>>  printing  a  fi I  tdy. He  1

early  oonCribntor  "f  rerae  to  I)  l<  rr<>bi's,  ••  ||.

luminal. d  Mngarine,n  and  abool  l-n
erarv  editor  of  a  paper  at  <  "heltenham. In  I
settled in London  as  a  law  student  at  thi
Temple,  and ln-jjan  contributing to  the "  DaQj

New-." in  1888  he  banaaM  antef  editor  of  the

"  Atheiiaum."  which  post  he  held  until  1888,  Hi-
treatment  of  American  mbjeots  and  American  su-
thors  in  this  journal.  US  well  as  in  his  hookaon
America,  was  considered  in  the  [Jutted  State*  un-
just and  Ineoneot, aithongh  hi  made  many  friends
in  his  visits  to  this  country.  In  \st;\  he  made  a
tour  of  the  Bast,  and  in  lwjit  10001  a  lev  months
in  travelling  and  leeturing  in  the  United  E
paying eapedn]  attention  to  Monaonhan  ami  s|,jr-

ituali-m. He revi»ited America in lH74-'5,  and

wrote  -White  Conquest"  (8  roan,  1878),  which

contained  some  useful  information  abool  t1
dition  of  the  negroes,  the  Indians,  and  the  Chines*.

in  America. He  published  "John  Howard.  ■  Me-
moir"  (London.  1848);  "Life  of  William iV-nn  "
(1851);  "The  Lives  of  the  Archbiehops  of  York  "
(1888);  "The  Holy  Land"  (8  rote-  IS
America  "(1807);  "Spiritual  Wivt  5  :  "  Her

Majesty*!  Tower"  (4  rolu,  i^;i*-'?l > :  -  Free  Rus-
sia (8 Tola.,  1870);  "The  Bwitsers*'  (1878);  "The
Historv  of  Two  Queens — Catherine  of  Aragon  and
Anne  Boleyn"  (4  vols.,  187tt-'4):  "Diana  Iiadr
Lvle"  (8  vols.,  1877);  "  Kubv  Grey"  (8  roan,
1878);  "Royal  Windsor'1  (1878);  and  a  work  on
Cyprus,  which  he  visited  in  I87lt

III  X  WELL.  JOHN,  regicide,  b.  prohablv  in
Polkstone,  Kent.  England,  in  IIK'7:  'I.  in  New
Haven.  Conn..  18  March.  1888.  It  appear!  that  he
was  a  man  of  estate,  and  was  deeoanded  from  a
family  long  prominent  in  Kent  and  Warwickshire.
In  the  revolution  of  1<>4<)  he  espoused  the  |*>pular
caose,  was  a  colonel  in  the  parliamentary  army,  a
member  of  four  parliaments,  thrice  In  the  council.
and  alaoone  of  the  court  that  tried  and  condemned
Charles  I.  After  the  Restoration  he  and  his  asso-
ciates were  Condemned  to  death,  but  Dixwell  es-
oaped  to  America.  He  changed  hi*  name  to  John
Davids,  and  lived  undiscovered  in  Ken  BttVan,
where  be  was  married  and  left  children.  In  1664
he  riaited  two  of  his  fellow-regicidea,  Whallev  and
Qoff,  who  had  found  a  refuge  at  Hadley,  "Mass.
I'p  to  the  time  of  his  death  he  cheriahed  a  bopl
that  the  spirit  of  lilwrt y  in  England  woultl  produce
a  new  revolution.  S-e  Stiles*!  "  History  of  Three
of  the  JodgM  of  Charles  I.— Whallev.  I
well"  (Hartford.  1794).

DOAK, Samiiid. clergyman, b. in A
count  v.  Va..  in AagUSt,  174!»:  d.  in Bethel,

1s::m.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1778.  became  tutor  in  Hampden  Sid:
stiulied  theologv  there,  and  was  licensed  to  i
bv  the  preebytan  of  Hanover  in  1777.  lb-  re-
uiovnl  to  the  Holston  settlement  (then  j»art  of
North  Carolina.  t>ut  now  a  j>art  of  east  Tennessee),
and  two  years  later  to  a  settlement  on  the  Little
Limestone,  in  Washington  county,  where  he  bought
a  farm,  budt  a  loj;  ssnnoHMMMI  and  a  small  church,
ami  founded  the  "Salem  Concrep»tion."  The
■ehool  he  established  at  this  place  was  the  first
that  WM organised  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi-


188


DOANE


DOANE


In  1785  it  was  incorporated  by  the  legislature  at
North  Carolina  m  Martin  academy,  and  in  1795  1k*-

came  Washington  college.  He  presided  owr  it
bom  the  time  of  its  incorporation  till  1818,  when
he  removed  to  Bethel  and  opened  a  private  school,
which  he  named  Tusculum  academy.  Mr.  Doak
was  a  member  of  the  convention  of  1784  that
formed  the  constitution  of  the  commonwealth  of
Frank  land.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Washington  and  Greenville  colleges
in  1818. — His  son,  Samuel,  was  president  of  Tus-
culum college,  Tennessee,  in  1857.

DOANE,  Augustus  Sidney,  physician, b.  in  Bos-
ton, 2  April,  1808:  d.  on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  27
Jan.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1825,
studied  medicine  for  two  years  in  Paris,  and  re-
turned to  Boston,  but  in  1830  settled  in  New  York,
where  he  became  a  successful  practitioner.  In
1839  he  was  appointed  professor  of  physiology  in
the  University  of  New  York,  which  chair  he  soon
resigned.  He  was  subsequently  appointed  chief
physician  of  the  Marine  hospital,  practised  again
from  1843  till  1850,  and  was  again  appointed  health
officer.  He  edited  "Good's  Study  of  Medicine,"
translated  Maygrier's  "  Midwifery,"  Dupuvtren's
"  Surgery,"  Lugol's  "  Scrofulous  Diseases,'5  Bay-
lis's  "  Descriptive  Anatomy,"  Blandin's  "  Topo-
graphical Anatomy,"  Ricord's  "  Syphilis,"  Chaus-
sier  on  "  The  Arteries,"  and  Scoutetten  on  "  Chol-
era." He  also  contributed  to  "Surgery  Illus-
trated," and  to  other  medical  publications.  See
"  Discourse  on  the  Death  of  Dr.  Doane,"  by  E.  H.
Chapin,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1852).

DOANE,  George  Washington,  P.E.  bishop,  b.
in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  27  May,  1799;  d.  27  April,  1859.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1818,  studied  the-
ology in  the  General  theological  seminary,  when,
as  he  used  to  say,  "  the  whole  seminary  was  accom-
modated in  a  seeond-story  room  over  a  saddler's
shop  down  town,"  and  ordained,  by  Bishop  Hobart,
deacon  in  1821  and  priest  in  1823.  He  was  associ-
ated with  the  bishop  as  his  deacon  and  assistant  in
Trinity  church,  New  York,  and  was  also  inter-
ested with  Bishop  Upfold  in  founding  St.  Luke's,

New  York.  In  1824
he  went  to  Hartford
as  professor  in  Wash-
ington (now  Trinity)
college,  and  during
his  residence  there
began  his  life-long
interest  and  active
energy  in  Christian
education  according
to  the  system  of  the
church.  He  gave  a
great  deal  of  time
then,  as  he  did  later,
to  work  in  connec-
tion with  the  church
newspapers,  edit-
ing the  "  Episco-
pal Watchman  "  in
connection  with  Dr.
William  Croswell,  who  was  his  most  congenial
and  beloved  friend.  In  1828  he  went  to  Boston  to
become  the  assistant  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Gardiner,  on
whose  death,  in  1830,  he  was  elected  rector  of
Trinity  church.  He  was  intimately  associated  here
with  Dr.  Croswell,  who  was  then  the  rector  of
Christ  church,  Boston.  In  1829  he  married  the
widow  of  James  Perkins.  He  made  his  mark  in
that  city  as  an  eloquent  and  persuasive  preacher,
especially  in  all  matters  connected  with  the  mis-
sionary work  of  the  church. In 1832  he was


elected  bishop  of  New  Jersey,  to  succeed  Bishop
Croes,  to  which  high  office  he  was  consecrate  1  In
October  of  the  same  year,  in  St.  Paul's  chapel.  New-
York.  His  life  from  this  time  was  largely  associ-
ated with  the  diocese  of  New  Jersey,  which,  during.
his  episcopate,  comprised  the  entire  state;  and
there  was  no  parish  in  it  with  which  lie  was  not
familiar,  and  hardly  a  parishioner  whom  be  did
not  know  and  in  whom  lie  did  not  feel  that  strong
personal  interest  which  grows  out  of  great-hearted
sympathy,  and  belongs  to  that  rare  trift  of  remem-
bering face's  and  names-and  individual  histories.
Hewas  prominent  in  everything  that  concerned  the
general  interest  of  the  institutions  of  the  church,
and  particularly  those  connected  with  its  growth.
He  had  a  large  part  in  framing  the  old  constitu-
tion of  the  Missionary  society,  whose  leading  prin-
ciples still  survive  through  various  changes  of
form.  His  conviction  of  the  great  importance  of
Christian  education,  and  his  influence  as  a  Chris-
tian educator,  led  him  to  found  St.  Mary's  hall,
which  was  really  the  first  effort  on  a  large  scale  to
educate  the  church's  girls  in  the  church's  way.
Subsequently  he  founded  Burlington  college,  to  do
the  same  work  for  boys.  The  former  was  the
more  successful  of  the  two,  and  its  great  spiritual
power,  both  in  the  lives  of  those  whom  it  educated
and  the  pattern  it  set.  can  hardly  be  overestimated.
The  establishment  of  these  schools  brought  him
into  serious  financial  embarrassments,  which  be-
came afterward  the  nominal  ground  not  only  for
criticism,  but  for  serious  accusations,  and  led  to
his  presentment  and  trial,  the  result  of  which
was  the  unanimous  dismissal  of  the  presentment.
Bishop  Doane's  reputation  as  an  orator  was  second
only  to  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  held  as  an
educator  and  preacher.  Many  of  his  addresses
deal  with  the  great  questions  of  the  day,  in  which,
as  a  staunch  American  and  true  patriot,  he  took
the  deepest  interest.  He  was  a  spirited  and  clever
conversationalist,  ready  always  to  "  give  a  reason
for  the  hope  that  was  in  him.''  especially  when  the
authority  of  the  church  was  impugned.  He  pub-
lished numerous  addresses,  and  a  volume  of  poems
with  the  title  "  Songs  by  the  Way "  (New  York,
1824).  His  son  edited  his  "Life  and  Writings,"
with  a  memoir  (4  vols.,  New  York,  1860-'l).  Among
the  best-known  of  his  fugitive  poems,  found  in
many  collections,  are  "  What  is  that,  Mother  t "
"  Softly  Now  the  Light  of  Day,"  and  "  Thou  art  the
Way." — His  son,  George  Hobart,  domestic  prelate,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1830.  He  was  graduat-
ed in  medicine  at  Jefferson  college,  Philadelphia,  in
1850. but  did  not  practise.  He  thenprepared  himself
for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
was  ordained  deacon,  and  stationed  at  Grace  church,
Newark.  He  entered  the  Roman  Catholic  church
in  1855,  was  educated  for  the  priesthood  in  the
college  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris,  and  afterward  in  the
Collegio  Pio,  Rome.  He  was  ordained  priot  in
1857,  made  secretary  to  Bishop  Baylev,  and  then
appointed  chancellor  of  the  diocese  of  Newark.  In
1873  he  became  vicar-general.  He  was  raised  to
the  rank  of  domestic  prelate  of  the  papal  house-
hold, with  the  title  of  monsignor,  in  1886.  He  did
much  to  place  the  American  college  in  Rome  on  a
solid  basis,  and  raised  large  sums  in  the  United
States  for  its  support. — Another  son,  William
Croswell,  b.  2  March,  1832,  was  ordained  deacon,
6  March,  1853,  and  priest,  6  March.  1856.  by  his
father,  in  St.  Mary's  church,  Burlington.  N.  .1..  in
which  church  he  was  first  assistant  to  his  father
and  then  rector.  He  established  St.  Barnabas  free
church  in  Burlington,  where  he  ministered  tor
three  years,  was  rector  of  St.  John's  church.  Hart-


180


;.  iui.I  thru r.-.-t..r  ..f  St.

r's  church,  Albany,  In  which  ohureh ba  wu

-t  bishop  of  the  new  diooaee  of  Albani

9, and  consecrated  on  9  Feb.,  186fJ.

He  baa  organized the  Cathedral  of  All  Saints,  in

Albany,  and  begun  tin-  erection  of  the  1  >n i l< !

baa  established  the  Sisterhood  of  the  Holy  Child

Jesus,  for  works  of  BMfOJ  and  ednoatfoa  in  the

chunh;  and  founded  St. Agues  school fur  girls,

and  the  Child's  hospital,  In  Albany,  with  afflHatri

bottaei for the  care  and  training  of  children in

Saratoga  and  Hast  Line.  Hia  pnblioations  bonatol
ehiaflj  of  addreaeea,  sermons,  and  fugitive  verses,  be-
tide* the  memoir  of  his  father  mentioned  above,  and

a  volume  called "Mosaics  for  the  Christian  Year."

DO  \  N  I".  Joseph,  loyalist,  of  Bucks  countv.  Pa,
Previous  to  the  Kevolution  he  was  regarded  as  a
reputable  man  of  good  estate,  but.  having  lx«en  har-
assed by  the  vhigs,  lie  and  his  seven  sons  threw  in
their  lot  with  the  tories.  He  was  in  Bedford  coun-
ty jail  in  September,  \"!M.  but  nothing  further  is
known  of  his  history.  Five  of  the  sons,  M>>-i  -.
JoSKI'll.  Israkl,  Abraham,  and  M I  it  t.ox.  were  men
of  fine  physique  and  address,  elegant  horsemen.
and  great  runners  and  leapafB.  Their  property
having  been  confiscated  and  sold,  they  detennineil
to  wage  predatory  war  upon  their  persecutors,  to
live  in  the  open  air,  and  exist  as  beat  they  could.
In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  they  became  the  terror
of  the  surrounding  country,  robbing  and  plundering
continually,  but  sparing  the  |>oor,  the  weak,  and
the  paaoefaL  They  also  acted  as  spies  for  the
British  army,  always  went  on  horseback,  sometimes
all  together,  at  other  times  separately,  and  with  ac-
complices. So  successful  were  they  in  escaping
when  arrested  or  assailed,  that  a  reward  of  «.:;ihi
was  offered  for  each  of  their  heads.  Finally.  M
after  a  desperate  fight,  was  shot  by  his  cantors,  and
Abraham  and  Mahlon  were  hanged  at  Philadelphia.
:>h,  before  the  Revolution,  was  a  teacher.
While  on  a  marauding  expedition  during  the  war,
he  was  badly  wounded,  and,  falling  from  his  horse.
was  captured.  He  was  imprisoned,  but  succeeded
in  escaping  to  New  Jersey,  where  he  taught  for  a
year  under  an  assumed  name.  Finally  he  fled  to
Canada,  and  returned  to  Pennsylvania,  a  few  vears
after  peace  had  been  declared,  a  poor,  broken-down
old  man.  The  only  mention  of  Israel  is  that  in
February,  1783,  he  was  in  jail,  and  that  his  appeal
to  the  council  of  Pennsylvania  to  be  released  was
dismissed.  Aaron,  who  was  under  sentence  of
death  at  Philadelphia  in  October,  1784.  was  par-
doned by  the  council  in  March.  17S5,  and  a  second
Aaron  was  reprieved  under  the  gallows,  at  Newark,
N.  J.,  in  Julv.  1THH.

DOANE,  William  Howard,  musical  composer,
b.  in  Preston.  Conn.,  8  Feb..  1881.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Woodstock  academy,  and  settled  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio.  Though  actively  engaged  in  busi-
ness, he  devotes  much  time  to  musical  study  and
work.  cs]M'cially  in  connection  with  Sunday-schools.
Dr.  Doane  is  very  active  and  liberal  in  the  promo-
tion of  Christian  enterprises.  In  1878  he  present. *d
Daniaon  university  with  Doane  hall,  a  Iibrarv  build-
ing costing  $  10,000.  His  works  include  "Sabbath-
School  Hems"  (1862);  "Little  Sunbeams"  (1864);
••Silver  Spray"  (1867);  and  "Songs  of  Devotion"

(18);  ami  several  others  in  connection  with  the

Sober)  Lowry. He  is  the  chief  editor  of  the

i.tist Hymnal"  (Neat York. 1888). h  ls7".

Daniaon  university.  Ohio,  conferred  upon  him  the

degree  of  Mus.  I

DOBBIN.  James  Cochrane,  statesman,  b.  in

etteville, N. ('.. in 1N14; d. there. 4 Aug..

He was  graduated  at the  Dntveteil


North  Carolina  in  1KJ-J,  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  Ur  in is:;;,,  Hnd  practised in K»j
He  m  ,,  North  Carolina  a»

moerat,  and nerved fr->m 1 l>.

184?. Ba  was  a  BMaabar  of  the  atata  lagla*

lature  in  I848-'o2.  and  chosen  speaker  in  IK'jO. He

■  member  of  the  Democratic  national  com
Hon  at Baltimore  in  1h.VJ.  and  Appointed  secretary
of  the  naw  bv  President Plena,  serving  from  7
March,  I8.M,  until  0  March,  |s

DOBBINS,  Daniel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mifflin

county. Pa..  .1  July, 1778: d.  at PreSUM UUO,  29

Feb., I8S6L He  Vlsite.l Hake Kric  with I
mrvayntl as early as 171MI, and was with Gen.
Wayne  at the time of  his  death. Ha  battHM I

resilient  then-,  and  was  noted  as  a  navigator  of  the
great  lakes.  When  Mackinaw  was  captured  by  the
British  in  \H\2.  he  was  present  with  his  vessel,  the
"Salina."  taken  prisoner,  and  lutroled.  He  was  a
second  time  made  prison. t  at  Detroit,  but  was  soon
j.aroli-d  unconditionally.  He  was  of  g,.
in  fitting  out  Perry's  fleet  on  Hake  Krie.  and  was
with  the  expedition  under  Coin.  Sinclair  that  at-
tempted to  recapture  Mackinaw.  After  the  war  he
was  in  command  of  the  "  Washington."  ami  in  her

conveyed  the  troops  to  Owen  bay,  she  being  the

first  vessel  that  entered  that  harUJr.  Having  l»een
ordered  to  sea  in  1888,  he,  in  preference  to  going,
resigned  his  commission  Us  captain  in  the  navy,
but  still  remained  in  the  employ  of  theg<n«ni-
ment,  and  President  Jackson  ap|>ointed  him  com-
mander of  a  revenue  cutter  in  1888;  He  retired
finally  from  the  service  iti  1848.

DO  BBS.  Arthur,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Ire-
land in  17K4:  d.  in  Town  Creek.  N.  C.  -,'s  March,
1765.  He  had  been  a  member  Of  the  Irish  parlia-
ment, and  was  known  for  his  attempt  to  dis<
the  northwest  passage.  He  became  governor  of
North  Carolina,  1  Nov..  17*>4.  and  retained  the
office  until  17t'>">.  He  adopted  conciliatory  meas-
ures toward  the  Indians,  but  his  administration
was  a  continued  contest  with  the  legislature.  His
zeal  in  behalf  of  the  royal  prerogative  was  thwarted
by  the  representatives  ,.f  the  j»eople,  who  did  not
hesitate  to  leave  the  government  expenses  unpro-
vided for  when  the  governor  instated  upon  unnnpn
lar  measures.  When  he  attempted  to  establish  the
Anglican  church,  they  were  ready  to  welcome  it,  so
lone;  as  their  own  vestries  wire  permitted  to  choose
their  minister!  :  and  when  he  wished  toooUect  quit-
rents  from  the  people,  who  ware  nearly  all  tenant*
of  the  king,  they  deferred,  from  time  to  time,  the
adjustment  of  the  rent-roll.  (Jov.  Dohbs  was  the
author  of  ••  Trade  and  Improvement  of  Ireland"
(Dublin.  17881;  "('apt.  Middleton's  Dafai
(1744);  and  "An  Account  of  the  Countries  Adjoin-
ing to  Hudson's  Bay" (London,  174*).

DOBI.VDO.  Manuel  (do-bkh'-do),  Mexican
statesman,  b.  in  (iuanajuato,  18  June.  1818;  d.  '2'2
April.  1864  He  studied  in  the  is. liege  of  San
Ignaoio  in  Guanajuato  and  that  of  San  lldefonso
of  the  citv  of  Mexico,  where  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1848,  and  joined  the  liUral  jiarty.  With
2ar00  and  Ignacio  Ramirez  In'  wrote  for  the  jour-
nal "  Kl  Sigio  XIX"  against  the  government  of
Santa  Anna,  for  which  M  suffered  bitter  pan

Hon. At tl ntrv  of  the  American  troojw  into

the  capital  in  September,  1*47.  ■•  Waa  taken  pris-
oner while  firing  from  a  roof  npefl  the  BVM
In  1886  he  ntinsi  to  (iuanajuato,  and  devoted  him-
self to  his  profeamon  till  1888,  whan  Bam  Juan
Alvarez  initiated  the  revolution  consequent  <>n  the
plan  of  Ayutla.  He  Joined  »t  Acapulco  tin-  head-
quarters  of  the  revolutionary  chief,  and  remained
with  him  us  privy  counsellor  until  the  triumph  of


190


DOBKI/.imiTKl;


Don


the  revolution  in  1855.  The  newly  elected  pn -i-
ient,  Oomonfort.  appointed  him  minister  of  ttttiga

affairs,  in  which  office  he  displayed  diplomatic
ability,  and  through  his  mediation  pome  difficul-
ties with  the  government  of  the  United  Stat--  Ml
■ranged  satisfactorily,  and  the  existing  govern-
ment, proclaimed  by  the  plan  of  Ayutla,  was  rec-
ognized by  France  and  Spain.  Toward  the  end  of
l$M  be  resigned  his  seat  in  the  cabinet,  as  he  had
been  elected  deputy  to  the  famous  congress  of
1857,  and  as  such  he  signed  the  constitution  of  that
year,  which  was  based  upon  that  of  the  Tinted
States  of  America.  When  Comonfort  in  1857  gave
himself  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  reactionary
or  church  party,  Doblado  was  one  of  the  first  to
suffer  persecution ;  but  with  Juarez  and  Lerdo  de
Cejada,  of  the  liberal  group,  he  worked  incessantly
to  re-establish  the  constitution  of  1857,  and  was
one  of  the  deputies  that  proposed  the  famous  re-
form laws,  which  comprised  the  confiscation  of
church  property,  suppression  of  religious  orders,
civil  marriage,  and  other  republican  principles.
Alter  the  victory  of  the  liberal  party  in  the  battle
of  Calpulalpan/Doblado  was  elected  governor  of
Guanajuato  in  1859,  and  occupied  this  place  until
the  difficulties  between  Mexico  and  Spain,  England,
and  France  arose,  which  led  to  the  tripartite  in-
tervention, when  he  hastened  to  offer  his  services
to  President  Juarez.  After  the  landing  of  the  al-
lied forces  at  Vera  Cruz,  8  nee,  1861,  Juarez  ap-
pointed noblado  and  invested  him  with  extraordi-
nary powers  to  meet  the  commanders,  and  try  to
arrange  the  existing  differences.  At  Soledad,  nob-
lado encountered  the  advance-guard  of  the  allied
army  and  arranged  a  treaty  that  led  to  the  evacua-
tion of  Mexico  by  the  English  and  Spanish  forces
in  April,  1862.  After  the  declaration  of  war  by
Napoleon  III.,  and  the  invasion  of  the  capital  of
Mexico  by  the  French  forces  in  186.3,  noblado  fol-
lowed Juarez  and  the  cabinet  to  the  interior,  and
fell  a  victim  to  malignant  fever.

DOBRIZHOFFER,  Martin,  missionary,  b.  in
Gratz,  Styria,  in  1717;  d.  in  Vienna  in  1791.  He
went  as  a  missionary  to  South  America  in  1749,
and  was  engaged  in  converting  the  Indians  that
dwelt  on  the  west  bank  of  Paraguay  river  and  in
the  interior  of  Paraguay.  After  the  expulsion  of
the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish  colonies  he  returned
to  Austria  and  became  a  favorite  of  Maria  Theresa.
He  wrote  a  history  of  the  Abipones  in  Latin :  "  His-
toria  de  Abiponibus  equestri,  bellicosaque  Paragua-
rial  natione"  (3  vols.,  Vienna,  1783-'6;  German
translation,  Pesth,  1784;  English  translation,  by
Sara  Coleridge,  London,  1822).

DOCAMPO,  Rod  rigo  (do-cam '-po),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  at  Zamora,  Spain,  near  the  close  of  the  15th
century;  d.  in  Tomebamba,  Ecuador,  in  1545.  He
went  with  Pizarro's  expedition  to  Peru  in  1531,
took  part  in  the  conquest  of  that  kingdom,  and  in
1533,  being  in  command  of  a  division  of  the  army
under  Benalcazar,  fought  in  the  plains  of  Riobam-
ba,  Ecuador,  several  battles  against  the  Indian
chief  Iiuminabi,  whom  at  last  he  defeated  decisive-
ly, and  thereby  secured  the  conquest  of  Quito.  In
1534  he  was  ordered  by  Benalcazar  to  leave  Quito
at  the  head  of  a  small  army  for  the  noTth  of  Ecua-
dor, and  explored  and  conquered  a  vas^  territory,
after  terrible  hardships  ana  numerous  battles  with
the  Indians.  For  this  service  he  was  made  lieuten-
ant-governor of  the  town  of  San  Juan  de  Pasto  in
1539.  After  Pizarro's  death  in  1541,  Bocampo
supported  the  new  viceroy,  Cristobal  Vaca  de  Cas-
tro, was  appointed  captain  of  Castro's  body-guard,
and,  as  royal  standard-bearer,  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Chupas,  1542,  against  Diego  Almagro  the


younger.  In  recompense  he  was  appointed  vice-
governor  of  Quito,  and  was  also  authorized  to
undertake  the  conquest  of  the  Stimaoo  and  Ma-
cas  provinces.  Winn  Doosmpo  was  informed  thai
Castro's  successor,  the  Viceroy  Blasco  Nufiez  Vela^
who  had  lx»en  imprisoned  by  order  of  the  supreme
court,  had  been  liberated  by  his  custodian.  Judge
Juan  Alvarez,  and  had  debarked  at  Tumbes,  he
with  his  followers  hastened  to  the  coast  and  gave
him  every  assistance  (1544).  The  viceroy  rewarded
him  with  the  appointment  of  marshal,  and  gave
him  the  rich  commandery  of  Tomebamba.  But
these  dignities  and  grants  appeared  to  Bocampo  in-
sufficient for  his  merits,  and  he  put  himseli  into
secret  correspondence  with  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  who
gave  him  written  orders  to  imprison  and  kill  the
viceroy  and  the  judge,  Alvarez.  During  the  retreat
after  the  battle  of  Popayan,  Docampo  committed
designedly  so  many  blunders  that  Blasco  Nufiez,
convinced  of  his  treachery,  ordained  his  execution
in  his  own  commandery  of  Tomebamba.

DOCKER Y,  Oliver  HM  congressman,  b.  in  Rich-
mond county,  N.  C,  12  Aug.,  1830.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Isorth  Carolina  in  1848,
and  studied  law,  but  never  practised.  He  repre-
sented his  native  county  in  tne  state  legislature  in
1858-'9,  and  was  candidate  for  district  elector  on
the  Union  ticket,  Bell  and  Everett,  in  1860.  He
was  for  a  short  time  in  the  Confederate  service,
but  soon  withdrew,  and  ever  afterward  was  an  out-
spoken advocate  of  the  re-establishment  of  the
Lnion,  and  was  active  in  the  peace  movement  of
1864  in  his  state,  Under  Gov.  Holden.  He  was
elected  a  representative  from  North  Carolina  in
congress  from  13  July,  1868,  till  3  March,  1871,  and
was  re-elected  as  a  Republican.

DOD,  Thaddeus,  clergyman,  b.  near  Newark,
N.  J.,  7  March,  1740 ;  d.  in  Cross  Creek,  Pa.,  20  May,
1793.  Hisearly  days  were  passed  in  Mendham,  N.  J.
By  alternate  teaching  and  studying,  he  fitted  him-
self for  college,  and  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1773.  He  studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach
by  the  New  York  presbytery  in  1775,  and  held  pas-
toral charges  in  Virginia  and  Maryland,  lie
crossed  the  mountains  westward  about  1773,  when
there  had  been  for  several  years  peace  with  the  In-
dian tribes,  but,  in  consequence  of  a  fresh  outbreak
in  1774,  his  colony  were  driven  back,  and  took  ref-
uge in  an  old  fort  near  Monongahela  river,  where
they  found  it  necessary  to  build  forts,  and  to  live
in  them  part  of  the  time.  He  returned  to  New-
Jersey  in  1777,  and,  with  a  view  to  preaching  in  the
distant  west,  was  ordained  by  the  New  York  pres-
bytery. After  living  at  Patterson's  Creek,  in  Vir-
ginia, for  nearly  two  years,  he  removed  across  the
mountains  in  September,  1779,  organizing  a  church
in  1781.  Mr.  Dod  was  the  second  minister  that
settled  west  of  the  Monongahela  (Dr.  McMillan
only  having  preceded  him),  and  he  took  a  position
farther  westward  on  the  frontier  than  any  other,
where,  in  1783,  the  first  administration  of  the
Lord's  supper  in  that  region  took  place  in  a  barn.
The  first  house  of  worship  was  erected  two  years
later,  and  the  second  not  till  1792.  Mr.  Dod  had
an  exquisite  taste  for  music,  was  acquainted  with
it  as  a  science,  and  caused  special  attention  to  be
given  to  this  part  of  the  service,  delivering  ser-
mons on  the  importance  of  sacred  music.  He  in-
troduced the  custom  of  singing  without  reading
the  line.  He  taught  in  a  classical  and  mathe-
matical school  in  1782,  of  which  he  was  founder
and  builder,  and  it  was  the  first  school  of  its
kind  in  the  west  and  was  in  operation  for  about
three  years  and  a  half.  As  the  result  of  his  enter-
prise, "with  the  co-operation  of  McMillan,  Power,


l»M|ll»


Ix.hlMMIKJK


191


and  Smith,  mi  academy  was  established  at  Wash-
tagton,  Pa.,  in  17*7.  wbioh  be  conducted  one  year,

iiik'  it with  about thirty  students,  and

Hatting  his  preaching  at  the  same  time. Ho  was

in.t  i-nlv  tin-  HrM  president,  and  mm  of  the  found*

I Ittington  OoUegO, I'ii..  hut  founder  of  the

IbM preshvtery  west  of t In-  Alleghany  mountains.

— His  nephew,  Daniel,  mechanician,  l>.  in Vir-
irinia.  88  Bent,  1786;  d.  in  New  York  <  ity.  !•  May.
•.  wa^  educated  at Rutgers,  and  beosjne  dis-
tinguished f<»r his mathematical  acquirements.

BOWBS  especially  devoted  t(»  the  construction  of
steam  machinery,  beginning  when  steam  naviga-
tion was  in  its  infancy,  and  s,M(u  In-came  one  of
the  most  siicccssfid  engine-builders  in  the  country.
In  1*11  he  declined  an  appointment  in  Rutgers
college  as  professor  of  mat  hematics,  in  order  to  de-
vote himself  to  this  business.  His  mechanical  con-
structions were  different  from  former  ones.  and.
having  proved  superior  to  all  others,  were  geiier-
ally  adopted.  In  1819  the  "Savannah."  with  an
engine  of  his  building,  made  the  first  steam-ship
voyage  across  the  Atlantic,  and  returned  in  safety
after  visiting  Kngland  and  K u — ia.  Mr.  Dod  re-
■OVed,  in  [881,  to  New  York  city,  where  he  was
reputed  the  most  successful  engine-builder  in  the
United  States.  In  1N2:1,  having  altered  the  ma-
chinery of  a  steamboat,  he  went  on  board  to  wit-
ness the  effect  of  his  repair  by  a  trial  trip  on  the
■ml  river.  The  boiler  exploded,  and  so  severely
injured  Mr.  Dod  that  he  died  a  few  days  there-
after.— His  second  son.  Albert  Baldwin,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Mendham.  N.  J..  24  March.  1H0.-) ;  d.  in
Princeton.  20  Nov.,  184.'),  was  like  his  father,  not
only  in  mathematical  taste,  but  in  the  versatility
of  his  genius.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1888  and  was  at  once  offered  a  place  in  the  navy
by  the  secretary,  who  witnessed  his  graduation,
but  declined  it.  He  taught  four  years  in  Freder-
icksburg, Va..  and  in  ls2li  entered  the  Theological
seminary  at  Princeton  as  a  student:  at  the  Mine
time  was  a  tutor  in  the  college  till  1829,  when  he
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  New  York  presby-
tery. He  became  professor  of  mathematics  at
Princeton  in  18530,  which  chair  he  held  until  t lu-
time  of  his  death,  declining  the  chaplaincy  and
rrofessorshin  of  moral  philosophy  at  West  Point,
le  possessed  a  taste  for  general  literature  and  the
fine  arts,  and  a  power  of  analysis,  logical  deduc-
tion, and  lucid  statement,  to  which  was  due  the
Ugh  degree  of  success  he  attained  as  a  teacher.
Be  frequently  supplied  pulpits  in  New  York  and
Philadelphia,  and  was  regarded  as  an  eloquent
preacher  and  a  learned  lecturer  on  political  econo-
my and  architecture.  The  degree  of  I).  I),  was
conferred  upon  him  by  the  University  of  North
Carolina  in  1844.  and  by  the  University  of  New
York  in  lS4.r».  His  articles,  contributed  mainly  to
the  "  Princeton  Review."  have  l>een  published  in
book-form  under  the  title  of  "  Princeton  Theologi-
cal Bmoti  "  ( New  York,  1847).  The  one  on  ••  ( Sep-
ital  Punishment"  (1H42)  was  adopted  by  a  com-
mittee of  the  New  York  legislature  m  their  report.
His  article  on  "Transcendentalism  "  was  reprinted
as  a  pamphlet.

DODI),  Edward  Mills,  missionary,  b.  in  IJloom-
tield.  N.  .1..  88  June,  1884;  d.  in  Manoran,  Turkey,
in  the  autumn  of  1888.  After  receiving  a  coin-
mon-s4-hool  education,  he  l>ecame  a  clerk  in  his  na-
tive pnM  in  1X{<». He  was  (-.inverted,  ami  resolved

npon  entering  the  Presbyterian  ministry.  With
this  in  \jew  be  httgan  a  preparatory  course  of
study,  and  in  1K44  was  graduated  at  Princeton.
After  devoting  one  year  to  private  teaching  in
Virginia,  and  spending  three  years  in  the  Union


theolog  .ry  of  New  York  as  a  student,

he  was  licensed  to  preach  l-v  the  Newest  preaby-

od  ordained  in  Iti  died  fn.m  ltoston

for Smyrna  in 1848, MpMOSntteg  the American

Ixmnl  on  a  mission to  the  .leu*  at  Sali
cause  of  the  failure  of  his  health  three  years  1 .
in-  returned  to  the  United  states,  baton  bhi  re-

<"\>  rv  again  Beflod  for  Smyrna,  ami  from  ScptoM-
Iht.  1855,  continued  his  Inborn  among  the  Arme-
nians for  eight  years.  With  special  reference  to
the  mission-school  for  girls,  he  was  transferred
from  Smyrna  t<>  MetBOTML lis  organization  was

delayed  till  the  snnunerof  im»."».  and  eiMnelifle
Mr.  Dodd  wiper  flood  its  eonetruotion,  and  acl

shared  the  missionary  work  of  that  vicinity,
sudden  death  by  cholera  <M<urred  two  nMNttMOaftM

the  opening ol  the  MhooL The Tufcieh end  lb

brew  longUM  were  familiar  to  him,  and  he  had
contributed  largely  to  the  Turkish  hjlllll  I  Mint

IM)DD.  .lames  H.,  mathematician.  I».  in  Vir-
ginia in  1807;  (i.  in  Hieenobttrg,  Ky..  J7  March.
1H72.  He  was  chosen  professor  of 'mat hems
natural  philosophy,  ami  astroUOUiy  in  Pllrtsnnrj
college.  Mississippi,  in  1M41.  and  in  Transvlwmia
university  in  1840,  of  which  institution  he  was
aoting-preeidenl  from  ls4!i  till  1M.V>.  He  was  au-
thor of  arithmetics  (New  York.  1-  bras
(1858),  and  a  geometry,  and  contributed  to  the
••  Southern  Quarterly  Review."

DODD,  Mary  Ann  llauiner.  poet,  b.  in  Hart-
ford. Conn..  •">  March.  1818  She  attended  eohool
in  Wethersfiild.  and  in  her  native  town,  where  she
was  graduated  in  1880  at  Mrs.  Kinnear's  MttU%
nary.  Her  first  published  articles  appeared  in
in  the  "  Hermetheiiean,"  a  magazine  conducted  by
the  students  of  Washington  (now  Trinity)  college,
Hartford.  She  wrote  but  little  until  f83,r>,  after
that  becoming  a  frequent  contributor  to  "The
Ladies'  Repository"  and  "The  Bom  of  Sharon."
an  annual  in  which  the  greater  part  of  bar  writing!

appeared.  Among  her  U-st  poems  were  "The  I-a-
ment."  "The  Dreamer,"  "The  Mourner,"  and  "To
a  Cricket."  A  volume  of  DOT  poemi  was  published
in  Boston  in  1S4:{.

1)01)1).  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bloomfleld,
N.  J.,  8  March,  1777;  d.  in  Morristown.  N.  .1..  5
Pel).,  1858.  He  was  educated  at  Union  Ool
and  WM  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  at  Cannel.
N.  Y.,  and  Watcrbury  alid  Best  Haven,  CotUU,  ffOM
1817  till  1*47.  He  was  a  founder  and  trustee  of  the
Connection!  theological  institution  at  East  Wind-
sor, and  gave  it  his  valuable  library.  He  published
a  "History  of  Best  Haven"  (New  Haven,  lv
"Family  Record  <»f  Daniel  L)oddM  (1888);  and
■•  Bevolutionary  Memorinle''(New  York,  Ifi

DODDKIIM'F..  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Penn-
■ylvanie  in  I788j  d.  in  wellsburg,  Brooke  on*  Va*,
in  November,  1888  He  ewe  educated  at  Jefferson
academy.  Canonsburg. Pa., ami ordained  in  the

Protestant  Bpiooopal  church  by  Bhthop  White  in

17!<2. He  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  western  Yir-

ginia,  and published "  l^>gan."  a  dramatic piece

I),  and  "Notes  on  the  Settlement  and  Indian

Wars  of  the  WeMern  Country  in  1788- W  (lfi

— His  brother.  Philip,  lawyer,  b.  in  I  led  ford
county.  I'a..  in  1772:  d.  in  Washington.  I>.  ('..  l'.i
Nov..  1888  After  •  Voyage  down  the  Mississippi
OB  a  flat-Unit,  he  studied  law.  and  gained  a  brill-
iant reputation.  He  was  a  delegate  from  llrooke
county  to  the  Virginia  legislature  in  1815,  and
for  several  years  a  memlier  of  that  body.  He
aNo  served  in  the  state  constitutional  convention
Ol  1880  "80,  and  was  an  earnest  advocate  linn- of
the  while  Iwi-is  of  representation. He  was  el.

to  congress,  and  served  from  7  I>ec..  1888,  till  his


192


DO  DESTEREO


DODGE


death,  while  ho  was  acting  on  a  committee  to  codif y
the  laws  <>f  the  District  of  ( \>ltmil>ia.

DO  DESTERRO,  Antonio  Keimas  (do-des-
ter'-ro),  Brazilian  prelate,  b.  in  Vianna  da  Lima,
Portugal,  13  July,  1094;  d.  in  Rio  do  Janeiro,  5
Dec,  1??:>.  lie  entered  the  order  of  St.  Benedict
distinguished  himself  as  a  teacher  and  orator,  and
became  liishopof  Angola,  from  which  see  he  passed
to  Bio  de  Janeiro,  nominated  archbishop  of  that
diocese  by  the  king,  and  confirmed  by  the  pope,  18
Jan.,  1745.  Do  Desterro  made  his  entry  into  Rio
de  Janeiro,  1  Jan.,  1747.  He  was  the  first  that  tried
to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  slaves,  and  pro-
hibited their  burial  outside  of  the  cemeteries.  He
founded  schools,  built  churches,  and  contributed
to  the  improvement  of  the  country.

DODGE,  David  Low,  merchant,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
Conn.,  14  June,  1774;  d.  in  New  York  city,  23
April,  1852.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, and  was  for  several  years  a  teacher,  but
in  1802  became  a  dry-goods  dealer  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  in  1807  removed  to  New  York  city.
At  one  time  Mr.  Dodge  had  charge  of  the  first  cot-
ton factory  built  in  his  native  state,  near  Norwich.
In  1827  he  retired  from  business.  He  aided  in  es-
tablishing the  New  York  peace  society  in  1815,
being  its  first  president,  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  New  York  Bible  society,  and  of  the  New
York  tract  society.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of
the  Rev.  Aaron  Cleveland.  He  published  "  The
Mediator's  Kingdom  not  of  this  World"  (New
York,  1809),  and  "  War  inconsistent  with  the
Religion  of  Jesus  Christ"  (1812).  See  "Memo-
rial of  David  Low  Dodge"  (Boston,  1854).— His
son,  William  Earl,  merchant,  b. in  Hartford,

Conn.,  4  Sept.,
1805 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  9  Feb.,
1883,  received  a
common  -  school
education,  and
worked  for  a  time
in  his  father's
cotton  mill.  At
the  age  of  thir-
teen he  removed
to  New  York  city
with  his  fam-
ily, and  entered
a  wholesale  dry-
goods  store,  re-
maining there
eight  years.  Af-
terward he  en-
gaged in  the
same  business  on
his  own  account,
continuing  till
1833,  when  he  married  the  daughter  of  Anson
G.  Phelps,  and  became  a  member  of  the  firm  of
Phelps,  Dodge  &  Co.  He  continued  at  the  head
of  this  house  till  1879.  Mr.  Dodge  was  one  of
the  first  directors  of  the  Erie  railjoad,  and  was
interested  in  other  railways  and  In  several  in-
surance corporations.  He  also  own^d  large  dis-
tricts of  woodland,  and  had  numerous  lumber  and
mill  interests,  besides  being  concerned  in  the  devel-
opment of  coal  and  iron  mines.  He  Was  elected
president  of  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce
three  times  in  succession.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the
Union  theological  seminary,  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Union  league  club  of  New  York  city,  vice-
president  of  the  American  Bible  society,  president
of  several  temperance  associations,  and  took  great
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  freedmen. He  was  a


'^^-^6U^D


member  of  the  peace  convention  of  1861,  end  ■
1886V?,  baring  successfully  contested  the  election
of  his  Democratic  opponent,  Janice  Brooks,  was  a
representative  in  UMUjjfH,  serving  on  the  commit-
tee on  foreign  affair^.  President  Grant  appointed
him  a  member  of  the  Indian  commission.  He  left
a  large  fortune,  and  made  several  bequests  to  re-
ligious and  charitable  institutions.  A  bronze  si, it  tie
of  him  has  !>een  placed  at  the  junction  of  Broad-
way and  Sixth  Avenue,  New  York  city. — His  son,
William  Earl,  b.  in  New  York  city,  15  Feb.,
1889,  lias  given  his  time  and  attention  to  the  ad-
ministration of  an  extensive  mercantile  business.
He  has  been  connected  with  the  allotment  and
sanitary  commissions  during  the  civil  war,  and  is
now  (1887)  president  of  several  religious  and  be-
nevolent societies. — Another  son,  Charles  Cleve-
land, soldier,  b.  in  Plainfield,  N.  J.,  16  Sept.,  1841,
was  commissioned  as  captain  of  New  York  mounted
rifles  on  6  Dec,  1861,  and  as  major  on  30  Dec.,  was
in  command  of  the  outposts  at  Newport  News,  and
a  cavalry  column  of  Gen.  Wool's  army  that  marched
on  Norfolk,  and  received  the  surrender  before  the
arrival  of  his  superiors.  He  commanded  in  suc-
cessful engagements  at  Suffolk,  Va.,  and  Hert  ford
Ford,  N.  C.,  was  made  colonel  14  Aug.,  1862.  pro-
moted brigadier-general  29  Nov.,  1862,  was  in  com-
mand at  Suffolk  during  Longstreet's  siege,  and
resigned  on  12  June,  1863. — Grace  Hoadley,
daughter  of  the  second  William  Earl,  has  been  for
some  time  officially  connected  with  New  York  city
charities,  and  other  organizations  for  the  relief  of
the  poor  and  the  care  of  needy  women.  In  No-
vember, 1886,  she  was  appointed  by  the  mayor  of
New  York  city  one  of  the  board  of  school  commis-
sioners, together  with  Mrs.  Mary  Nash  Agnew,  wife
of  Dr.  Cornelius  R.  Agnew.  Miss  Dodge  has  been
a  prominent  member  of  the  New  York  state  char-
ities association,  and  is  president  of  the  Working-
girls'  society,  and  vice-president  of  the  Industrial
education  association.

DODGE,  Ehenezer,  educator,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
22  April,  1819  ;  d.  in  Hamilton.  N.  Y.,  4  Jan..  18801
He  was  graduated  at  Newton  theological  seminary.
After  a  pastorate  of  seven  vears  in  the  Baptist
church  in  New  London,  N.  H.,  he  was  called  in
1853  to  the  professorship  of  Biblical  criticism  in
Hamilton  theological  seminary,  filling,  at  the  same
time,  the  professorship  of  evidences  of  Christianity
in  Madison  university.  In  1861  he  became  profes-
sor of  Christian  theology  in  the  seminary.  In  1868
he  was  made  president  of  Madison  university,  and
also  of  Hamilton  theological  seminary.  Besides
reviews  contributed  to  various  periodicals,  he  is
the  author  of  "Christian  Evidences"  (Boston,
1868),  and  '•  Theological  Lectures  "  (1883).

DODGE,  Grenville  Mellen,  soldier,  b.  in
Danvers,  Mass.,  12  April,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Capt.  Partridge's  military  academy,  Norwich,
Vt.,  in  1850,  and  in  1851  removed  to  Illinois,  where
he  was  engaged  in  railroad  surveys  until  1854.  He
was  afterward  similarly  employed  in  Iowa  and  as
far  west  as  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  made  one  of
the  earliest  surveys  along  the  Platte  for  a  Pacific
railroad.  He  was  sent  to  Washington  in  1861  by
the  governor  of  Iowa  to  procure  arms  and  equip-
ments for  the  state  troops,  and  on  17  June  booasM
colonel  of  the  4th  Iowa  regiment,  which  he  had
raised,  having  declined  a  captaincy  in  the  regular
army  tendered  him  by  the  secretary  of  war.  He
served  in  Missouri  under  Fremont,  commanded  a
brigade  in  the  army  of  the  southwest,  and  a  por-
tion of  his  command  took  Springfield  13  Feb.,
1862,  opening  Gen.  Curtis's  Arkansas  campaign  of
that  year. He  commanded  a  brigade  on  the  ex-


DODOE


IMMMJK


m


'it  in  tin-  battle  of  i'l-a  Kidgc.  where  t
horses  were  shot  under  him,  ami,  tbougfa
wi.umitii  in  tin'  M.I.-.  kept  the  field  till  the  final
r» >ut  of  tin-  I'tii'inv. F.t  his  gallantry  on  tli:

a  lie  fsj  BUM  brigadier-general  <>f  rolunl
on  81  March,  1*62.  In  JtUM  of  tluit  year  M  t.M.k
cniiiiiianil  of  tin  lUatrid  of  the  Mississippi, and  su-
|H-rintftiilril  the  BOMl ruction  of  the  MIssfmlpjH'  ami
Ohio  railroad.  Gen.  Dodge  WM  one  of  the  lirM  to
organize  colored  regiments. During  the  Vicksburg

paign,  with  beadquarteri  at  Corirtth,  he  made
fre<iuent  raids,  and  indirectly  protested  the  flanks

of  tHith  Grant  and  Kosecrans,  U'ing  afterwanl
placed  by  (Jrant  at  the  head  of  his  list  of  officers
for  promotion.  Be  distinguished  himself  at  Sugar
Valley,!*  May.  1864,  and  Rsaaj»,  14  and  10  Ma\.
and for his services in these two battles was

Smtnoted  to  major-general  of  volunteers  on  7
une.  1864  He  led  the  16th  corps  in  Sherman-
Georgia  campaign,  distinguished  himself  at  At-
lanta on  22  July,  when-,  with  eleven  regiments,  he
withstood  a  whole  army  corps,  and  at  the  siege  of
that  city,  OB  11»  Aug,,  was  severely  wounded  and
incapacitated  for  active  service  for  some  time.  In
December,  1804,  he  succeeded  (Jen.  Kosecrans.  in
the  command  of  the  department  of  Missouri.  That
of  Kansas  and  the  territories  was  added  in  Febru-
ary, 1805,  and  he  carried  on  in  that  year  a  success-
ful camimign  against  hostile  Indians.  In  1806  he
resigned  from  the  army  to  become  chief  engineer
of  the  Fnion  Pacific  railroad,  which  was  built
under  his  su|>ervision.  He  resigned  in  1869  to
accept  a  similar  place  in  the  Texas  Pacific  railroad,
and  since  then  has  been  constantly  employed  in
building  railroads  in  the  United  States  and  Mexi-
co. He  has  been  for  many  years  a  director  of  the
Union  Pacific  railroad.  Gen.  Dodge  was  elected
to  congress  from  Iowa  as  a  Republican  during  his
absence  from  the  state,  and  served  one  term  in
1867-'9,  declining  a  re-nomination.  He  was  also
a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  republican  convention
of  1868  and  the  Cincinnati  convention  of  l*7f>.

DOlMiK.  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Vincennes.  Iml..
12  Oct.  ITS,';  d.  in  Burlington,  Iowa,  19  June,
1867.  His  father,  Israel  Dodge,  was  a  revolution-
ary officer  of  Connecticut.  Henry  commanded  a
mounted  company  of  volunteer  riflemen  in  August
and  September,  1812.  became  major  of  .Louisiana
militia  under  Gen.  Howard  on  28  Sept.,  major  in
McXair's  regiment  of  Missouri  militia  in  April.
1813,  and  commanded  a  battalion  of  Missouri
mounted  infantry,  as  lieutenant-colonel,  from  Au-
gust till  October,  1814.  He  was  colonel  of  Michi-
gan volunteers  from  April  till  July,  1888,  during
the  Black  Hawk  war,  and  in  the  affair  with  the
Indians  at  Pickatolika,  on  Wisconsin  river.  15
June,  totally  defeating  them.  He  was  commis-
sioned major  of  l\  S.  rangers.  81  June,  1832,  and
became  the  first  colonel  of  the  1st  dragoons,  4
March,  1833.  He  was  successful  in  making  peace
with  the  frontier  Indians  in  1H;{4.  ami  in  1835
commanded  an  important  expedition  to  the  Kocky
mountains.  (Jen.  Dodge  was  unsurpassed  as  an
Indian  lighter,  and  a  sword,  with  the  thanks  of  the
nation,  was  voted  him  by  congress.  He  resigned
from  the  army.  4  July.  1  m;{»>.  having  been  appointed
by  President  J ackson  governor  of  Wisconsin  terri-
tory and  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs.  Hi-
held  this  otTu-e  till  1*41.  when  he  was  elected  dele-
gate to  congress  as  a  democrat,  and  served  two
is,  In  1840  he  was  again  made  governor  <>f
onsin,  and  after  the  admission  of  that  state  to
the  Fnion  WM  one  of  it-  lir-t  ktOOL lb-

was  re-elected. and  served  altogether  from 98  June,
1848,  till 8 March. I867<— His son, Augustus

VOL. II. — 18


Ca»*ar,  »cuator.  b.  in  St  Genevieve.  Mo..  2  Jan.,

I.  in Hurlington.  I...
cei\ed  a  publio-echool  education,  and  nerved  under
his  father  in  the  Win:  ,i„l  the

Blank  Hawk  war  of 1882. He  removed  I
Ungton,  Iowa,  was  register  of  the  Ian..
in  183H-'J»,  and  was  then  elected  n

greas  as  a  democrat  from  tin-  i.

Mrvrngfron  1840 till  1847. Upon  the' admission

i  t<>  the  Fnion he beOslM one  of ;•

senators,  and  served  from  i*4»<  till  hi-*  resign

N Feb.. 1S.V., big father lielllg 1" 'he BSfltX

Wisconsin  during  the  same  period.  1 1  •  -  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in 1*4M,  F.  S.  minister  to  Spain  m

>,  his  appointment  to  till  the  mission  i
by  the  accomplished  linguist,  Pierre  Soule,  eliciting

from  Horace  Greeley  the  criticism  that  the  admin-
istration had  thought  MOWjf  to  ap|M>mt  as  suc-
cessor to  a  gentleman  who  spoke  six  languages  a
tx-rson  who  could  not  correctly  ■penl
)odge  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  national
democratic  convention  of  1864,  ami  in  lM?:t-'4  was
mayor  of  Burlington,  having  been  afcoaja  01  an

Independent  ticket. On  4  Feb.,  l884,Albarl  <J.

Brown,  of  Mis»i.»ippi.  alluded,  in  the  OOUMof  ■
speech  in  the  senate,  t<>  certain  occupation*  aj
menial  and  degrading,  whcreujx.n  Mr.  DodgU  re-
plied to  him,  ending  with  the  following  word-:  "  I
tell  the  senator  from  Mississippi,  in  pnasnes  of  my
father,  who  will  attest  its  truth,  that  1  have  in-
formed, and  do  perform  when  I  am  at  boOM,  all
of  those  menial  services  t<>  which  that  senator  has
referred  in  terms  so  grating  to  my  feelings.  As
a  general  thing,  I  saw  my  own  wood  anil  do  all
my  own  marketing.  I  never  had  a  servant,  of  any
color,  to  wait  u|m>u  me  a  day  in  all  my  life.  I  have
driven  teams,  honea,  mules,  and  ox.-n.  and  consid-
ered myself  as  respectable  then  jus  I  now  do,  or  as
any  senator  upon  this  floor  is."

UoiMiK.  John  Henry,  missionary,  b.  In  Wen-
ham.  Mass..  14  Feb..  ls-js;  d.  in  Wendell,  Mass.,
IN  June,  1M«k{.  He  worked  on  a  farm  till  his
seventeenth year, when he  was  apprenticed  to  a

carpenter,  and  at  the  same  time  studied  by  himself.
He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1KV1  and  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary  in  1808,  ordained  on 81
Sept.  of  that  year,  and  sailed  at  once  for  Africa  as
a  missionary.  Bosldf  the  care  of  a  church  and  a
Sunday-school  at  Sherbm  island.  Mendi,  West
Africa",  he  had  the  oversight  of  the  workmen  QSJ
the  mission  farm,  and  labored  to  reduce  the  Bborbro
dialect  of  the  Mandiiigo  language  to  writing.
Overwork  and  the  climate  undermined  his  health,
and  he  returned  to  this  country  in  1861,  after  which
is  pastor  at  Wendell.  Mass..  till  hi*  death.
DODGK.  Mary  Abigail,  author,  b.  in  Hamilton.
Mass.,  ab'ut  l*:t(».  She  was  instructor  in  physical
science  in  the  Hart  ford.  Conn.,  high  school  in  1861,
and  for  several  years  thereafter,  and  was  subse-
quontlv  a  goveniess  in  the  family  of  Dr.  Gama-
liel Bailev.  of  Washington.  D.  C.  to  whose  l«ai«er.
the  ••  National  Era."  she  baUasaa  a  i-ontributor.  In
lSir»-'7  sJm  was  one  of  the  editors  of  "Our  Young
Folks."  a  magazine  for  children,  publish.-.!  in  Bos-
ton. Sim-.-  1*7(1  she  has  resided  much  of  the  time
in  Washington.  She  has  been  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  prominent magazines,  under  the  pe*>

nan f "(Jail Hamilton." and her publish,-,!

works,  written  in  a  witty  and  aggress^

sjst  largely  of  isleotions  from  her  contributions.

They  include  u Country  Living  and  Country  Think-

Boston,  1882);  "Gala  !
Atmosphere"  and "Stumbling Blinks "
"Skirmishes  and  Sk.i  *65); "  Bed

Days  in  Applethorpe"  and  "Summer  Heat"  (1886):


194


DODGE


D»»DS


"  Wool-Gat  bed  i  nr"  (1807);  "Woman-  Wmnfjs,  a
Counter-Irritant"  (1868);  "Battle  of  the  Books"
(New  York.  1870);  "  Woman's  Worth  and  Worth*
lessness "(1871);  "Lit tie  Polk  Life "(1872);  "Child
World  "(2  vols.,  Boston,  1872-'3);  "Twelve  Mil.s
from  a  Lemon"  (New  York.  1873);  "Nursery
Noonings "  (1874) ;  "Sermons  to  the  Clergv"and
"  First  Love  is  Best "  (Boston,  1875) ;  "  What  Think
Ye  of  Christ!"  (1876) ;  " Our  Common-School  Sys-
tem "  (1880) :  "  Divine  Guidance,  Memorial  of  Allen
W.  Dodge "  (New  York,  1881);  and  "The  Insup-
pressible  Book  "  (Boston,  1885).  In  1877  she  wrote
for  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  a  series  of  vigorous
letters  on  civil  service  reform.

DODGE,  Mary  Ma  pes.  author,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1838.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Prof.  James  J.
Mapes,  and  was  educated  under  private  tutors  in
New  York  city.  Early  in  life  she  married  William
Dodge,  a  New  York  lawyer  of  high  standing,  at
whose  death  she  was  left  a  widow  with  two  sons.
Of  these  the  elder,  James  Mapes  Dodge,  became
known  as  a  successful  inventor.  In  connection
with  Donald  G.  Mitchell  and  Harriet  Beecher
Stowe,  Mrs.  Dodge  was  one  of  the  earliest  editorial
writers  on  "  Hearth  and  Home,"  and  for  several
years  conducted  the  children's  department  of  that
paper.  In  1873,  with  the  issue  of  its  first  number,
she  became  conductor  of  "  St.  Nicholas,"  an  illus-
trated magazine  for  children,  published  in  New
York.  She  has  contributed  to  English  and  Ameri-
can periodicals,  and  has  published  "  Irvington
Stories  "  (New  York,  1864) ;  "  Hans  Brinker,  or  the
Silver  Skates,"  which  has  been  translated  into
French,  Dutch,  and  other  European  languages
(1865,  new  illustrated  ed.,  1876);  "A  Few  Friends,
and  How  they  Amused  Themselves"  (Philadel-
phia, 1869);  "Rhymes  and  Jingles"  (New  York,
1874);  "Theophilus  and  Others*  (1876);  "Along
the  Way,"  a  volume  of  poems  (1879) ;  and  "  Don-
ald and  Dorothy"  (Boston,  1883).  Mrs.  Dodge  is
the  author  of  "  Miss  Malony  on  the  Chinese  Ques-
tion," published  in  "  Scribner's  Monthly  "  in  1870.

DODGE,  Nathaniel  Shatswell,  author,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass..  10  Jan.,  1810;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
2  Feb.,  1874.  He  studied  at  Dartmouth,  but  was
not  graduated,  was  in  Andover  theological  semi-
nary in  1833-'4,  and  was  afterward  principal  of
Maplewood  institute,  Pittsfield,  Mass.  He  lived  in
London,  England,  in  1851— '61,  saw  some  service  as
an  army  quartermaster  in  1862-'6,  and  was  after-
ward clerk  in  one  of  the  departments  at  Washing-
ton. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  president  of
the  Papyrus  club,  an  organization  of  literary  men
in  Boston.  He  was  a  voluminous  contributor  to
periodicals,  under  the  pen-name  of  "  John  Carver,
Esq.,"  and  published  "Stories  of  a  Grandfather
about  American  History"  (Boston,  1873).

DODGE,  Ossian  Euclid,  vocalist,  b.  in  Cayuga,
N.  Y.,  22  Oct.,  1820;  d.  in  London,  England,  4
Nov.,  1876.  Having  early  given  evidence  of  decided
musical  ability,  he  determined,  much  against  the
wishes  of  his  friends,  to  become  a  professional
singer  of  moral  comic  songs,  which  he  composed
and  wrote  himself.  About  1845,  in  company  with
Bernard  Covert,  composer  of  the  song  'H  he  Sword
of  Bunker  Hill,"  he  organized  a  concfcrt  troupe,
and  gave  entertainments  in  most  of  tF.i  cities  of
the  united  States.  He  was  the  first  to  take  a
company  overland  from  New  York  to  San  Fran-
cisco, and  was  the  first  manager  that  ever  gave
an  entertainment  in  the  Mormon  tabernacle  at
Salt  Lake  city.  Mr.  Dodge  was  a  strict  teeto-
taler, and  being  brought  frequently  in  contact,
during  the  political  canvass  of  1844,  with  Henry
Clay,  Millard  Fillmore,  William  H.  Seward,  anil


others  of  the  Whig  leaders,  was  entertained  at  din-
ner liy  Mr.  Clay  at  Ashland.  Ky.,  in  October  of
that  star,  where  wine  was  on  the  table.  <  >n  U-ing
challenged  to  drink  his  boofl  health.  Mr.  Dodge
excused  himself  on  the  ground  of  hi-  total  absti-
nence principles,  and  proposed  substituting  water
for  wine  as  "more  emblematic  of  the  purity  of
true  friendship."  Mr.  Clay,  replacing  his  untasted
glass  on  the  table,  and  scanning  the  features  of  his
guest,  but  finding  there  no  expression  but  that  of
the  greatest  res|>ect,  grasped  him  by  the  hand,  and
replied :  "  I  honor  your  courage,  and  respect  your
principles,  but,"  he  added,  laughingly,  "I  can't
say  that  i  admire  your  taste."  Mr.  Dodge  pur-
chased the  choice  of  a  seat  for  the  first  concert
given  by  Jenny  Lind  in  Boston.  Mass.,  paying  a
premium  of  $625.  which  outlay,  he  asserted,  was
many  times  repaid,  as,  during  the  nine  months  fol-
lowing, he  netted  $11,000  in  a  tour  of  the  New
England  states,  being  frequently  compelled  to  give
two  concerts  in  one  evening.  In  1851  he  was  sent
as  a  delegate  to  the  "  World's  Peace  Congress,"
held  in  Exeter  Hall,  London.  He  also  acted  as
foreign  correspondent  for  the  Boston  "Weekly
Museum,"  a  journal  he  had  established  in  1849.
This  was  afterward  transferred  to  Cleveland,  where
he  removed  about  1858,  abandoning  public  singing
and  devoting  himself  to  the  sale  of  musical  publica-
tions. Having  invested  largely  in  real  estate  in  St.
Paul,  Minn.,  he  settled  in  that  city  in  1862,  where
he  amassed  a  fortune.  From  1869  till  1873  he  was
secretary  of  the  St.  Paul  chamber  of  commerce.

DODGE,  Richard  Irving,  soldier,  b.  in  Hunts-
ville,  N.  C,  19  May,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1848,  assigned  to  the  8th
infantry,  and  after  serving  at  various  posts  w&«-
promoted  to  captain.  3  May,  1861.  He  commanded
the  camp  of  instruction  at  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  in  Au-
gust and  September,  1861,  and  served  as  mustering
and  disbursing  officer  at  various  places  during
the  civil  war.  He  was  assistant  inspector-general
of  the  4th  army  corps  in  1863,  and  promoted  to
major,  21  June,  1864.  He  was  member  of  a  board
to  perfect  a  system  of  army  regulations  in  New
York  city  in  1871-'2,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-
colonel  on  29  Oct.,  1873,  and  since  that  time  has
served  against  hostile  Indians  in  the  west  He  was
made  colonel  of  the  11th  infantry  on  26  June,  1882.
Col.  Dodge  has  published  "  The  Black  Hills  "  (New
York,  1876) ; "  The  Plains  of  the  Great  West "  (1877 ;
republished  in  London  as  "  Hunting  Grounds  of
the  Great  West ") ;  and  "  Our  Wild  Indians  "  (1881).

DODGE,  Theodore  Ayranlt,  soldier,  b.  in  Pitts-
field,  Mass.,  28  May,  1842.  After  receiving  a  mili-
tary education  at  Berlin  under  Maj.-Gen.  Von
Frohreich,  of  the  Prussian  army,  he  studied  at
University  college,  London,  and  at  Heidelberg,  and
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  London  in  1861.
On  his  return  to  this  country  in  that  year  he  en-
listed as  a  private  in  the  national  service,  and  lost
his  right  leg  at  Gettysburg.  He  became  1st  lieu-
tenant on  13  Feb.,  1862,  captain  in  the  veteran  re-
serve corps,  12  Nov.,  1863,  and  was  brevetted  major,
17  Aug.,  1864,  and  colonel,  2  Dec.,  1865.  He  was
made  captain  in  the  44th  regular  infantry,  28  July,
1866,  and  served  as  chief  of  a  war  department-
bureau  till  28  April,  1870,  when  he  was  retired,
and  has  since  lived  in  Boston.  Col.  Dodge  has  lect-
ured and  contributed  much  to  periodicals,  and  has
published  "The  Campaign  of  Chancellorsville"
(Boston,  1881);  a"Bird's-Eye  View  of  the  Civil
War  "  (1883) ;  and  "  A  Chat  in  the  Saddle  "  (18851

DODS.  John  Bo  vee,  philosopher,  b.  in  New  Y.rk
city  in  17i»r> :  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y..  21  March,  1872.
His  life  was  largely  devoted  tothe«tudy  of  mental


Im.|»\Vm|;TM


DOLU


198


phy. He published  "Thirty Sermone";
"Philosophy  of  ■MMrin"  (New  York.
"Philosophv of Eleotrioal Psycholo
M Immortality  Triumphant"  Hn08);  and  ** Spirit
Mniiifi  Kamiucd  and  P.xplaincd  "

IHMIWOK  III.  Thomas,  musician,  b. in  Shef-
field, England,  in  lTJMt;  ±  in  Morn-ania.  N
April.  1878. He  came  to  the  United  Statei  in  1880,
end  organised  in  New  York  the"  City  band,"  wUefa

became  by  his  efforts  the  National  brass  Iwnd,  and
IH  (be  fitM  Independent  military  bend  of  Back
in  tin-  city.  Hi-  was  tin-  originator  ami  busineee
manager,  his  sons,  Allan  and  Harvey  P.,  enwettttg
him.  He  was  fond  of  athletic  sports,  was  one  of
the  Original  members  of  tin-  St.  George's  cricket
club,  ami  spent  mticli  of  his  time  in  spirting  ainuse-
ments  until  he  had  passed  his  sixtieth  year.

DDK.  Charles  Henry,  journalist,  b.  in  Charles-
town.  Mass..  .'-  Nov..  1KIM.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  lXiW),  and.  after  a  year's  trial  in  business
pursuits  in  New  York  city,  devoted  himself  to
journalism.  beginning  00  the  "Brooklyn  Times."
and  later  going  to  the  Boston  "  Daily  Advertiser."
where  he  was  assistant  editor  from  1H(>-J  till  1888.
A  year  later  he  became  editor  and  publisher  of  the
Worcester,  Mass.,  '■  Evening  Gazette."  In  1H?<1
Mr.  Doe  invented  the  inap-tyj>e  in  use  in  news-
paper otliees  for  diagrams  and  maps.  In  addition
to  stories  that  appeared  in  the  "Knickerbocker"
and  "Galaxy"  magazines,  under  the  pen-name  of
"Samuel  Blotter,  be  lias  published  a  novel,  first
as  a  serial  in  the  Boston  "Sunday  Courier,"  en-
titled ••  Buffets"  (Boston,  1875).

DOMETT.  Daniel  Seth.  M.  K.  bishop,  b.  in
Yirginia  in  1810;  d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  27  Oct..
1MH0.  His  father  was  a  lawyer,  and  the  son  began
the  study  of  that  profession,  but  changed  to  the
ministry.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Virginia,  and  became  an  itinerant  minister  in  1889,
traveling  through  the  southern  states.  In  1866  he
accepted  a  professorship  in  Randolph  Macon  col-
lege, and  in  1*7:}  was  made  a  bishop.  He  was
about  to  take  charge  of  the  California  conference,
when  he  was  seized  with  the  illness  that  resulted
in  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of  "The  War
and  its  Close"  (Richmond,  1864).

DOtiGETT,  Kate,  reformer,  b.  in  Castleton.  Vt.,
")  Nov..  1888;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba.  18  March.  1884
Her  maiden  name  was  Xewell.  She  was  educated
at  the  Albany.  X.  Y.,  female  academy,  and  mar-
ried William  K.  Doggett,  of  Chicago,  in  1808a  She
was  elected  a  memlier  of  the  academy  of  oaienoc
in  1*»>!»,  and  given  charge  of  its  herbarium.  She
attended,  as  a  delegate  of  the  National  woman
suffrage  association,  the  Frauen  conferenz  held  in
Berlin.  Germany,  in  November,  1800,  and  on  her
return  delivered  lectures  on  art.  .Several  French
and  German  clubs  were  established  by  her.  also  a
literary  society  called  the  Fortnightly,  of  which
i-  the  preeidanti  Mrs.  Doggetl  translated
the  "Grammar  of  Painting  and  Engraving"  (New-
York.  1M74).

IMM.G KIT.  Simeon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kiddle*
l>oro',  Mass..  t>  March,  1765:  d.  in  Raynham.  Mass..
He  was  graduated"  at  Brown  in
1788,  was  a  tutor  there  in  17!M-'(S,  meanwhile  pur-
sued a  SOWN  of  theology,  and  was  licensed  in  1  ?!»•'!.
In  July,  1796.  Bristol  academy  at  Taunton  was
opened,  with  Mr.  Doggett  as  its  first  principal.  He
remained  for  seventeen  years,  and  then  in  April,
18 18,  resigned,  and  rattled  el  a  minister  in  mm
don.  Worcester  co.,  Mass.  Initarianism  was  a  new
thing  in  that  region,  end  the  society  hf  which  he
had  been  called  was  large,  and  supposed  to  be  or-
..  yet  he  made  it  one  of  theconditionsof  his


I  acceptance that the  i-hun  h  orowJ  and  covenant,
which  he"  neither  understood  nor  In
be  altered. This  was done, and  If r.  attained in
charge  of  the  church  until  1KII.  when  In

to  Raynham,  Drletul  en,  The  winter  of  1*34- '5wa*

passed  in  a  journey  through  the  south.  He  resigned
his  active  mmi«trv  in  IM-Y  lb  publi*ln-d  several
orations  anil  sermon-.

DOHBRTY,  Patrick.  Canedkn  eleigynmu, b.
in  Qoebeo,  8  June,  is:;s:  d.  there  in  ]*:■;. n

Oeived his  earlv edttOQtlon in the  eOBOOll  of  the

Christian  brothers  of  QnoboCL  was  graduated  at  the

seminary,  and  appointed  pjoOwnor  of  English.  In
lxm  be  Joined  the  norltlnteof  tneJeenitefbnt  hail

to  leave  it  owing  to  feeble  health.  He  was  ordained
in  1800,  and  at  once  became  noted  as  a  pulpit  ora-
tor. He  was  elected  president  of  St.  Patrick's  in-
stitute, and  delivered  courses  of  lectures  before
this  and  other  literary  Itodies.  In  lhjJH  he  traveled
through  BniQIW  ami  Palestine. and  wrote  »  journal
of  his  travels.  He  accompanied  the  Canadian
pajMil  zouaves  as  chaplain  on  their  return  to  Cana-
da in  1870.  In  1H71  he  was  appointed  vicar  of
St.  Booh  and  chaplain  to  the  hospital  of  Qnebeft
But  his  health  was  broken  by  his  labom,  and  a
series  of  lectures  before  the  Society  of  St.  Yincent
de  Paul,  on  the  principal  incidents  of  his  travel*,
completed  his  prostration.  A  collection  of  his
French  writings  was  published  in  Quebec  in  1878,
DOISSIN,  Iannis,  poet,  b.  in  Martinioue  in
17-M  :  d.  in  I'aris,  France.  81  Sept,  17W.  Be  was
a  Jesuit,  and  became  noted  at  an  early  age  for  his
I^atin  poetry.  His  principal  imm-iiis  are  "In  Na-
talibus  Riirgundia*  ducis  Kcfoga"  (Paris.  17.*»h
and  "Gallia-  ob  restitutam  dclphino  valetudinem  "
(17")'J).  Moth  works  are  found  in  the  collection
published  by  the  professors  of  the  college  of  I>mis
le  Grand.  M Sculpt ura.  carmen "  (Paris.  178
reprinted  in  1787, with  a  French  translation attrfih
oted  to  Father  Boiaein  himself.  ••  Si  a  I  pt  ura,  car-
men" (Paris,  1758)  was  acconi|>anied  by  a  French
translation  by  a  brother  Jesuit.  The  two  latter
poems  were  published  In  a  volume  of  the  "  Pooma
tadidascalia" (Paris.  isi;{).  ThepnbHoationof  the
poemeon  esnlptnre obtained  for  Father  Boiaain  a
high  reputation  among  Kuro|iean  scholars.  He
was  peculiarly  happy  in  rendering  w  ith  dignit  v  and

fuecisioii  mechanical  details  for  which  the  Latin
anguage  offers  only  equivalent  terms.

iHH.ltKAR,  Amos  Kinerson,  physi,  -i-t,  |,.  in
Norwich,  Conn..  10  Nov.,  is;{7.  He  weegradnated
at \\  esleyan  university,  Delaware,  <»hio,  in  1H86,

and  with  the  degr >f  M.  K.  at the Cniversity

of  Michigan  in  1X(»7,  where  he  received  the  de-
gree of  I'h.  D.  in  1888.  In  lsii»>-*7  he  WM  in-
structor of  chemistry  at  the  Cniversity  of  Mulli-
gan, and  in  18<>7-'X  "assistant  professor  of  natural
science-  in  the  Cniversity  of  Kentucky  in  1/cxing-
ton.  From  lX«iX  till  1X7-1  he  was  professor  of  nat-
ural sciences  iii  Bethany  college.  W.  \'a.,  and
mayor  of  that  city  during  is71-'i.  In  1x71  he  was
appointed  professor  of  physics  and  astronomy  in
Tuft's  college.  College  Ilill".  Mass.  He  has  made
valuable  contributions  to  science.  Among  the  in-
ventions that  he  has  perfected  »it'  the  eleatrlo
gvroscope,  used  to  demonstrate  the  rotation  of  the
earth,  in  ix»i7  :  tuning-forks,  for  the  exhibition  of
Lissajou's  curves,  in  1X72  :  and  the  opeidOMOno,  lot
the  exhibition  of  vocal  vibmtiona  In  1x7:1  he  be-
gan t.>  studv  the  convertibility  of  sound  into  elec-
tricity, and'  in  1X7'5  perfected  and  patented  his
1  ric  telephone,  and  t  he  stat  ic  telepln me
in  1870. He  has  published  "The  Art  of  Project

Booton,  is7»;i:  "The  Speaking  Tele  1

and  "  Sound  and  its  Phenomena  "  (1885).


196


DOLES


DOMBEY


DOLES.  Qeonge  Pierce,  soldier,  b.  In  Millcdgc-
villi-,  (in..  11  May.  1880;  il.  near  ("old  Harbor,  Va..
2  June,  1864  He  was  educated  In  Killedgerille,
and  at  the  beginning  of  t  in-  civil  war  wm  captain

of  a  militia  < many  called  the  "  Baldwin lilucs."

His  services  aim  those  of  his  command  were  at
onee  offered  to  the  governor  of  Georgia  and  ac-
cepted. He  was  made  a  captain  in  the  4th  Geor-
Sria  infantry,  and  in  May,  1862,  became  colonel  of
lis  regiment.  He  followed  the  fortunes  of  the
army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  at  the  battle  of
Gettysburg  succeeded  to  the  command  of  a  bri-
gade. His  commission  as  brigadier-general  bore
date  2  Nov.,  1862.  During  the  overland  campaigns
he  commanded  a  division  in  Gen.  Ewell's  corps,
and  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Cold  Harbor.

DOLLIER  DE  CASSON,  Francoi8,clergyman,
1».  in  France  about  1630;  d.  in  Canada.  The  Sul-
nitiaiis,  being  anxious  to  compete  with  the  Jesuits
in  missionary  enterprise,  sent  Father  Dollier  de
Casson  to  winter  with  the  Nipissings  in  1668.  In
company  with  Lasa  lie  and  twenty-one  other  French-
men, he  set  out  for  the  Seneca  country,  being
fuided  by  some  Senecas,  and  at  Tenaoutona  met
olliet,  and  received  from  him  information  as  to
the  west,  which  enabled  them  to  draw  a  map.
But  here  Lasalle  and  his  party  refused  to  proceed
farther.  They  returned  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  and,
as  they  had  boasted  that  they  were  going  to  China,
the  name  of  La  Chine  was  given  to  Lasalle's  place
in  ridicule.  Dollier  de  Casson,  with  the  nine  that
remained  faithful,  set  out  from  Tenaoutona  in  Oc-
tober, 1669,  reached  Lake  Erie,  and  spent  the  win-
ter near  the  mouth  of  Grand  river  on  the  north
shore,  and  in  March,  1670,  drew  up  an  act  of  posses-
sion. They  then  continued  their  voyage,  but  had
to  abandon  their  project,  owing  to  a  storm,  and
made  for  the  Jesuit  mission  of  Sault  St.  Marie,
which  they  reached  in  May.  Father  Dollier  de
Casson  was  the  first  to  sail  through  Lake  Erie  and
Lake  St.  Clair.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "His-
tory of  Montreal  "  (still  in  manuscript).

DOLPH,  John  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Fort  Ann,
Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  April,  1835.  He  stud-
ied for  two  years  with  Louis  van  Kuyck  in  Ant-
werp, and  then  spent  three  years  in  Paris,  after
which  he  settled  in  New  York.  In  1877  he  was
made  an  associate  of  the  National  academy,  and  he
has  been  a  member  of  the  society  of  American  art-
ists since  its  organization  in  1878.  Mr.  Dolph's
works  include  "Knickerbocker  Farm -Yard"
(1869);  "The  Season  of  Plenty";  "The  Country
Blacksmith  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Horse-Doctor  "  (1873) ;
"The  Pasture"  (1874);  "The  Antiquarian";  "A
Gray  Day  on  the  Coast "  (1875) ;  "  From  the  Horse-
Market"  (1876);  "The  Ante-Chamber"  (1878),
exhibited  in  the  French  salon  in  1882 ;  "  Relic  of
the  Battle-field  " ;  "  The  Rehearsal "  (1878) ;  "  Prin-
cess" (1885) ;  and  "  A  June  Day  "  (1886).

DOLPH,  Joseph  Norton,  senator,  b.  in  Hec-
tor, Tompkins  (now  in  Schuyler)  co.,N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,
1835.  He  received  a  common  -  school  education,
besides  private  instruction,  and  for  a  time  attended
the  Genesee  Wesleyan  seminary  at  Lima,  N.  Y.
He  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  No-
vember, 1861,  and  practised  in  Schuyler  county  in
l8(>l-'2.  In  the  latter  year  he  enlisted,  and  was
appointed  orderly  sergeant  in  Capt.  M.  Crawford's
company,  known  as  the  "  Oregon  Escort,"  which
was  raised  under  an  act  of  congress,  for  the  pur-
pose of  protecting  the  emigration  to  the  Pacific
coast  against  hostile  Indians.  He  settled  in  Port-
land, Oregon,  the  following  October,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  was  elected  city  attorney  in
1864,  and  President  Lincoln  appointed  him  dis-


trict-attorney for  the  district  of  Oregon.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Oregon  senate  in  1866,  1879,  tad

1*74. When elected to tile l". S. >eliatc. he  Was

actively  engaged  in  various  famine—  enterprises,
and  had  an  extenaJTi  law  practice. He  was  chosen

sss  republican, and  took  his  seat  4  March,  iss:i.
Senator  Dolph  is  at  present  (1887)  chairman  of  the
committee  on  coast  defences.

DOMUKY,  Joseph,  French  botanist,  b.  in  Ma-
con, France,  20  Feb.,  1742;  d.  in  the  island  of
Montserrat,  West  Indies,  in  May,  1794.  He  ran
away  from  home  and  acquired  a  thorough  knowl-
edge of  botany  in  Montpelier,  where  in  1768  he
was  graduated  in  medicine.  In  1772  he  went  to
Paris,  where  he  became  assistant  to  the  botanist
Bernard  de  Jussieu,  and  in  1776  was  appointed  by
Turgot.  botanist  of  the  Jardin  des  plantes.  A  year
later  he  was  sent  on  an  expedition  to  visit  South
America  and  collect  such  useful  plants  as  could
be  cultivated  in  France.  He  arrived  in  Callao  in
January,  1778,  and  soon  gathered  a  large  herbari-
um of  the  Peruvian  flora,  also  accumulating  much
valuable  information  concerning  the  cinchona  tree.
In  1780  he  sent  a  portion  of  his  collection  home,
but  the  vessel  containing  them  was  captured  by  the
British,  and  the  specimens  sent  to  the  British  mu-
seum, where  they  are  still  retained,  notwithstand-
ing the  subsequent  claims  by  the  French  govern-
ment. Dombey  sought  at  once  to  replace  this  loss,
and  soon  had  in  readiness  a  second  shipment,  but
the  authorities  of  Callao  confiscated  over  300  origi-
nal designs  of  rare  plants  on  the  pretext  that  works
of  native  artists  were  not  permitted  to  be  exported
to  foreign  countries.  These  designs  were  given  to
the  Spanish  botanists  Pavon  and  Ruiz,  who  used
them  in  their  publication  of  "  La  Flora  Peruana."
In  1782  he  visited  Chili  and  collected  the  plants
indigenous  to  that  country.  During  his  stay  in
Concepcion  the  cholera  broke  out,  and  at  once
Dombey  offered  his  services  and  was  appointed
physician-in-chief  of  the  city,  which  office  he  re-
signed in  1783  when  the  epidemic  had  passed.  He
was  then  invited  to  examine  the  quicksilver  mines
of  Chili ;  the  mines  in  Coquimbo  he  put  in  working
order,  and  discovered  the  mines  in  Jar  ilia,  and  al-
though he  spent  considerable  monev  in  this  work,
refused  all  compensation  from  the  officials  in  Chili,
saying  that  he  accepted  payment  only  from  the
king  of  France.  Finally  he  sailed  for  Cadiz,  where
he  arrived  in  February,  1785.  Here  he  suffered
the  loss  of  half  of  his  collections,  which  were  seized
by  the  Spanish  government  and  himself  impris-
oned until  he  agreed  not  to  publish  his  researches
prior  to  Pavon  and  Ruiz.  Dombey  succeeded  in
escaping  to  France  by  way  of  Havre,  and  secured,
on  Buffon's  recommendation,  an  indemnitv  of  10,-
000  francs  and  an  annual  pension  of  1,206  francs.
In  1793  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  United
States,  but  was  captured  by  privateers  and  im-
prisoned in  Montserrat,  where  he  died.  Dombey's
collections  are  among  the  treasures  of  the  British
museum,  the  Jardin  Real  of  Madrid,  and  the  Jardin
des  plantes  and  the  Musee  d'histoire  naturelle  of
Paris.  His  grand  herbarium  contains  over  1,500
South  American  plants,  of  which  more  than  60  are
new  species,  accompanied  by  valuable  notes  on  the
plants  of  Peru  and  Chili,  their  cultivation  and  use,
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  complete  that  exists  in
Europe  of  the  flora  of  South  America.  Botanists
bare  honored  his  memory  by  giving  his  name,
Dombeya,  to  a  plant  that  belongs  to  the  family  of
Butneriaceas,  of  which  eleven  different  species  are
known.  Dombey  published  :  ••  Lettres  sur  le  sal-
pet  re  du  Perou,  et  la  phosphorescence  de  la  mer  "
(1786); "  Memoires  a  l'academie  fles  scien


I><>\  U.Ii


197


Its  BriBM  '!>•  mercuiv  ilu  <  'liili  "  (17X0) ;  M«nn>in-

sur  li-  cuivre  marial  D bey's  posthu-

sjkous  works,  published  t>v  1/IIt'rii ii-r.  ore :  "Plow

uvienne"  il'iir:  : ••  L'lbr-

l>i.r  de  DomU-y  cxpliquc"  (Pan-.  1811,6  \"l-..  in
4*);  and  "Observations  de  DoniU-v  fades  au  Chili
ft  an  I'.-pmi  "  (Paris,  1818,  in  4°).

DOMENEC1L  Kinniniiucl  Henry  IHful— I,
French  MtthOT,  l».  in  Lyon-,  France",  1  Nov.,  1088;
(1.  in  I'Viukv  in  .lulu-,  18H6.  Me  became  a  priest  in
tin1  Unman  Catholic  church,  ami  was  sent  as  a  mi—
etooatj  to  Texan  and  Mexico.  During  Maximilian's
nridMMM  in  America.  DonMMOh  acted  M  |>ri\ ut.-
chaplain  to  the  emperor,  and  he  was  also  almoner
to  tin-  French  army  daring  its  occupation  of  M.  \i-
oo.  On  his  return  to  PlMM  he  was  made  hono-
rary canon  of  Montpellier.  His  «  Manuscrit  pie*
tographique  Americain.  precede  d'une  notice  MB
ridcographie  iles  Peaux  Houses  "  (1MC0).  was  pub-
lislie<l  by  the  French  government,  with  a  facsimile
of  a  manuscri|it  in  the  lilirarv  of  the  Paris  arsenal,
relating,  as  he  claimed,  to  the  American  Indians,
but  the  German  orientalist,  Julius  Pet zholdt,  de-
clared that  it  consisted  only  of  MribbUng  and  in-
coherent illustrations  of  a  local  German  dialect.
Dmnenech  maintained  the  authenticity  of  the
manuscript  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  ••  La  verite*  sur
le  livre  des  sauvages  (1801),  which  drew  forth  a
reply  from  Potzholdt,  translated  into  French  under
the  title  of  "  Ije  livre  des  sauvages  au  point  de  rue
de  la  civilization  Francaise"  (Brussels,  1861).  He  has
also  published  "Journal  d'un  missionaire  au  Texas
etau  Mexique"(lN57);  "  Voyage  dans  les  solitudes
Amcricaincs,  It  Minnesota "(1858):  "  Voyage pitto-
resoue  dans  les  grands  desert  du  Nouveau  nionde  "
( 1  v'il ) ;  "  I^es  Gorges  du  Diable,  voyage  en  Islande  "
(1864);  "  Ijegendes  islandaises"  (1865);  "  Le  Mex-
i<|iie  tel  qu'il  est"  (1867):  and  "Histoire  du  Mex-
ique,  Juarez  et  Maximilien.  correspondances  ine-
dites  "  (1868).  The  historical  accuracy  of  the  last-
named  work  has  been  questioned  by  several  writers,
including  (Jen.  Prim.  Domenech  also  published
"Inland  j'etais  joumaliste  "  (1869) ;  "  Histoire  de
la  camnagnc  de  1H70-'1  et  de  la  deuxieme  ambu-
lance de  la  presse  Francai-e  *'  <  1  s 7 1 ) :  and  "  L'ecri-
ture  syllabique  (Maya)  dans  le  Yucatan  d'apn*-
les  decouvertes  de  l'Abbe  Brasseur  de  Bourboug"
(1883);  and  during  the  latter  part  of  Ms  life  ne
produced  also  several  works  pertaining  to  religion
and  ancient  liistorv.

DOMENECH,  Miguel,  R.C.  bishop,  b.  in  Rios,
Si.ain,  in  1H1*!;  d.  in  Tarragona,  Spain,  in  1h?x.
He  was  educated  in  France  by  the  priests  of  the
congregation  of  the  mission,  and  after  becoming
a  meinUr  of  that  order  came  to  the  United  States
in  1*37.  He  finished  his  studies  in  the  theological
seminary  of  The  Barrens,  Missouri,  was  admitted
to  the  priesthood  in  1839,  and  became  a  profc— or
in  St.  Mary's  college.  In  1842  he  bonded  St.
Vincent's  male  academy  at  Cape  Girardeau,  and
was  subsequently  a  missionary  in  the  state  of  Mis-
souri. He  was  sent  to  Pennsylvania  in  1845,  and
performed  pastoral  duties  in  Nicotown.  His  next
■thrion  was  in  (Jennaiitown.  where  he  erected  the
church  of  St.  Vincent  de  Paul.  He  was  enum-
erated bishop  of  Pittsburgh  in  1860,  and  during
his  administration  erected  several  churches  and
schools.  The  diocese  of  Pittsburgh  was  considered
too  large  for  a  single  bishop,  and  in  1H75  a  portion

of it was f(,rine.l into the  s< t  Allegheny,  to

which  Bishop  Domenech  was  transferred  in  1888.
This  division  gave  rise  to  dissensions  and  difflcul-

ind.  in  order  to  bring  all  questions  to  a  «1
ion.  he  went  to  Rome  in  1877. Ho  resigned  hi-
eee  the  same  year.


■>UM\  III  K,  James,  Canadian  rapitnli»t.  b.  in
v..  1848. He  vm  sdaOBtad in  his

native cuntry.  and in 1M.X  went to Itarbadoe*.
where  his  father.  (Jen.  James  !>..m\ille.  |{.  .v.,  was
in  command  of  the  garrison,  and  I
merchant. In IW,  he  arrived in Si.  .I,,),,,.  \

Bnumriok,  engngad  mtmaJaassasa  men  ham

also  became proprietor  of  the  iron  works,  rolling
mills,  and  nail  factories  Ht  MoosspSth,  Coldbroonl
and  Iiocklaud.  in  King-  c«iuntv.  and  OBtei
ly  into  othcrcoinmiTiial  sshemesi He  bprsssdesji

of  the  Maritime  bank  Of  the  dominion  of  Canada,
a  memUr  of  the  council  of  the  Dominion  artillery
association. a  fellow  of  the  Royal  colonial  institute.
London.  England,  has  Iwn  president  of  the  K
county  l.oard  of  trade,  ami  was  chairman  of  the
delegation  from  St.  John.  X.  P..  at  the  Dominion
In.ard  of  trade.  Ottawa,  in 1H?L Eb WW asastsd •

representative  to  the  Dominion  naillaiiiwil  in  If

and  re-elected  at  the  general  elections  in  1x74  and
1N7N. He  is  a  liberal  conservative.

DONALDSON,  Edward,  naval  ofBeer,  b.  in

Baltimore,  Md.,  17  Nov..  lspi;  ±  there.  18  May,
1889.  He  entered  the  V.  S.  navy  as  cadet  midship-
man on  21  Julv,  1888,  and  served  on  several  ves-
sels of  war  in  the  West  India  ■qnadlOB,  In  1888
he  went  to  the  East  Indies  in  the  "Cotumbna,"  and
in  1839  participated  In  the  attack  on  the  fort-  on
the  coast  of  Sumatra.  He  was  promoted  passed
midshipman  in  June,  1K41,  and  attached  to  the
Mosquito  fleet  in  Flotilla  during  1841-18,  after
which  he  served  on  various  vessels  until  1H4<!,  when
he  was  appointed  on  the  coast  survey.  Be  rsosivad
his  eoniinission  as  Ucntonanl  In  October,  1*17.  and
was  connected  with  the  "Dolphin.'*  the  "Water-
witch,"  the  "Merrimac."  an<l  the  "San  Jacinto."
and  was  on  special  shore  duty  until  1881.  During
1861  he  commanded  the  sun-boat  "Scioto,"  at-
tached to  the  Western  gulf  squadron,  and  took
part  in  the  bombardment  of  Forts  Jackson  and  St.
Philip,  and  the  subsequent  capture  of  New  Orleans.
He  participated  In  the  passage  of  the  Vioksborg
batteries,  and  was  made  commander  in  July,  If
After  a  year  in  command  of  the  receiving-ship  at
Philadelphia,  be  was  transferred  to  the  '•  Keystone
State  "  m  executive  officer  during  her  trip  to  the
West  Indies  in  search  of  the  Confederate  cruiser
"Sumter."  and  was  her  commander  in  1k<»;{-*4.
During  the  battle  of  Mobile  bar,  B  Aug..  l*t>4.  he
commanded  the  "Seminole."  ana  rendered  efficient
service  by  his  coolness  and  judgment  in  piloting
his  vessel  while  passing  Fort  Morgan,  the  regular
pilot  being  ill.  In  1*<m  be  was  on  ordnance  dutv
in  Baltimore.  He  was  made  captain  in  July.  If
and  subsequently  had  command  of  the  receiving-
ship  at  Philadelphia  until  1*<W.  when  he  was  as-
signed to  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard.  In  SetAembsR
1871,  he  Ikh'iiiiu'  commodore,  and  for  a  tune  hail
Charge  Of  the  naval  station  in  Mound  City.  111.  He
was  promoted  to  rear-admiral  00  '.'1  Sept*  If
and  placed  on  the  retired  list  a  few  days,  later.
—  His  brother.  Frank,  physician,  h.  in  Baltimore.
Md..  23  July.  1S-J3.  was  educated  in  tin-  l'niver-ity
Of  Marvlaiid.  and  studied  medicine  under  Dr-.
Samuel  Chaw  and  Thomas  H.  Buckler,  receiving
his  itM-dical  degree  in  lst<'».  For  two  years  he  was
a  resident  student  in  the  almshouse  hospital.  Ital-
timore.  and  subsequent  to  his  graduation  studied
in the ho-pital-  in  Paris,  settling  in Baltimore  in

in.ii.  He  ha-  bald  the  ofaVssnofattsndiag  physi-
cian to  the  Baltimore  almshoii-c  ho-pital.  j.h\-ician
to  the  general  dispeaaary,  attending  phy-ician  of
university  hospital,  and  resident  physician  to  the
marine  hospital.  From  lsW  till  \*>it\  he  was  pro-
fessor of  materia  medica  in  the  Maryland  college


198


DONALDSON


DONALDSON


of  pharmacy,  and  in 1866  became  professor  of

Shysiology  and  hygiene,  and  clinical  professor  of
iseases  of  the  throat  and  chest  in  the  University
of  Maryland.  He  has  served  as  president  of  the
medical  and  surgical  faculty  of  the  state  of  Mary-
land, and  of  the  American  rliinatological  associa-
tion. Dr.  Donaldson  has  published  papers  in  the
medical  journals,  principally  upon  diseases  of  the
heart,  lungs,  and  throat,  ana  is  the  author  of  "  The
Influence  of  City  Life  and  Occupations  in  Devel-
oping Consumption  "  (Cambridge,  187<i).

DONALDSON,  James  Lowry,  soldier,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  17  March,  1814;  d.  there,  4  Nov.,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1836,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the
3d  artillery,  serving  in  that  capacity  during  the
Florida  war  in  1836-'8.  He  was  transferred  to  the
1st  artillery  in  May,  1837,  and  became  1st  lieuten-
ant in  July,  1838.  Subsequently  he  was  on  garrison
duty  until  1846,  when  he  was  stationed  at  Port
Brown  during  the  military  occupation  of  Texas.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  participated  in  the  bat-
tles of  Monterey  and  Buena  Vista,  receiving  the
brevets  of  captain  and  major.  He  was  appointed
assistant  quartermaster,  with  the  rank  of  captain,
in  March,  1847,  and  was  on  duty  as  such  in  Coa-
huila,  Mexico.  Subsequent  to  the  war  he  contin-
ued as  quartermaster  at  various  posts  until  he  be-
came chief  quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  New
Mexico  in  1858-'62.  During  the  civil  war  he  held
a  like  office  in  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  with  the  8th  army
corps  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  in  the  Department  of
the  Cumberland.  He  was  chief  quartermaster  of
the  military  division  of  the  Tennessee  in  June,
1865,  and  of  the  military  division  of  the  Missouri
Until  1869,  when  he  was  retired.  Meanwhile  he
had  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  on  the  staff,  and
had  received  the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volun-
teers. He  resigned  on  1  Jan.,  1874.  During  his
administration  of  the  quartermaster's  department
of  the  division  of  the  Tennessee,  he  became  a  favor-
ite with  Gen.  George  11.  Thomas,  to  whom  he  sug-
gested the  creation  of  cemeteries  for  the  scattered
remains  of  soldiers  who  had  fallen  in  battle,  from
which  has  resulted  the  annual  Decoration  day.  Gen.
Donaldson  published  "Sergeant  Atkins"  (Phila-
delphia, 1871),  a  tale  of  adventure  founded  on
events  that  took  place  during  the  Florida  war.

DONALDSON,  Washington  HM  aeronaut,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1840;  drowned  in  Lake
Michigan,  lo  July,  1875.  He  was  one  of  those  apt,
energetic,  restless  individuals  known  as  natural
geniuses.  He  could  do  anything  he  undertook  to
do,  and  would  undertake  anything  that  came  in
his  way.  He  had  enough  education  for  his  wants,
and  an  admirable  physique,  though  a  little  short
in  stature.  Gymnastics  were  as  second  nature  to
him,  and  there  was  little  in  this  line  in  which  he
was  not  an  expert.  Amiability  was  a  chief  char-
acteristic, which  never  failed  to  assert  itself;  his
rare  good  humor  and  pleasant  manners  won  him
friends  wherever  he  went,  and  there  never  was  an
aeronaut  more  popular  than  he.  His  early  life  was
spent  upon  the  stage  as  a  gymnast,  Ventriloquist,
and  magician.  He  was  a  graceful  tight -rope  per-
former. In  1862  he  walked  across  the  Schuylkill
river  on  a  rope  1,200  feet  long,  returning  to  the
middle  and  finishing  by  jumping  into  the  river
from  a  height  of  90  feet.  He  also  walked  across
the  Genesee  river  at  Rochester  on  a  rope  1,800  tf\v
long,  recrossing  it  with  a  man  in  a  wheelbam'W
trundled  in  front  of  him.  From  1857  till  1871  Vie
travelled  through  the  United  States,  appearing  not
fewer  than  1,300  times  in  his  various  specialties.
It  happened,  in  a  western  city,  that  his  host  pos-


sessed a  balloon,  left  with  hiiu  for  a  debt,  which  he
was  anxious  to  sell.  Donaldson  proposed  a  trade;
he  would  teach  the  landlord  the  mysteries  of  the
black  art  and  transfer  to  him  all  the  paraphernalia
of  his  exhibitions,  which  was  done,  and  Donaldson*
found  himself  the  owner  of  a  balloon.  Without
the  slightest  previous  knowledge  of  balloon  man-
agement, he  made  arrangements  for  an  ascension,
taking  his  first  lesson  in  a  failure,  which  happened
for  want  of  lighter  gas  or  a  larger  balloon,  the  lat-
ter being  too  small  to  carry  him  except  with  pure
hydrogen.  The  balloon  was  enlarged  and  tried
again  with  coal-gas,  as  in  the  previous  instance ;
and  this  time,  30  Aug.,  1871,  it  succeeded  in  get-
ting off  after  Donaldson  had  thrown  away  every
available  thing,  even  his  coat,  boots,  and  hat.  This
ascent  was  made  from  Beading,  Pa.,  and  the  de-
scent 18  miles  distant.  Another  ascent  was  made
from  Reading,  in  September,  upon  a  trapeze-bar.
On  18  Jan.,  1872,  he  ascended  from  Norfolk,  Va.,
and  his  balloon  accidentally  burst  when  a  mile  from
the  ground.  He  said  of  it:  "The  balloon  did  not
collapse,  but  closed  up  at  the  sides,  and,  swaying
from  side  to  side,  descended  with  frightful  velocity.
I  clung  with  all  my  strength  to  the  hoop.  I  coufd
not  tell  how  badly  1  was  frightened,  but  felt  as
though  all  my  hair  had  been  torn  out.  I  scarcely
had  time  to  realize  that  I  was  alive,  when,  with  a
crash,  I  was  projected  with  the  velocity  of  a  cata-
pult into  a  burr-chestnut  tree.  The  netting  and
rigging,  catching  in  the  tree,  checked  my  velocity,
but  I  had  my  grasp  jerked  loose,  and  was  precipi-
tated through  the  limbs  and  landed  flat  upon  my
back,  with  ray  tights  nearly  torn  off,  and  my  legs,
arms,  and  body  lacerated  and  bleeding."  Shortly
after  this  he  ascended  again  from  Norfolk,  but  on
this  occasion,  in  his  haste  to  avoid  being  carried
out  to  sea,  his  balloon  was  wrecked  among  the
trees,  although  he  himself  escaped  injury.  He  then
undertook  the  construction  of  a  balloon  which  he
called  the  "  Magenta."  It  was  made  of  fine  jaco-
net, held  about  10,000  cubic  feet  of  gas,  and  weighed
about  100  pounds.  He  made  several  ascensions
with  this  balloon,  two  of  which  were  from  Chicago.
On  the  first  occasion  he  was  carried  out  on  Lake
Michigan  and  dragged  more  than  a  mile  through
the  water,  bringing  up  against  a  stone  pier  finally
with  such  violence  as  to  render  him  insensible.  On
17  May,  1873,  he  ascended  from  Reading,  Pa.,  in  a
balloon  made  of  man  ilia-paper  enclosed  with  a  light
network,  the  whole  weighing  but  48  pounds,  al-
though it  contained  14,000  cubic  feet  of  gas.  He
travelled  ten  miles  before  landing.  Donaldson  was
a  convert  to  Wise's  theory  of  a  constant  current
blowing  from  west  to  east  at  a  height  of  three  miles,
and,  as  the  veteran  aeronaut  had  said  a  balloon  could
cross  the  ocean  in  this  current,  Donaldson  was  ready
to  take  the  venture,  and  so  announced  his  inten-
tion of  making  the  attempt.  Wise  offered  to  join
him,  and  they  set  out  together  to  raise  the  neces-
sary funds.  They  went  to  New  York  and  opened
a  subscription,  but  while  this  was  in  progress  the
proprietors  of  the  "  Daily  Graphic  "  offered  to  fur-
nish the  funds  required  for  the  construction  of  a
very  large  balloon  and  outfit,  together  with  the  gas
required.  The  proposition  was  accepted,  and  the
construction  of  an  immense  balloon  of  twilled  cot-
ton was  carried  to  completion.  But  before  the  in-
flation some  differences  arose  between  the  aero-
nauts regarding  the  reliability  of  the  balloon.
Donaldson's  inexperience  placed  him  in  a  second*
ary  position  throughout  the  entire  transaction,  but
when  the  time  for  action  came  he  found  himself
the  principal,  Mr.  Wise  having  withdrawn.  Such
a  balloon  as  Donaldson  found  himself  possessed  of


DONALD


190


on  this  occasion  was  no  t •  ►>  ;  it  was  *«id  to  I*-  cana-
ille .  .f  mtnteinlni  mi  lOO^QOO  cubic  tool  «>f  pis.  an<l
bed  orer  t lm<-  i< in-. We  do  not  roach  for

these  SgunO,  out  it  is  certain  that  tin-  lUmonriom
were  MiuiinmsT.  and  beyond the  capabilities  of

DonaldoOUa  management  at  t hut  t inn-. Time  un-
essfttl  attempt-  won  made  at  inflation,  the  bal-
loon  bunting  snob,  time,  when  finally  tin-  aeronaut
Tn.f.  S. A. King  was  sent for.  the  work  WOJ
COinpli-hed,  and  the  ascension  BOM  from  thcCapi-

tolme  baseball  groandf  in  Brooklyn,  N.  V.,  on  ?

<>it..  i*;:{. Donaldson  had  two  companions,  named

Poftl  an<l  Lnnt.  A  handsome  lifc-lM>at.  BUM  with
provisions  aii'l  loaded  with  great  quantities  of  sand,
was  hung  Is-neath  the  balloon,  which  served  l*>th
as  car  and  as  a  means  of  escape  in  case  of  falling
inti •  the  MOW.  Hut  they  never  reached  the  sea.
Fortunately,  they  kept  inland  sufficiently  to  clear
the  water  till  it  DOOMM  manifest  that  the  aeronaut
was  as  incapable  of  managing  the  mammoth  globe
in  the  air  M  he  had  been  on  the  ground.  Sanely
one  hundred  miles  hail  been  run  when  control  was
completely  lost,  and  the  voyagers  found  themselves
dashing  about  among  trees  and  fences,  and  coming
close  to  the  ground.  Donaldson  gave  the  word  to
jump,  and  Kurd  jumped  with  Donaldson,  but  Lunt
was  too  late.  A  thousand-pound  drag-rope  was
trailing,  which  prevented  the  balloon  from  rising
to  anv  considerable  height  after  the  two  men  had
left  the  car,  and  Lunt,  panic-stricken  at  finding
himself  alone  with  the  monster,  threw  himself
bodily  into  the  first  tree  the  boat  came  in  contact
with  near  Canaan,  Conn.,  and  fell  through  to  the
ground  without  being  able  to  stop  himself.  He
died  six  months  later.  P.  T.  Barnum  offered  Mr.
Donaldson  an  engagement  first  at  Gilmore's  garden
and  then  with  his  hippodrome,  which  was  accepted.
On  24  July,  1874,  he  ascended  from  Gilmore's  gar-
den in  a  balloon  containing  54,000  cubic  feet  of  gas,
with  five  passengers;  these  he  continued  to  land
one  after  another  as  the  balloon  became  weakened ;
but  by  resorting  to  the  use  of  the  drag-rope  he  was
able  to  keep  afloat  for  thirteen  hours,  landing
finally  at  Greenport,  near  Hudson,  130  miles  from
New  xorit  Four  days  afterward  he  again  ascended
from  Gilmore's  garden.  Three  hours  after  start-
ing, two  passengers  were  landed,  ami  the  voyage
continued  into  the  night.  At  2  A.  M.  a  landing  was
effected  at  Wallingford,  Vt.,  the  journey  being  re-
sumed at  8  A.  M.,  and  at  noon  the  voyage  terminated
at  Thetford,  Vt.  On  19  Oct.  of  the  same  year  Mr.
Donaldson  took  up  a  wedding  party  from  Cincin-
nat  i,  t  he  ceremony  being  performed  in  mid-air.  On
23  June.  1875,  he  ascended  from  Toronto,  taking
three  newspaper  reporters  with  him.  They  were
carried  out  over  Lake  Ontario,  and  finally  doBOendod
into  the  water,  through  which  they  were  dragged
for  several  miles  before  they  were  rescued  by  a  boat's
crew  sent  out  from  a  passing  schooner.  Donald-
son, during  his  tour  with  the  hippodrome,  made
numerous  ascensions.  From  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  he
ascended  with  live  ladies  and  one  gentleman,  mak-
ing a  pleasant  and  safe  voyage.  On  17  June,  1878,
he  ascended  from  Buffalo,  accompanied  by  two  re-
porters and  his  friend  Prof.  King.  They  expected
to  have  an  experience  over  Lake  Erie,  but  after  a
sail  of  twenty  miles  or  more  over  the  water  they
reached  the  Canada  shore,  landing  finally  near  Port
Colborne.  On  14  July,  ls7"»,  Donaldson  ax-ended
from  the  Lake  front  in  Chicago,  carrying  several
POTOOOJ  with  him.  The  air  being  very  still,  the
balloon,  although  it  drifted  lakeward.  did  not  get
Bon  than  three  miles  from  the  shore,  and  was
towed  back  to  the  starting-place  with  !in>-t  of  the
gas  remaining  in  it,  and  held  for  the  ax  ension  of


the  following  da>. <»ne  .,f  the  hippodrome  man.

looking  at  the  balloon.  Inquired  of  Donald-

soii-  -What-  the  iN.  ,,f tin-  f Whv  didn't i..ij

go  naowhonf  "Wait  tilt  to-morrow."  bo  re-
plied, "and  I'll  go  far  Wfmgtl  forjTOU."  On  the
following  da?  the  wind  was  blUWiag  Sjp  the  lake  at
the  rate  of  ten  to  fifteen  miles  an  hour.  An  addi-
tional amount  of  gas  was  suppli.-d  t"  make  up  f,,r
what  had  bm  lost  ;  but.  in  OOneonuoncs  of  the  de-
terioration of  what  had  been  in  the  balloon  -in..-
the  DrOfiOW  day.  the  buoyancy  WOJ  not  §j  B
usual.  Knowing  that  he  would  have  a  long  voyage
up  the  lake,  he  determined  to  take  but  one  com-
pinion  with  him.  Newton  S.  QrfanWOOd,  of  tbj  Chi-
cago "  Evening  Journal,"  drawing  the  prize,  as  it
WM  then  considered.  At  5  P.  M.  the  \oyage  U-gaii.
'111.-  balloon  gradually  rose  to  the  heigfit  of  a  mile
or  more,  floating  off"  up  the  lake,  and  in  10001  an
hour  and  a  half  di-apjK-ari-d.  At  seven  o'olool  the
crew  of  the  "  Little  Cuidc."  a  small  craft,  saw  the
balloon  about  thirty  miles  from  shore,  trailing  the
car  through  the  water,  and  tried  to  reach  it  ;  but
In-fore  this  could  be  done,  the  lialloon,  as  if  sud-
denly relieved  of  some  weight,  shot  up  into  the  air
again  and  off  into  the  distance.  Night  00UM  on.
and,  with  the  cooling  gas  and  natural  loss  (.f  buoy-
ancy, the  Luekkn  aeronanti  doubtlem  came  down
u|M>n  the  lake  again.  Hut  they  might  have  esca|N-d
with  their  lives  had  it  not  Is-en  for  a  violent  storm
which  came  up  alxnit  eleven  o'clock.  The  body  of
(Jri m wood  was  washed  ashore  mi  the  farther  side
of  the  lake,  and  was  found  on  1M  Aug.  Donaldooo
never  was  found,  nor  anv  part  of  the  lialloon.

DONDfi  IBARRA,  Joaquin  (don-day  ».  M.  \i-
can  scientist,  b.  in  Campeche,  Mexico, 6  July.  1887;
d.  in  Merida,  1  Nov..  iH7r>.  He  received  his  early  edu-
cation in  the  city  of  Campeche,  and  in  1*44  removed
toPuebla,  where  he  entered  t  he  college  of  pharmacv,
being  graduated  in  1*47.  He  continued  his  stud-
ies in  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  in  1N*>0  established
a  chair  of  pharmacy  in  Campeche,  and  in  1S.V1  an-
other in  Merida.  He  alec  held  for  a  long  time  the
chair  of  botany  in  the  Catholic  college  of  Merida,
and  the  chair  of  industrial  chemistry  for  artisans.
Donde  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  special
school  of  medicine OBd  pharmacy  of  Yucatan.  Ib-
was  the  inventor  of  some  very  useful  chemical
products,  and  the  first  to  produce  santonateof  si  do
(1862).  lie  published  "Pharmaceutical  Prescrip-
tions,'1 which  appeared  in  Philadelphia  under  the
name  of  "  Pharmaceutical  Notes,"  and  were  repub-
lished in  France,  England,  and  Germany :  "  Pwpa-
racion  del  Santonato  de  Sosa";  "  Estudio  sobra  el
Ni-in  "  :  ami  "  Kli-inentosde  Ilotiinica."  Donde  was
a  great  benefactor  of  the  local  industries  of  Merida.

DONKLSON,  Andrew  Jackson.  politicion,  b>
near  Nashville,  Tenn-JBS  Aug.,  1800;  d.  in  Horn-
phis,  M  Juno,  1871.  He  studied  in  the  Uniremity
of  Nashville,  and  was  graduated  at  the  V.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1880,  standing  moond  In  his  class.
From  1890  till  1888,  while  2d  lieutenant  in  the  en-
gineers, he  served  oi  aide-de-camp  to  his  uncle.
Son.  Andrew Jack-on, when  tin- latter  w..-

ernor  of  the  recently-ooauiwd  territory  of  Florida,

and  then  as  assistant  to  the  l»oard  of  engineers.
He  resigned  from  the  armv  in  February,  18
tended  law-lectures  in  the  Transylvania  university
Si  Lexington,  Kv..  and  was  admit t«il  to  the  Imr  in
[8991  but  turned' his  attention  to  cotton-planting
on  his  estate-  in  Bolivar  county.  Miss.  <  m  Jack-
son's election  to  the  presidency,  he  beOaUM  hi- con-
fidential adviser  and  private  secretary,  continuing
in  thai  capacitv  until  thoolONOf  his  second  ad-
ministnition.  The  annexation  treaty  botWOOB  the
United  States  and  Texas  having  been  rejected  by


200


DONGAN


DONKIN


y-J  &~cnctstt-ir'Ls


the  senate  in  April,  1844,  Mr.  Donelson  was  asked
to  undertake  new  negotiations,  and  accordingly
was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  to  the  repuMie  of
Texas.  In  1846  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Prus-
sia, and  in  1848
to the federal

government  of
fermany,  which
office  he  resigned
in  1849.  He  as-
sumed theeditor-
ship  of  the  Wash-
ington "Union"
inl851,butrelin-
quished  it  dur-
ing the  following
year.  After  the
inauguration  of
President  Pierce
in  1853,  he  aban-
doned the  Demo-
crats and  joined
the  American
party,  receiving
the  nomination
of  vice  -  presi-
dent on  the  tick-
et with  Millard  Fillmore  in  1856.  After  his  de-
feat in  the  election  that  followed,  he  retired  from
public  life,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  manage-
ment of  his  extensive  estates.  Subsequent  to  the
civil  war  he  practised  his  profession  in  Memphis.
He  published  "  Reports  of  Explorations  "  (Wash-
ington. 1855).

DONGAN,  Thomas,  colonial  governor  of  New
York,  b.  in  Castletown,  County  Kildare,  Ireland,  in
1634 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  14  Dec,  1715.  He
early  entered  the  army,  and  served  with  the  British
and  then  with  the  French,  attaining  the  rank  of
colonel.  Later  he  was  made  lieutenant-governor
of  Tangiers  by  Charles  II.,  and  in  1682  the  Duke
of  York  appointed  him  governor  of  the  colony  of
New  York.  His  instructions  were  to  conciliate  the
French,  and  to  give  no  countenance  to  Indian  tribes
hostile  to  this  nation.  These  suggestions  he  failed
to  carry  out,  and  he  was  accused  of  inciting  the
tribes  known  as  the  Five  Nations  to  war.  In  1686
he  gave  to  the  city  of  New  York  a  charter,  and  in
1688  resigned  his  office,  but  did  not  return  to  Eng-
land until  three  years  later.

DONIPHAN,  Alexander  William,  soldier,  b.
in  Mason  county,  Ky.,  9  July,  1808 ;  d.  in  Rich-
mond. Mo.,  8  Aug.,  1887.  His' father,  Joseph  Doni-
phan, a  native  of  Virginia,  died  in  1813.  Alexan-
der was  graduated  at  Augusta  college,  Ky.,  in  1826,
and  on  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1830  began
the  practice  of  law  at  Lexington,  Mo.  Three  years
afterward  he  removed  still  farther  west,  to  the  vil-
lage of  Liberty,  in  Clay  county.  He  soon  came  to
be  known  as  one  of  the  foremost  lawyers  at  the
Missouri  bar,  but  at  the  same  time  devoted  himself
with  such  zeal  to  military  studies  that  he  will  be
remembered  chiefly  as  a  soldier.  It  seems  to  have
been  under  the  influence  of  Albert  Sidney  John-
ston, who  was  for  some  time  stationed  at  Fort
Leavenworth,  that  this  militaryNzeal  was  awakened
in  Mr.  Doniphan.  In  1838  he  had  risen  in  the
state  militia  to  the  grade  of  brigadier-general,
when  there  was  trouble  with  the  Mormons.  At
tlic  head  of  a  considerable  force  of  state  troops,
Doniphan  imposed  terms  upon  the  prophet  Joseph
Smith  ;  the  Mormons  were  obliged  to  give  up  their
leaders  for  trial,  lay  down  their  arms,  and  leave  the
state  of  Missouri.  When  war  began  with  Mexico,
in  1846,  Doniphan  entered  the  United  States  ser-


vice as  colonel  of  the  1st  regiment  of  Missouri
mounted  volunteer-,  ami  took  part  in  Sen.  Kear-
ney's expedition  to  Santa  Fe;  and.  when  Kearney,
in  September,  1846,  set  out  from  Santa  F6  for  Cali-
fornia, he  ordered  Col.  Doniphan  to  proceed  with
such  troops  as  could  be  spared  from  New  Mexico'
to  the  city  of  Chihuahua,  and  there  report  to  Gen.
Wool.  But  before  this  order  could  be  carried  out
it  became  necessarv  to  reduce  to  submission  the
warlike  Navajos  Indians,  and  having  accomplished
this  difficult  task,  Col.  Doniphan  set  out  from  Val-
verde  on  14  Dec.  At  Bracito  river  he  was  met  by
a  superior  force  of  Mexicans,  who  sent  forward  an
officer  with  a  black  flag  summoning  Doniphan  to
surrender.  "  If  you  don't  obey,"  said  the  Mexican,
"  we  will  charge,  and  give  no  quarter." "  Charge

and  be  d d,"  was  the  laconic  reply. In  less  than

half  an  hour  the  Mexicans  were  put  to  flight,  leaving
more  than  200  of  their  number  killed  or  woundedT
Of  Doniphan's  men  not  one  was  killed,  and  only
seven  were  wounded.  Two  days  later  he  occupied
El  Paso,  where  he  was  obliged  to  wait  for  artillery  to
be  sent  to  him.  On  8  Feb.,  1847,  he  set  out  on  a
terrible  march  of  250  miles,  through  a  savage  and
sterile  country,  for  Chihuahua.  On  the  28th,  hav-
ing surmounted  most  formidable  hardships  and
arrived  within  seventeen  miles  of  his  goal,  ne  was
confronted  by  a  force  of  4,000  Mexicans  at  the  pass
of  the  Sacramento.  Although  his  own  fore*  num-
bered but  924
men,  and  the  en-
emy were  strong-
ly intrenched,
he  nevertheless
attacked  with
such  fury  as
completely  to
rout  the  Mexi-
cans, who  lost
more  than  800  in
killed  or  wound-
ed. Doniphan's
loss  was  one  man
killed  and  eleven
wounded.  It  was
like  the  ancient
fights  between
Greeks  and  Per-
sians. The  next
day  Chihuahua
surrendered.  Af-
ter waiting  for
weeks  until  fur-
ther orders  were  received,  the  brave  little  army
marched  700  miles  to  Saltillo,  where  they  arrived
on  21  May,  to  find  the  active  business  of  the  war
in  that  part  of  Mexico  ended.  After  1847  Col.
Doniphan  led  a  quiet  life  at  his  home  in  western
Missouri.  In  1836,  1840,  and  1854  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature.

DONKIN,  Robert,  British  soldier,  b.  19  March,
1727;  d.  near  Bristol,  England,  in  March,  1821.
He  entered  the  army  in  1746,  was  at  the  siege  of
Belle  Isle  in  1761,  afterward  served  in  Flanders
with  Wolfe,  and  through  the  Seven  years'  war,  and
was  aide-de-camp  and  secretary  to  Gen.  Rufane,
governor  and  commander-in-chief  at  Martinique.
He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1770,  and  had
risen  to  the  rank  of  general  in  1809.  He  served
through  the  whole  of  the  American  war  from  1775
till  1783,  in  the  early  part  of  it  as  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  Gage,  and  then  as  major  of  the  44th  regiment.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Military  Collections  and
Remarks"  (New  York,  1777.  "published  for  the
benefit  of  the  children  and  widows  »f  the  valiant


)A.\.\


IXXHJTTLE


201


■Oldfcfl  inhumanly  and  wantonly  butchered  when
illy  marching  to  and  from  Concord,  April  ID.
iV  the  rebels^.
IlilWI  in. Ignatius,  author. I.,  in Phil*

delphi  .  ii"  wm  educated  in  tin-  pnb>

lie  Khoolsof  lii-i  unit'-  -died  law.  was  ad-

111  ii t <••  1  to  tin'  bar,  and  practised.  He  wenl  t"
Minnesota  in  1857,  was  elected  lieutenant-governor

'.  and  again  in  1861,  and  *M  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  rt*piild i«-an. Miring from I

lift  March,  1K)J».  hVsidcs  doing  journalistic
work  be  lias  written  an  "  Essay  on  the  Bonnet*  ol
Sliak.  -|h  .in-  "  "Atlantis  the  Antediluvian  World  "
.  in  which  he  attempts  to  demon-
strate that  there  once  existed  in  the  Atlantic-
ocean,  opposite  the  straits  of  (iihrnltar.  a  large
island,  known  to  the  ancients  as  "  Atlantis";  and
'•  Ragnarok"  (lHM'l),  in  which  he  tries  t<>  prove  that
the  deposits  of  clay,  gravel,  and  dccomiioscd  rinks,
characteristic  of  the  drift  age.  were  the  result  of
contact  between  the  earth  and  a  comet. —  His-i-t.  r.
Eleanor  Cecilia,  |x>et,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  6
Sept.. 1KIN.  received her  education  in the  public

schools  of  Philadelphia  and  at  the  French  academy

of  Mine.  AdeleSigoignc,  of  that  city.  She  is  a  singer,
having  a  rich  contralto  voice  of  power  and  con-
siderable rain,'!-.  Her  poetical  publications  are
"(hit  of  Sweet  Solitude"  (Philadelphia,  1873);
"Doinus  I>ei"  (1874);  "Legend  of  the  Best  Be-
loved, and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1880);
" Crowned  with  Stars "  (published  by  and  for  the
University  of  Notre  Dame,  Indiana,  1NN1);  ••  Hymns
of  the  Sacred  Heart."  with  music  (Philadelphia,
1882);  "Children  of  the  Golden  Sheaf,  and  other
Poems  "(1884);  "  Garland  of  Festival  Song*,"  with
music  (New  York,  1885);  and  "  Little  Compliments
of  the  Season,"  original,  selected,  and  translated
verses  (1886).  She  has  also  published  •■  Our  Birth-
dav  Baniiuet."  in  prose  and  verse  (New  York,  1885);
"the  Life  of  Father  Felix"  (Philadelphia,  1HH6) ;
and  two  compilations.  "  Pearls  from  the  Casket  of
the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus"  (New  York.  1880)  and
"Signori  Leaflets  "(1887).  Her  labors  have  received
the  special  apostolic  benediction  of  Pope  Leo  XI II.,
and  she  has  ban  awarded  a  medallion  bv  one  of  the
chief  religious  orders  of  Rome.  One  of  her  poemf
was  read  at  a  grand  academia  in  the  Royal  college
of  the  Escorial,  Madrid.  Spain,  in  Mav,  1887.

DONOP,  Carl  Ball  Kurt  von,  Count.  British
oflicer.  1>.  ill  Germany  in  1740;  d.  in  New  Jersey,
25  Oct.,  1777.  He  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  four  battalions  of  grenadiers  and  the  yagers  in
the  detachment  of  Hessian  troops  in  the  Briti.-h
employ  destined  for  service  in  the  American  war.
He  landed  on  Long  Island  on  22  Aug.,  177<l.  and  took
part  in  the  Imttle  there  OH  27  Aug.  In  December,
177<>,  when  (Jen.  Howe  went  into  winter  qnftften
in  New  York,  he  left  Donop  as  acting  brigadier,
with  two  Hessian  brigades,  the  yagers  and  the  1J<1
Highlanders,  to  hold  the  line  from  Trenton  to
Burlington.  On  hearing  ol  the  defeat  of  Rail,
Donop  hurriedly  retreated  to  Princeton,  abandon*
iiiir  his  stores  and  his  sick  and  wounded  at  Borden-
town.  In  October,  1777.  Sir  William  Howe  gave
verbal  orders  to  (\.|.  Donop  to  carry  Bid
N.  J.,  by  assault,  if  it  could  !*•  done  easily;  an*tl
on  the  22d  he.  with  his  Hessians,  attacked  Fort
Mercer  at  that  place,  but  was  replied  after  a
most  desperate  resistance.  Don<>p  being  mortally
wonnded. He  survived  the  battle  three  da]

said  to  a  brother  oflicer :  "It  is  finishing  a  noble
career  early  ;  but  I  die  the  victim  of  my  ambition,
and  of  the  avarice  of  mv  sovereign."

DOOLITTLE. Amos,  engraver,  b.  in  Cheshire.
Conn.,  in 1754:  d.  in Men Haven,  Conn..  :il  .Ian..


1888. lb-  «as  entirely  --If-taught.  and.  nf
ing  an  apprentioeahip  with  a  -  h. began

husiiiem  as  an  OBfraYef  in  177V While*  volun-
teer at  Cambridge  he  rleitcd  the  Imtth-gnun

Dgton,  and  on  his  return  to  New  Haven  made
an  nagnmnj  of  the  latioa.  In*  iirM  ntlonq

that  art. This js believed to have Ui-n  the  first
historical  engraving  made  in  Am- 1
li 1 1 It-  executed  three  other  historical  prints  in  n  ln-
tion  to  the  expedition  to  Concord  and  L  i

DOOLITTLE,  Benjamin, clergyman,  b.  lOJuly,
1186;  d.  U  Jan..  174!i.  He  was  graduated  at  '•
in  1714  and  was  minister  of  Northtlcld.  Mas*.,
from  171M  until  his  death.  Bawasalsoa|
and  published  an  interesting  "Narrative  of  the
Mischief  by  the  French  and  Indians,  fp.m  1744  to
174H,"  and  an  "  Imiuirv  into  Enthusiasm."

DOOLITTLE.  Kdnili  Stafford,  artist,  b.  in
Albany.  N.  V..  in  lH4:i;  d.  aboui  Ikhi.  Bi  studied
painting  umler  John  A.  Hows  in  lNi.*>,  and  in  the
studio  of  William  Hart  for  a  short  time  in  I860.
In  1H67  he  opened  a  studio  in  New  Fork,  but  in
1868  went  to  Europe.  He  studied  art  for  some
time  in  Uome.  till  failing  health  breed  him  to  re-
turn to  the  United  States.  In  1869  he  painted  his
"Shadow  of  a  Great  Rock  in  a  Weary  I*and."  of
which  he  ntade  several  copies.  In  the  summer  Of
1872  he  studied  under  Jas|>er  F.  Cropsev,  at  War-
wick, N.  Y.  His  painting!  comprise  landscapes
and  marine  subjects,  and  include  "Sunset  on  an
Adirondack  Swamp";  "Chimney  Bock,  North
Carolina";  "Gray's  Peak.  Colorado" ;  "A  Pool  in
the  Warwick  Woodlands";  "  Ruins  of  theClaudian
Aqueduct  on  the  Koinaii  Campagna";  "On  the
Giuadecca  Canal.  Venice"  ;  "The  Arch  of  Tit  .
"Autumn  in  the  Catskill  Clove";  "Tie-  <  >\.-n-
strasse.  Lake  Lucerne";  "The  Old  Toll-Ga:
and  "Suns<t  on  Schroon  IjJike."  Mr.  Doolittle
also  designed  book-oorera,  deoorated  churches,  and
executed  illuminations,  the  latter  including  "  The
Soliloquy  of  Friar  Pacificus."  for  the  Centennial
exhibition  at  Philadelphia,  which  was  afterward
presented  to  the  pool  I^ongfcllow,  and  of  "  A
Prayer  to  the  Virgin. "  DOW  in  the  convent  of  the
Sacred  Heart  at  Savannah.  Ga. Be  was  the  author

of  u Grace  Church Chimea/* and  other  |><>cm8.

DOOLITTLE,  James  Rood,  senator,  b.  in
Hampton,  Washington  00*,  N.  V..  Ii  Jan.,  1816.
After  attending  Middlebury  academy,  he  entered
Geneva  (now  Bobait)  college,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated  in  1S:14.  Be  then  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1887,  ami  practised  at  Boeheater  and
at  Warsaw.  N.  V.  Be  wae elected  district  attorney
of  Wyoming  county.  N.  V..  in  1848,  and  also  aWfM
for  some  time  M  11  colonel  of  militia.  He  rOBOTed
to  Wiseonsin  in  1861,  and  was  elected  judge  of  the
first  judicial  circuit  of  that  state  in  lH-Vt.  but  re-
signed in  1808,  and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Democratic  EtepobUoan,  to  fncoeed  Bonn  Dodge,
serving  two  terms,  from  l^.")7  till  l*o'.».  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  pan  e  convention  of  1881,  While
in  the  senate,  he  served  as  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  Indian  affairs  and  as  ineinU'r  of  other
Important  committees.  During  the  summer  recces
of  [868,  he  visit, -d  the  Indians,  west  Of  the  Missis-
sippi Ma  member  Of  a  spoofe]  senate  committee.
He  took  a  prominent  j>art  in  dcliate  on  the  various
war  and  reconstruction  measures,  upholding  the
national  government,  but  always  insisting  that  the
seceding  states  had  ncverccascd  to  lie  a  part  of  the
Union.  Be  oppomd  the  fifteenth  amendment  to
the  const  it  ut  ion  of  the  United  States,  on  the  ground
that  each  state  should  determine  questions  of  suf-
frage for  itself.  Mr.  Doolittle  retired  from  public
life  iii  lsuit),  and  has  since  resided  in  Racine,  fl


202


DOOLITTLE


DoKE.MUS


though  practising  law  in  Chicago.  He  wa<  presi-
dent of  the  Philadelphia  national  union  convent  i<  >n
of  1806,  and  also  of  the  Baltimore  national  Demo-
cratic convention  of  18?2.  which  adopted  the
nomination  of  Horace  Greeley  for  the  presidency.
Judge  Doolittle  has  been  a  trustee  of  Chicago  uni-
ver-it  y  since  its  foundation,  served  for  one  year  as
its  president,  and  was  for  many  years  a  professor  in
its  law  school.

DOOLITTLE,  Mary  Antoinette,  lecturer,  b.
in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Mt.
Lebanon.  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  81  Dec.,  1886.  She
was  graduated  in  New  Lebanon  in  1825.  She  be-
came a  member  of  the  Shaker  society  in  1824,  a
deaconess  in  a  Shaker  community  in  1826,  and
was  an  eldress  from  1828.  Her  lectures  on  relig-
ious subjects,  which  were  delivered  in  various  cities
in  the  United  States,  attracted  much  attention.
In  1873-'5  she  edited,  with  Frederick  W.  Evans,
the  "  Shaker  and  Shakeress,"  a  periodical  pub-
lished at  Mt.  Lebanon  college,  and  is  author  of  an
"Autobiography"  (1880),  and  of  a  series  of  re-
markable inspirational  songs.

DOOLITTLE,  Theodore  Sandford,  educator,
b.  in  Ovid,  Seneca  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1836.  He
was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1859,  and  at  the  New
Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1862,  and  in
that  year  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Reformed
Dutch  church,  and  became  pastor  at  Platlands,
near  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1864  he  accepted  the
chair  of  rhetoric,  logic,  and  metaphysics  at  Rut-
gers, which  he  has  since  held,  becoming  also  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  "  Christian  at  Work  "  in  1873.
Wesleyan  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1872.  Dr.  Doolittle  has  frequently  lectured  on
art  and  literature.  Besides  articles  in  periodicals,
he  has  published  an  "  Account  of  the  Centennial
Celebration  of  Rutgers  College"  (1870),  and  a
"  History  of  Rutgers  College,"  written  for  the  Bu-
reau of  education  at  Washington.  In  1875  he  con-
tributed to  the  "  Christian  Intelligencer "  a  series
of  letters  entitled  "  Across  the  Continent."

DOOLY,  John  Mitchell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lincoln
county,  Ga.,  about  1772;  d.  there,  26  May,  1827.
Little  is  known  of  his  early  life,  or  the  time  at
which  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  ap-
pointed solicitor-general  of  the  Western  circuit  of
Georgia,  2  Sept.,  1802,  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  on  22
Nov.,  1804,  was  elected  to  the  same  office  by  the
legislature.  In  1816  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
same  circuit,  and  in  1822  chosen  first  judge  of  the
Northern  circuit,  to  which  latter  place  he  was  re-
elected in  1825.  He  also  represented  his  county  in
the  legislature  during  the  embargo  and  other  re-
strictive measures  adopted  by  the  general  govern-
ment, and  the  war  with  Great  Britain,  successfully
advocating  the  "  alleviating,"  "  thirding,"  and
"  stop  "  laws  then  passed.  It  is  chiefly  as  a  wit
that  Judge  Dooly  is  still  remembered.  He  was
quick  and  brilliant  in  repartee  and,  when  provoked,
would  launch  at  his  adversary  the  most  biting  sar-
casm. But,  notwithstanding  this  powerful  weapon
with  which  nature  had  furnished  him,  he  was  a
genial  companion,  and  utterly  unselfish.  The  re-
ports of  his  wise  and  witty  sayings,  handed  down
by  tradition,  have  kept  the  bench  and  bfcr  of  Georgia
supplied  with  anecdotes  for  a  half  cent imv.

DORANTES,  Pedro  (do-rahn'-tays),  Spanish  ex-

Slorer,  b.  in  Bejar,  Spain,  early  in  the  16th  century ;
.  in  Paraguay.  He  was  attached  as  commissary
to  the  expedition  commanded  by  Cabeza  de  Vaea,
which  left  Sanlucar  for  River  Plate  on  2  Nov.,  1540,
and  reached  the  island  of  Santa  Ca tali na,  29  March,
1541.  Thence  the  expedition  went  to  the  continent.
and  as  they  intended  to  go  to  Asuncion  by  land  the


commander  sent  Dorantes  to  open  the  way.  After
exploring  the  country  for  three  months,  he  reported
that  the  journey  would  be  difficult,  and  ■flTJood
Cabeza  de  Vaca  to  ascend  Itabicu  river,  which  WM
successfully  effected,  and  the  expedition  reached
Asuncion,  11  March,  1542.  Dorantes  proved  to  be*
a  brave,  intelligent,  and  useful  officer,  hut  his  mal-
administration compelled  the  governor  to  deliver
him  to  the  court  of  justice.  At  the  same  time  the
colonists  were  in  great  danger  of  perishing  at  tin-
hands  of  the  hostile  natives,  ana,  as  every  oai
thought  Dorantes  to  be  the  only  man  able  to  save
them,  it  was  decided  to  stop  the  proceedings  against
him  and  let  him  continue  at  his  post.  The  war
with  the  Indians  was  short,  but  during  that  time
Dorantes  joined  the  other  officers  in  a  plot  to  force
the  governor  to  return  to  Asuncion,  and  eight  days
afterward  (25  April,  1544)  took  an  important  part
in  the  deposition  of  the  governor  and  in  the  elec-
tion of  his  successor,  Domingo  de  Irala.  He  soon
l>ecame  an  enemy  of  the  new  ruler,  who,  in  1547,
went  to  Peru,  leaving  Francisco  de  Mendoza  in  his
place ;  but  Dorantes  was  also  opposed  to  Mendoza,
and  worked  for  the  election  of  Diego  de  Abreu,
whose  party  he  left  again  on  the  return  of  Irala
from  Peru.  After  the  death  of  Irala  in  1557,  Fran-
cisco Ortiz  de  Vergara  was  elected  governor,  and
Dorantes  accompanied  him  during  the  campaign
against  the  Indians  in  1559,  when  he  greatly  dis-
tinguished himself,  as  well  as  during  the  expedition
to  Peru  in  1564,  where  he  remained  for  five  vears.
In  1569  he  returned  to  Asuncion,  and  lived  in  Para-
guay to  a  verv  old  age.

DOKEMl'S,  Sarah  Piatt,  philanthropist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  3  Aug.,  1802;  d.  there.  29  Jan.,
1877.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Elias  Haines,  a
merchant  of  New  York,  and  her  mother  was  the
daughter  of  Robert  Ogden,  a  distinguished  lawyer
of  New  Jersey.  In  1812  she  united  with  her  mother
in  praying  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  and
from  that  time  dates  her  interest  in  foreign  mis-
sions. She  married,  in  1821,  Thomas  C.  Doremus,
a  merchant,  whose  wealth  thenceforth  was  freely
expended  in  her  benevolent  enterprises.  In  1828,
with  eight  ladies,  she  organized  the  Greek  relief
mission,  and  sent  Dr.  Jonas  King  to  Greece  to  dis-
tribute supplies.  Seven  years  later  she  became  in-
terested in  the  mission  at  Grand  Ligne,  Canada,
conducted  by  Madame  Henriette  Feller,  of  Switz-
erland, and  in  1860  was  made  president  of  the  or-
fanization.  In  1840  she  began  visiting  the  New
rork  city  prisons,  and  after  establishing  Sabbath
services,  used  her  influence  in  1842  toward  found-
ing the  Home  for  women  discharged  from  prison,
now  the  Isaac  T.  Hopper  home,  of  which  she  be-
came president  on  the  death  of  her  friend  and  co-
founder,  Miss  Catherine  M.  Sedgwick.  She  aided  in
founding,  in  1850,  the  House  and  school  of  indust  ry
for  poor  women,  becoming  its  president  in  1867,
and  in  1854  became  vice-president  of  the  Nursery
and  child's  hospital.  In  1855  she  assisted  Dr.  J.
Marion  Sims  in  his  project  of  establishing  the  New
York  woman's  hospital,  of  which  she  was  ultimately
president.  During  the  civil  war  she  co-operated
with  the  work  carried  on  in  the  hospitals,  minis-
tering alike  to  the  wounded  from  north  and  south.
She  founded,  in  1860,  the  Woman's  union  mif
ary  society,  designed  to  elevate  and  Christ  ianize  the
women  of  heathen  lands,  and  she  took  an  active
part  as  manager  in  the  Presbyterian  home  for  aged
women,  organized  in  1866.  She  aided  in  collecting
supplies  to  relieve  the  sufferers  from  famine  in  Ire-
land in  1869,  and  was  for  many  years  manager  of
the  female  branch  of  the  City  mission  and  tract
society  and  of  the  Female  Bible  society. The  last


DOREMUS


DOREMUS


m


in  which  she  lnlMtrml  was  known  as  the
"Gould  Memorial,"  and  had  for  its  olij.
establishment  of  halo-American  -m  Ihm.U.  All  for-
eign missions,  without  regard  to  creed,  Amd
her  sympathies.  Her  private  charities  for  the  poor
win-  incessant,  amid  the  cares  of  a  family  of  nine
children  ol  her  own,  and  othan  t hut  ibe  adopted.
—  Her  MM,  Robert  Ogdcn.  ■h«-mi>t.  b.  in  New
York  city.  11  Jan.,  1884J  -t u<  1  i«-«l  at  Columliia,  ami
was  graduated  at  the  Now  York  university  in
1842.  Here  he  came  under  the  influence  of  John
\V.  Draper,  and  in  1843t)ecamc  his  assistant  in  the
medical  department  of  the  university.  This  office
he  held  for  seven  years,  and  aided  Prof.  Dnqicr  in
many  of  his  famous  researches  on  light  and  heat.
In  H47  he  went  to  Kurojie,  continuing  his  chemi-
cal studies  in  Paris  with  s]>ccial  reference  to  elec-
tro-metallurgy, also  visiting  the  estalilishtnents
where  chemical  products  were  manufactured.  <  »n
his  return  to  New  York,  in  1H48,  with  Dr.  Charles
T.  Harris,  he  established  a  laboratory  on  Broadway
for  the  purpose  of  giving  instruction  in  analytical
chemistry,  and  for  making  commercial  analyses.
He  was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  N'ew
York  college  of  pharmacy  in  1841),  and  delivered

the  first  lectures
in  his  own  labora-
tory. Meanwhile
he  studied  medi-
cine with  Dr.  A  bra-
ham  S.  Cox,  and
received  hisdegree
from  the  medical
department  of  the
university  in  1850.
He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the
New  York  medi-
cal college  in  1850,
and  at  his  own
expense  arranged
and  equipped  the
first  laboratory  in
rff J ,  JA  the  United  States

Jfc-^&s  f/'UvZ.  'or instructing

V7>  /pfiUJsnJ?29*4-o  medical students

/J '  in  analytical  chem-

^  istry,  requiring  all

the  candidates  for  graduation  to  pass  tnis  exam-
ination. In  1851  he  was  elected  professor  of  nat-
ural history  in  the  Free  academv  (now  the  Col-
lege of  the  city  of  New  York),  and  in  1859  was  as-
sociated with  others  in  establishing  the  Long  Island
college  hospital,  where  he  lectured  for  several  years.
He  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and  toxi-
cology in  IMlevue  hospital  medical  college.  New
York,  in  1861,  which  chair  he  has  since  retained.
A  year  later  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  spent  two
years  in  developing  the  use  of  compressed  granulated
gunpowder  in  fire-arms.  The  cartridges  patented
by  him  require  no  Mlga  envelopes  as  are  ordinarily
Oed  in  muzzle-loading  cannon,  and  hence  no  ipong-
in^r  of  the  gun  after  firing  is  necessary.  Dr.  Dore-
mus  was  authorized  by  the  French  minister  of  war
to  modify  the  machinery  in  the  Koiichet  pouderie
so  that  gunpowder  of  the  American  character  could
\m-  produced.  Subsequently  an  exhibition  of  the
firing  of  compressed  granulated  powder  in  cannon
and  small  arms  was  made  in  Yinccniies.  In-fore  Na-
poleon III.  and  man v  of  his  generals.  This  system
was  adopted  by  the  French  government,  and  a  large
portion  of  the  Mont  Cenis  tunnel  was  blasted  with
"  la  poiidrecomprimee."  While  in  Paris  he  was  in-
vited to  fill  thechair  of  chemistry  and  physics  in  the
College  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  lie  still  holds


that  ap|">intmcut.  His  lectures  on  toxicology  at
IMlcsue  hospital  medical  college  resulted  in  his
bofasg  culled  u|h.u  liv  coroner*  and  district  attor-
neys to  examine  poison  cases,  and  he  introduced
radical  changes  in  the  system  Of  ■edfesjl  jurispru>
deuce.  II.  established  a  s|»«-cial  toxicologies!  laU>-
ratory.  with  a  dissecting-room  attached,  kejit  under
lock  and  key.  using  only  reagent*  of  known  purity,
and  purchasing  new  glass  and  pnftfwifj  VSjsjsJs.  lot
each  MSB.  Dr.  DofSSMM  further  baSSlted  that  the
BMl  should  have  ample  time  for  Ml  pajea
and  that  he  should  be  pro|terly  remuiierate.l  f,,r
his  senriesa  His  course  has  led  to  mop-  thorough
scientific  investigation  than  was  formerly  common
in  poison  examinations.  In  the  asSS  of  James
Stephens,  convicted  of  poisoning  his  wife.  Dr.  Do-
reUUM  analyzed  not  onlv  the  .*nt in-  body  of  Mrs.
Stephens,  but  another  human  body,  to  test  the
question  of  "normal  arsenic"  lb-  was  the  expert
in  the  celebrated  Hurdell  murder  case  (1*57),  and
examined  the  blood-stains  found  in  Dr.  Buraell'l
room.  In  another  OSse  he  proved  the  presence  of
strychnine  in  a  Ixxly  that  had  Ix-cn  buried  for  four
months.  In  1885  the  "Atlanta"  arrived  at  quar-
antine,  and  during  her  voyage  from  Liverpool  sixtv
of  her  Passengers  had  die* I  from  cholera.  A  quiet
method  of  disinfection  was  necessary,  ami  Dr.
Doremus  recommended  that  chlorine  in  enormous
quantities  be  used. Under  hk  direction,  speoiaUy

[irepared  vessels  for  the  generation  of  this  power-
ul  gas  were  introduced  between  decks,  the  hatches
battened  down,  and  the  vapor  allowed  to  accom-
plish its  work  of  destroying  the  disease-germs.
This  hemic  treatment  proved  thoroughly  success-
ful, and  in  1878  the  process  was  again Used,  with

equal  success,  in  the  disinfection  of  hospital  wards.
In  1H71  he  was  appointed  president  of  ■  Hoard  for
examining  the  druggists  and  their  clerks  in  New-
York  city,  which  in  six  months  examined  over
000  persons.  He  obtained  aid  from  the  Hoard  of
health  in  suppressing  the  gases  emanating  from
the  gas-houses,  and  opposed  its  action  in  adopting
the  "  lactometer  with  the  senses  "  as  the  sole  means
of  testing  the  purity  of  milk.  Dr.  Doremus  is
known  as  a  brilliant  lecturer  on  scientific  topics,
and  has  frequently  appeared  before  New  York  au-
diences in  thai  capacity.  He  has  patented  methods
for  extinguishing  fires,  and  also  other  chemical
proc*-sses,  also  introducing  into  the  United  Mates
several  chemical  industries.  The  New  York  uni-
versity has  conferred  <>n  him  the  degree  of  UL.  I).
Dr.  Doremus  held  for  several  years  the  presidency
of  the  New  York  philharmonic  society,  and  has
also  been  president  of  the  New  York  medicolegal
society,  of  which  organization  he  was  chemist  for
several  years.  His  published  writings  include  only
a  few  addresses,  notably  that  at  the  unveiling  of  the
Humboldt  statue  in  Central  Park,  ami  papers  de-
livered before  scientific  societies. — His  son,  (  harles
Avery,  chemist,  b.  in  New  York  cttv.6  Sept
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  the  city  of  New-
York  in  1*?<>.  and  mhsoqimntly  studied  in  the  uni-
versities ofLetpsJe  and  Hcidellierg.  reviving  the
degree  of  Ph.D.  from  the  latter  institution  m  18311
In  1^77  he  became  professor  of  eheaaistrysad  t-u-

Oology  in  the  medical  department  of  the  I'nivcrsity
of  Buffalo,  which  office  he  held  until  1888]  when
he  became  BSSBStent  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and
physics  in  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York.
Sleanwhile  he  bad  received  the  appointments  in
rk  city  of  lecturer  on  practical  chemistry
tnd  toxicology  in  Hcllcvue  hospital  medical  college,
and  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  American  veter-
inary college.  The  chemical  lal>oratories  in  the* ■  in-
stitiitioits,  excepting  Hcllevuc,  were  organize*!  under


204


DORGAN


D«»KU


his  direction.  Dr.  Doremus  has  made  a  specialty
of  medical  chemistry  and  toxicology,  and  has  fre-
quently been  called  into  courts  as  an  expert  in  m h
niai  t  crs.  He  is  chemist  to  the  Medico-legal  society,
and  a  member  of  the  chemical  societies  of  Berlin,
Paris,  ami  New  York,  and  for  some  time  edited  the
journal  of  the  latter  society.  He  has  written  fre-
quent papers  on  sanitary  chemistry  and  methods
of  analysis,  which  have  appeared  in  the  proceed-
ings of  the  societies  to  which  he  belongs,  and  he  is
the  author  of  a  "  Report  on  Photography,"  con-
tributed to  the  U.  S.  government  reports  on  the
Exhibition  held  in  Vienna  in  1878.

DORUAN,  John  Aylmer,  poet,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 12  Jan.,  1836;  d.  there,  1  Jan.,  1867.  He
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Philadelphia,
where  he  always  resided,  and  was  so  diligent  in  his
studies  as  to  have  prepared  himself  for  entering
the  Central  high  school  a  year  before  he  was  old
enough  for  admission.  After  a  four-year's  course
at  this  institution,  he  was  graduated  with  the  de-

Sree  of  A.  B.  He  then  entered  a  law  office,  where
e  remained  until  his  last  illness.  He  died  of  con-
sumption, and  much  of  his  poetry  was  written
while  his  body  was  wasting  from  the  inroads  of  that
disease.  His  writing  was  done  in  the  intervals  of
his  daily  toil,  as  he  never  took  any  vacation.  In
1862  he  published  the  first  edition  of  his  poems,
under  the  title  of  "  Studies."  In  1864  he  issued  a
second  edition,  and  a  third  in  1866.  He  also  con-
tributed to  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and  other
Eeriodicals.  Many  of  his  poems  are  set  in  a  minor
ey,  but  they  are  characterized  by  strong  and  vig-
orous thought.  Some  of  his  lyrics  pass  far  beyond
the  work  of  a  beginner,  and  indicate  what  their
author  would  probably  have  accomplished  had  a
longer  life  been  vouchsafed  him.

DORHMAN,  Arnold  Henry,  merchant,  b.  in
Portugal  in  1748;  d.  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  21
March,  1813.  He  proved  himself  to  be  one  of  the
strongest  friends  of  American  liberty  not  born  on
American  soil,  and  put  forth  such  strenuous  efforts
to  relieve  our  captured  seamen  that  the  British
government  demanded  his  expatriation.  He  was
originally  a  merchant,  engaged  in  business  in  Lis-
bon, but  came  to  this  country  in  1783.  In  view  of
his  services,  and  the  losses  he  had  sustained  in  his
devotion  to  the  young  republic,  congress  voted  him
a  money  compensation  and  a  Western  township,
besides  appointing  him  U.  S.  agent  in  Lisbon.

DORION,  Sir  Antoine  Aime,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Quebec,  17  Jan.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  31
May,  1891.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  college,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  January,
1842.  He  was  a  representative  for  Montreal  in  the
Canada  assembly  from  1854  till  1861,  when  he  was
defeated; and  for  Hochelaga from  1862  till  1867.  He
represented  the  same  county  in  the  commons  from
the  union  until  the  general  election  of  1872,  when
he  was  returned  for  Xapierville,  which  he  repre-
sented till  1874.  He  declined  a  seat  in  the  Canadian
cabinet  in  1859,  but  was  a  member  of  the  executive
council  of  Canada  several  times,  holding  the  port-
folios of  commissioner  of  crown  lands  from  2  till  4
Aug.,  1858,  when  the  government  resigned ;  pro-
vincial secretary  from  May,  1862,  till  January,  1863,
when  he  resigned  on  the  question  of  the  Interco-
lonial railway;  and  attorney-general  of  Lower
Canada  and  leader  of  the  government  (with  John
Sandfield  Macdonald  as  premier)  from  May,  1863,
till  March,  1W4,  when  the  administration  retired
from  office.  He  was  sworn  of  the  privy  council,  7
Nov.,  18753,  and  was  minister  of  justice  from  that
date  until  his  appointment,  in  June,  1874,  as  <  ■hicf-
justice  of  the  province  of  Quebec. He  was  admiu-


istrator  of  the  province  of  Quebec  in  December,
1876, Iduring  the  last  illness  of  Lieut.-Gov.  Car<>n.
Sir  Antoine  was  a  leader  of  the  Rouge  or  French
Canadian  lilwral  pa rtv  of  Quebec  from  hJsentnOMM
into  political  life  until  his  retirement.  He  occupied-
for  years  a  distinguished  place  at  the  bar,  and  was
knighted  in  1N7?.— His  father,  P.  A.  Dorion,  repre-
sented ('liaini)lain  in  the  assembly  of  Lower  Canada
from  1830  till  1838. — His  brother,  Jean  Batti-th
Eeic  (who  died  in  November,  1866),  sat  in  the
Canada  assembly. — Another  brother,  Piekre  Neke,
had  a  seat  in  the  house  of  commons.
DORION,  Jacques  Edmond,  French  Canadian

Surnalist,  b.  in  St.  Ours,  Lower  Canada,  in  1827.
e  came  to  the  United  States  at  an  early  age,
studied  medicine,  and  practiced  as  a  physician.
He  founded  the  newspapers  "  La  Ruche  Cana-
dienne,"  "  La  feuille  d  erable,"  "  Le  eitoyen,"
"L'Union,"  the  last  published  at  Ogdensburg.
N.  Y.,  previous  to  1860.  He  also  edited  "  Le  courrier
d'Ottawa"  (1861-5).  Dr.  Dorion  founded  "La
Societe  St.  Jean  Baptist,"  at  Burlington,  Vt,  at
Plattsburgh  and  Ogdensburgh,  N.  Y.,  and  in  other
places  in  the  United  States.  He  is  the  author  of
"  L'education  populaire  "  (New  York,  1853),  and
of  addresses  and  novels.

DORNIN,  Thomas  Aloysins,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Ireland  about  1800 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  22  April,
1874.  He  was  appointed  midshipman,  2  May,  1815,
and  lieutenant  in  1825.  After  cruising  in  the  Pa-
cific, he  volunteered  in  the  sloop-of-war  "  Vin-
cennes,"  bound  round  the  world,  and  returned  in
her  in  1830.  After  again  cruising  in  the  Pacific,  he
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  storeship
"  Relief "  on  the  fitting  out  of  the  South  sea  ex-
ploring expedition.  While  in  command  of  the
"  Shark,"  in  the  Pacific,  he  was  commissioned  com-
mander (1841)  and  given  charge  of  the  sloop  "  Dale,"
which  he  brought  home  from  a  cruise  in  1843.  In
1851  he  sailed  in  command  of  the  "  Portsmouth,"
and  during  his  cruise  he  was  ordered  to  charter
one  of  the  Panama  steamers  and  endeavor  to  pre-
vent the  invasion  of  Mexican  territory  by  William
Walker's  expedition.  In  the  execution  of  this  de-
sign he  was  completely  successful.  After  discharg-
ing his  steamer  he  visited  Mazatlan,  where  he
found  forty  American  citizens,  who  had  been
peaceably  doing  business  in  Guaymas,  closely
packed  in  the  hold  of  a  schooner,  doubly  ironed,
and  chained  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  Capt.
Dornin  at  once  demanded  of  the  governor  their
immediate  release,  and  after  considerable  delay
that  official  finally  complied.  Dornin  then  sailed
for  Acapulco,  where  he  learned  that  a  Mexican  war-
vessel  had  declared  a  blockade  and  driven  off  U.
S.  mail  steamers.  He  pursued  and  overhauled  the
vessel,  and  notified  her  commander  that  such  pro-
ceedings were  in  violation  of  a  special  treaty  be-
tween the  United  States  and  Mexico.  The  Mexi-
can, after  making  a  written  protest,  abandoned  the
blockade.  After  being  commissioned  as  captain
(1855),  and  while  in  command  of  the  "  San  Jacinto,"
Dornin  captured  two  slave-vessels  on  the  coast  of
Africa  with  over  1,400  slaves  on  board,  and  landed
them  safely  in  Liberia.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  commodore  on  the
retired  list  (16  July,  1862),  and  at  its  close  was
placed  in  charge  of  the  fifth  light-house  district.

DORR,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salisbury.
Mass.,  22  March,  1796;  d.  in  Germantown.  Pa.,  a
Sept.,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1817,  and,  after  studying  both  law  ami  divinity,
was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop  Hobart  in  182:!.  at
was  rector  of  Protestant  Episcopal  churches  in
Lansingburg  and  Waterford  in  1820-'9,  and  of


I»n|;u


DORH


100


Trinity  church.  I'ti.  a.  in  lH20-*85.  In  1885-'?  hi
15,000  miles  as  general  agent  of  tht  do-
mestic oominittee  of  tin-  Board  "f  mjfahrna  lint
his  rati  lif.-wi.rk  did  not  begin  until  1^17,  when
he  succeeded  thi-  ramble  I li -»li« «| »  White  in  the

r>hi|.  ..f  ( "hri-t  church. Philadelphia.  wl
ht  remained  until  his  death. In  1*un  ii„.  ITuiver-

f  Peniisylvanm  conferred  on  him  the  degree
<>f  1>.  D,  and  in  1889  he  «n>  elected  bishop  of  Mary-
Innil.  Init  declined. In  is,">;t  be  visited  Europj
tending  his  journey  lo  Fgv  pt  and  tin-  Holy  Land.
Among  Iijn  works,  which  have  been  extensively  cir-

sjsjsjtaa  in  ths  [Jnited  states  sad  reprinted  in  Eng-
land ainl  the  British  provinces,  an?  '"The  Church-
man's .Manual";  "The  History  of  a  Pocket  I'rayer-

Book,  Written  by  It»eif " ;  ••  Recognition  of  Priends

in  Another  World";  "Sunday-school  Teacher's
Kncourageuieiit  "  ;  ** ftpphsoici  and  Types  Itcla-
ti\e  to  »!--i-t";  "An  Atrectioiiate  Invitation  to
the  Holy  Communion  " !  "An  Historical  Account
<>f  Christ  church,  Philadelphia " (1841);  "Notes of
Travel  "  (1856) ;  and  "A  Memoir  of  John  Fanning
Watson  "  (1861).

DOKIt,  Khenezer  Pearson,  sea-captain,  b.  in
Hartford,  Vt..  18  March,  init :  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  V..
30  April.  1SM1.  After  following  the  em  for  sev-
eral years,  Capt.  Dorr  settled  in  liutTalo  in  1888,
and  from  that  time  until  1841  was  engaged  in  the
navigation  of  the  great  lakes.  In  the  latter  year
he  liecaine  marine  ■rtJfftflT  for  the  Buffalo  mutual
insurance  company,  ami  acted  as  agent  of  the  New
York  board  of  underwriters  for  the  entire  north-
west. He  was  also  for  some  time  the  Buffalo  repre-
sentative of  many  insurance  companies,  and  ■erred
for  seven  years  as  president  of  the  lioard  of  inland
underwriters.  He  acted  at  different  times  sj  presi-
dent of  the  lioard  of  trade,  the  Society  of  fine  arts,
and  the  Historical  society  of  Buffalo,  and  as  vice-
president  of  the  National  lioard  of  trade.  He  was
the  first  to  organise  a  regular  system  of  wreckage
on  the  lakes,  and  did  much  to  improve  the  condi-
tion of  seamen  and  to  obtain  recognition  of  their
acts  of  heroism.  When  Jefferson  Davis,  as  secre-
tary of  war,  first  snggeeted  the  value  of  weather
reports,  ('apt.  Dorr,  at  the  request  of  Lieut.  Maury,
forwarded  daily  meteorological  observations  from
Buffalo.  On  5"  Jan..  1874,  <  apt.  Dorr  read  before
the  Buffalo  historical  society  a  paper  entitled  "A
Brief  Sketch  of  the  First' Monitor  and  its  In-
ventor" (Buffalo,  1874).

DORR,  Julia  Caroline  Ripley,  author,  b.  in
Charleston,  s.  c..  v.)  I'd...  1895,  Her  maternal
grandparents  wen-  natives  of  France,  who  fled  to
BOUth  Carolina  from  San  Domingo  at  the  time  of
the  servile  insurrection  in  that  island.  She  lost
her  mother  when  a  child,  and  her  father.  William
Young  Hipley.  a  native  of  Vermont, removed  short-
ly afterward  to  New  York,  and  in  in;{((  to  his  na-
tive state,  where  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  develop
the  Rutland  marble  quarries. In  1847 Miss Bipley

married  Beneea  EL  Dorr,  then  of  New  York,  who

shortly  afterward  went  to  Rutland.  Yt..  and  lived
there  till  his  death  in  1884,  She  has  written  since
early  childhood,  but  her  first  published  poem  was
sent  to  the  "Union  Magazine"  by  her  husband,
without  her  knowledge,  ■  year  or  two  after  their
marriage.  In  1848  she  became  a  contributor  to
"Sartain's  Magazine,"  taking  one  of  its  hundred
dollar prizes by her fitM published pros,- tale,

Ih'1  Lathe."  She  has  sin,.-  continued  to  c«.n-
triliute  ImiiIi  prose  and  poetry  to  prominent  |*»ri-
odicals.  Mrs.  Dorr's  works  include  ••  Farming-
dale."  a  novel,  published  under  the  pen~name  of

••line  Thomas "  (New  York,  1884);  "  I.an-
nov.l (1886); "Sibyl Huntingdon


Philadelph

piation,"  a  novel  tiiwlm,  and  other

Poem*  Daybreak,  an  I

Poem

noon  Songl  rioe  of  eamvn  on  mnr-

riage,  contributed  by  Mrs.  |.

journal  under  the  titles  ••  Letter*  to  «  Young  wife"

and  "  letter*  to  a  Young  Huslmnd,"  h

in  liook-form  without her  sanction,  with  the  title

"  Bride  and  Bridegroom  "  (Cincinnati,  193

DORR.  Thoinus  \\  ilson.  politician,  b.  in  Provf.
deuce,  u.  i.,  r,  Wot.,  1808;  d,  there,  n

His  father,  Sullivan  Dorr,  was  a  successful  manu-
facturer. Thomas  was  educated  nt  Phillips  i
academy  and  at  Harvard,  where  bs  was  graduated
in  UB8.  He  then  studied  law  in  New  York  in  the
office  of  Chancellor  Kent,  was  admitted  to  the  liar.
and  beg—  practice  in  his  native  ■  itv.  He  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  lKltt-7,  being  i
at  first  as  a  Federalist.  I. ut  bsoominga  !»■  iikh  rat  in

the  laat  named  year.  In  \km  he  introduced  and
carried  through  the  legislature  an  Important  bill
curtailing  the  powers  of  ths  banks  in  the  stat
this  time  the  government  of  the  state  was  based  on
a  charter  granted  by  Charles  II.  in  1668,  The  suf-
frage was  limited  to  jiossessors  of  real  estate  to
the  amount  of  $1:14  and  to  their  eldest  pons,  and
therefore  only  about  one  thinl  of  the  citizens  wen
entitled  to  vote.  The  representation  in  the  legis-
lature was  also  unfairly  distributed.  Newport,  for
Instance, with 8,000 inhabitanta,  having  si\  mem*
bers,  while  Providence,  with  2.*{.<hm».  had  only  four.
Mr.  Dorr  exerted  himself  in  the  assembly  mf  the
adoption  of  a  more  libera]  constitution,  but  his
movement  obtained  only  seven  out  of  seventy  rotes.
He  finally  resorted  to  popular  agitation,  ana  in  the
latter  part  of  1*40  a  "suffrage  party"  was  organ-
ized, which,  at  a  mass  meeting  held  in  Providence
on  S  July,  1H41,  authorized  the  calling  of  a  state
constitutional  convention.  Delegates  wen-  elected
on  88  Aug..  and  the  convention  met  at  Providence
on  4  Oct.  and  framed  a  constitution,  which  was
submitted  to  the  people  of  the  state  on  27.  'J*,  ami
29  Dec.,  when,  as  was  asserted,  about  14j000  votes
were  cost  in  its  favor,  being  a  majority  of  the  adult
male  citizens  of  the  state.  It  was  also  claimed
that  the  constitution  was  adopted  by  a  majority  of
the  legal  voters,  or  those  entitled  to  suffrage  under
the  charter.  Meanwhile  the  legislature,  00  0  PV  b..
1H41,  had  also  called  a  constitutional  convention.
ami  delegates  elected  in  accordance  with  the  Bad
met  in  November, but  adjourned  to  February.  184%
when  they  agreed  upon  a  constitution,  which  was
submitted  to  the  people  on  21,  93,  and  98  March,
ami  rejected.  <>n  is  April,  1843,  an  election  was
held  under  the  "suffrage"  constitution,  by  which
Mr.  D«>rr,  who  had  been  the  leader  in  the  move-
ment, was  chosen  governor,  and  a  legislature  was
elected  consisting  exclusively  of  his  supnortsfa,

An  election  was  also  held  under  the  old  charter,
which  resulted  hi  ths  choice  of  Samuel  W.  King  as
governor.  Both  governments  organized  in  N>  w-
|K.rt  on  ■!  May.  1849,  and  there  was  an  ap|ical  to
arms,  fjov,  King  proclaimed  martial  law,  called
out  the  militia,  and  asked  aid  from  the  National
government,  which  recognized  him  as  the  legal
governor.  <  >n  18  May  an  attempt  was  made  by
an  tinned  party  of  "  suffragists  "  |q  s, fas.  the  PrOi  i-
denOS  arsenal,  which  was  thwarted  by  tin-  npiwar-
the  militarv  under  QoT.  King. Mr.  iK.rr,

by  request  of  his  adherantevthen  went  to  Washing-
ton to  tr\  and  gain  the  support  of  the  Federal  gov-
ernment! and  on his  return  was  assured  that the
iieoplc  were  ready  to  fight  for  their  rights. |
une  a  demonstration  in  I  ■.«  made  at


206


DOltRANCE


DORSKY


Chepachet,  ten  miles  from  Providence;  but  only
300  of  Dorr's  party  were  present,  and,  as  nearly
ten  times  their  number  were  opposed  to  them,  Dorr
ordered  them  to  dbpene,  um  quiet  whs  restored
by  28  June.  In  this  same  month  the  legislature
issued  am  it  her  call  for  a  convention,  which  met  at
Providence  in  September,  adjourned  to  East  Green-
wich, and  on  5  Nov.  adopted  the  present  state  con-
stitution, doing  away  with  most  of  the  objection-
able features  of  the  old  charter.  This  was  ratified
by  the  people  almost  unanimously.  The  affair
thus  terminated  is  known  hs  "  Dorr's  rebellion."
Dorr  fled  to  Connecticut,  and  afterward  to  New
Hampshire.  A  reward  of  $4,000  had  been  offered
by  the  state  authorities  for  his  apprehension,  and
on  his  return  to  Rhode  Island  he  was  arrested,
tried  for  high  treason,  and  on  25  June,  1844,  sen-
tenced to  imprisonment  for  life.  Ho  was  released
in  1847  under  a  general  amnesty  act,  and  in  1851
restored  to  his  civil  rights.  In  1854  an  act  to  re-
verse judgment  in  his  case  was  passed  bv  the  legis-
lature, butdeclared  unconstitutional  by  the  supreme
court.  See  "Life  and  Times  of  Thomas  Wilson
Dorr,"  by  Dan  King  (Boston,  1859).

DORRANCE,  Gordon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stir-
ling, Conn.,  in  1705 ;  d.  in  Attica,  N.  Y.,  in  1846.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1786,  taught
at  Griswold,  Conn.,  and  studied  theology.  He  was
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Windsor,
Si  ass.,  in  1795-1834,  and  afterward  preached  in
Sunderland,  Mass.,  and  its  vicinity.  He  published
a  -History  of  Windsor"  (Pittsfiefd,  Mass.,  1829).

DORREGO,  Mannel,  Argentine  soldier,  b.  in
Buenos  Ayres,  15  Feb.,  1787;  d.  at  Navarro,  13
Jan.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  in  law  at  the  uni-
versity of  San  Carlos,  in  his  native  city,  in  1809,
and  went  to  Santiago  de  Chili  to  finish  his  studies.

While  he  was
there  the  news
of  the  revolution
against  Spanish
rule  in  Buenos
Ayres,  25  May,
1810,  arrived,  fol-
lowed in  June  by
that  of  the  de-
posal  of  the  Span-
ish governor  of
Chili,  Carrasco,
and  the  forma-
tion of  a  revo-
lutionary junta,
18  Sept.  Dorrego
joined  in  the  rev-
olutionary move-
ment, and  the
Chilian  govern-
ment, after  its  in-
dependence was  recognized,  struck  a  medal  in  his
honor,  with  the  inscription,  "Chili  to  its  first
defender."  In  1811  Dorrego  returned  to  his  native
city,  was  appointed  commander  of  a  regiment  of
cavalry,  and  distinguished  himself  in  the  battle
of  Salta  under  Gen.  Saavedra.  In  1812,  com-
manding a  brigade  in  the  army  of  Gen.  Pueyrredon,
he  marched  to  Upper  Peru,  and  defeated  the
Spanish  forces  in  Nazareno  and  Suipacha,  being
severely  wounded  in  the  latter  battle.  In  Sep-
tember of  the  same  year  he  took  a  distinguished
part  in  the  battle  of  Tucuman,  and  in  February,
1813,  in  that  of  Salta,  and  when  Artigas  took
possession  of  Uruguay  in  1814,  Dorrego  defeated
nim  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Guayabo,  and  in  the
following  vear  participated  in  the  battles  of
Barrios  and  Sourena,  in  which  he  captured  many


prisoners,  and  those  of  Pozo  Verde  and  Llatarte.
saving  those  towns  from  conflagration  and  pillage.
When  Pueyrredon,  26  March.  1*10,  declared  him-
self dictator,  Dorrego  energetically  opposed  him
in  the  press,  and.  on  a  charge  of  military  insub-
ordination and  arrogance,  was  bani>h. kL  He  went
to  the  United  States,  resided  there  nearly  four
years,  and  published  "  Cartas  apoloieticas  en
contestacion  al  auto  de  expatriacion  "  ( Malt  i more.
1817).  On  the  downfall  of  the  dictator  in  L8M,
Dorrego  went  home,  was  elected  governor  of
Buenos  Ayres,  and  organized  troops  to  subdue  the
lawless  bands  that  opposed  the  authorities  in  the
interior  under  the  name  of  "  montoneros,"  whom
he  defeated,  2  Aug.,  at  San  Nicolas  de  los
Arroyos.  In  1823  he  was  elected,  by  a  popular
vote,  a  member  of  the  Junta  de  Representantes,
and  in  1826  of  the  constituent  congress,  where
lie  distinguished  himself  by  his  eloquence,  defend-
ing federal  principles  against  the  central  party  or
"  Unitarios/ In  July.  1827,  he  was  again  elected

governor  of  Buenos  Ayres,  on  the  resignation  of
ren.  Rivadavia  as  unitario  president,  and  as  such
recognized  the  independence  of  Uruguay,  notwith-
standing the  opposition  of  the  other  Argentine
provinces,  but  with  the  general  approbation  of
other  American  republics  and  European  govern-
ments. On  1  Dec.,  1828,  Gen.  Lavalle  pronounced
against  Dorrego's  government,  and  the  latter,  with
such  forces  as  ne  could  collect,  marched  against  the
insurgents,  but  was  defeated  at  Navarro  on  his  flight,
taken  prisoner  by  Maj.  Pacheco,  and  shot  the  same
day,  by  Lavalle's  order,  without  a  trial.  When  in
1862  the  federal  principle  triumphed,  the  govern-
ment erected  a  monument  to  him  in  Buenos  Ayres.
DORSE Y,  Anna  Hanson,  author,  b.in  George-
town, D.  C,  12  Dec.,  1815.  Her  father  was  one  of
the  first  chaplains  appointed  in  the  U.  S.  navy.
During  her  girlhood  she  contributed  many  short
anonymous  poems  to  periodicals.  At  the  age  of
twenty-two  she  married  Owen  Dorsey,  for  many
vears  judge  of  the  Orphan's  eourt  in  Baltimore,
In  1840  she  became  a  convert  to  the  Catholic  faith.
Her  works  include  dramas,  poems,  novels,  tales,
essays,  and  stories  for  young  people.  Many  of  her
stories  have  appeared  first  as  serials,  and  when
issued  in  book  form  have  been  reproduced  in  for-
eign countries.  One  of  her  books,  "  May  Brooke,"
republished  in  Scotland,  was  the  first  Catholic
book  issued  in  that  country  since  the  reformation.
She  has  also  written  many  political  articles,  as
well  as  sketches  and  poems  on  national  topics.  The
following  is  a  partial  list  of  her  books :  "  The
Student  of  Blenheim  Forest "  (Baltimore,  1847) ;
"Flowers  of  Love  and  Memory,"  poems  (1849);
"Oriental  Pearl"  (1857;  translated  into  German,
and  republished  in  Vienna) ;  "  Woodreve  Manor  "
(Philadelphia,  1852);  "May  Brooke"  (New  York,
1856) ;  "  Coaina,  the  Rose  of  the  Algonquins  "  (1868) ;
"  Nora  Bradv's  Vow  "  (Boston,  1869) ;  "  Mona,  the
Vestal "  (1869) ;  "  The  Flemings,  or  Truth  Tri-
umphant "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  The  Old  Gray  Ro-
sarv"  (1870);  "Guy.  the  Leper,"  an  epic  poem
(Baltimore,  1850);  "  Tangled  Paths"  (1879);  "The
Old  House  at  Glenarra  "  (Baltimore,  1886) ;  "  Warp
and  Woof  "  (1887) ;  and  "  Palms  "  (1887).

DORSEY,  Godwin  Volney,  physician,  b.  in
Oxford,  Butler  co.,  Ohio,  17  Nov.,  1812.  He  was
educated  at  Miami  university,  Oxford,  Ohio,  and
was  graduated  at  the  medical  college  of  Ohio  in
1836,  when  he  settled  in  Piqua,  Ohio.  He  was  for
many  years  president  of  the  Miami  county  medical
society.  He  was  an  elector  on  the  democratic  presi-
ih  nti.il  ticket  in  Ohio  in  1848.  a  member  of  the
Ohio  constitutional  conventions  of  J850  and  1873,


Ml


a  member  of  tin-  democratic  national  convention
in  1888,  ainl  of  the  republican  iwtt i<>mtl  conven-
tion in  16  TraMinr  ..f  <>hi<>  in  lmil  and
;.  chairman  ..f  th«-  republican  exeoativc  oom*
milt nd  supplied  the  place  of  I

sleotor  at  large  on  the  BepuhUoan
ticket  iii  1888.

IN)RSKY. J  ami  - Owen,  . b. in

Baltimore.  Mil.,  31  Oct.,  1848.  He  studied  at  the
( '<-iit nil  higfa  school  (now  Baltimore  citv  college)
fn.in  1h;-.>  till  lsiUt.  ami  thru  at  the  theological
seminary  <>f  Virginia  frmn 1HU7  till 1871. After

being  ordained  ■  deacon,  18  April,  IM71,  he  was

sent  as  a  missionary  of  the  Protestanl Bpisoopa]

ehureh  to  the  Pooka  Indians  in  Dakota,  when-  he
mmained  for  two  ream  From  1m;;{  till  1878  be
was  engaged  in  parish  work  in  Maryland.  He  was
appointed  ethnologist  to  the  U.  S.  geological  ami
graphical  surrey  of  the  Rooky  mountain  n«gion
under  Major  J.  W.  Powell,  ami  sent  to  the  Omaha
Indians  in  Nebraska,  remaining  there  until  1880.
Meanwhile,  in  1*75*,  he  had  been  transferred  to  the
bureau  of  ethnology  in  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion, and  in  1880  was  also  appointed  Fonka  inter-
En'ter  t<>  Gen.  Crook's  commission.  Frior  to  ls*4
is  investigations  were  confined  to  the  lanaill
mythology,  and  sociology  of  tribes  of  the  Dakotan
or  Siouan  family,  but  since  then  he  has  made
original  researches  for  linguistic  material  among
nineteen  Oregon  trilies  of  the  Athapascan.  Euan,
Takilmiui.  and  Vaknon  families.  He  was  made
member  of  the  council  of  the  Anthropological  so-
ciety  of  Washington  in  1884.  and  general  sc<n>tary
in  1885,  vice-president  of  the  section  on  anthro-
pology of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science  in  1885,  honorable  local
corn*spondent  of  the  Victoria  institute  of  Gnat
Britain  in  18H5,  and  member  of  the  Italiana  Re-
gale Societa  Didascalica  in  1886,  from  which  or-
ganization in  1886  he  received  a  gold  medal  for
his  works  on  sociology.  A  record  of  his  work  will
be  fouml  in  the  annual  reports  of  the  Smithsonian
institution.  He  has  published  "Ponka  A  B  0  Wa-
ba-ru,"  a  Fonka  primer  (1878);  "Siouan  Phon-
ology" (18H3)  ;  "Osage  War  Customs"  (1884);
'Kansas  Mourning  and  War  Customs"  (1885);
"Omaha  Sociology  (1885) ;  "Siouan  Migrations"
(ISM*!)  ami  "  Indian  Personal  Names"  (1886).  Most
of  the  foregoing  were  issued  as  pamphlets  or  re-
prints from  government  publications  or  transac-
tions of  societies.

DORSET,  John  Svmr.  physician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 2:J  Dec.,  1783;  d.  there,  12  Nov.,  1818.
He  received  his  early  education  at  the  Friends'
ioadeany  ia  Philadelphia,  studied  medicine,  and
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1803.  The  yellow  fever  broke  out  in
Philadelphia  a  few  weeks  later,  and  committed
■BOB  ravages  that  a  hospital  was  opened,  and  the
young  graduate  received  the  appointment  of  resi-
dent physician.  He  comhattcd  the  idea  of  conta-
gion, and  strengthened  his  theory  regarding  the
disease  by  courting  infection  in  the  most  madam
manlier.  The  next  year.  1803.  he  visited  Frame
and  England,  attended  the  lectures  of  Humphry
Davy, the distinguished chemist,  and afterward

vi-ited  the  medical  schools  of  Paris,  returning  to

Philadelphia  after  an  alienee  of  about  a  year.  He
was  elected  adjunct  professor  of  surgery  in  the
scho.il  where  he  had  l>een  graduated  but  five  years
previously,  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  materia

madiaa  n  I818.and.  having  given  two  oonrmaof

lectures  on  that  subject,  was  chosen  to  the  profes-
sorship of  anatomy  made  vacant  by  the  death  of
Dr.  \N  istar. On  the  evening  after  delivering  his


introductory  lactam  he  was  attacked  by  a  fever,
and  died  at  the  .-ml  .,f  n  w.-ck.  B*  had  tat  repu-
tation of  batntg  m f  the  first  swmmmi  of  Amer-
ica, lie  contribut^l  |ia|»cr»  to  the  "  Portfolio  "and
other  medical  journals,  and  pabUahed  an  ftitfwi
Of  "OoajMtii  Surg.T\  "  in  the  notes,  and  "Ele-
ments ,,f  Snrgerj  "  (Philadelphia.  1813).  The  last
was  adopted  a«  a  text-book  in  tin  ty  of
Edinburgh,  and  was  long  a  favorite  ia  Isdaammtn
DORSEY,  Sarah  Anne,  author,  b.  in  N

Miss., HI  Fek.  1  *•_>'.»;  ,1.  ,„ New  Orleans.  Ijt..  4  .lulv.

1870.  Her  maiden  name  was  Ellis.  Sh.
a  careful  education,  and  enjoyed  tin  ad  vantage  of
extended  foreign  travel.  HeV  mother  was  a  sister
of  Catherine  Warfleld,  author  of  "The  Household
of  Boiiyerie."  who  died  in  1h77,  „nd  left  in  Mrs.
Dorsey's  hands  a  mass  of  manuscript,  the  greater
|mrt  of  which  is  still  unpublished.  Mrs.  Dorsey's
mother  married  (Jen.  Charles  (i.  Dahlgren.  after-
ward  of  the  Confederate  army,  and  the  daughter.
in  1888.  married  Samuel  W.*  Ifc>rsev,  of  Kllicott'g
mills.  Md..  who  was  then  practising  ]Hw  and  pi
ing  in  Tensas  parish,  fiirnanana  Mrs.  Dnmaj  used
her  pencil  with  artistic  skill,  and  patterned  01
the  harp  with  exquisite  taste.  She  sjM.ke  llucnt-
ly  several  modern  languages,  was  a  proficient  in
bitin  and  Greek,  and  a  student  of  Sanskrit.  She
began  her  literary  career  by  writing  for  the  '
York  "Churchman."  receiving  from  that  journal
the  pen-name  of  "  Filia  BeomsBaV'  Mr
built  a  chapel  on  her  plantation,  ami  rttfotail
much  time  to  the  religious  instruction  of  her
slaves,  teaching  a  class  of  fifty  or  sixty  negroes
every  Sunday.  In  1860  she  sent  to  New  York,  to
be  published,  the  choral  services  that  she  had  ar-
ranged and  used  successfully  among  her  black  pu
pils  for  years,  but  the  war  began,  and  the  collection
remained  unpublished.  Mr.  Dorset  lost  nearly  a
quarter  of  a  million  dollars  by  the  civil  war.  Their
home  was  burned  in  a  skirmish,  ami  several  men
were  killed  in  the  garden.  They  took  their  slaves
to  Texas,  where  Mrs.  Dorsey  acted  as  nurse  in  a  ( 'on-
federate  hospital.  After  the  death  of  Mr.  Dorsey  in
1878,  she  removed  from  her  plantation  in  Tensas
parish,  and  resided  at  Beauvoir.  a  small  place  on
the  Gulf  shore,  which,  by  her  will,  was  given  to
Jefferson  Davis.  Hare  she  oontinned  her  literary
labors,  acting  also  as  amanuensis  to  Mr.  Davis  m
the  preparation  of  his  "  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Con-
federate Government."  She  afterward  rumored  to
New  Orleans,  and  submitted  to  a  surgical  opera-
tion for  cancer,  which  proved  unavailing.  Her
EnbUshed  works  are  "  Recollections  of  Henry  Wat-
ins  Allen,  ex-governor  of  Louisiana"  (New  York.
1808);  "Loom  Dare"  (1867);  "Agnea  Qmham"

(Philadelphia,  lHild;  ••  Atalie  or  a  S.tithern  Vil-
leggiatura  "  (1N71);  and  "Panola;  a  tale  of  Lou-
isiana "  ( 1 v

DORSET,  Stephen  >V..  jH.litician.h.  in  Beams*,
Yt..  SB  Fell..  1842.  He  received  an  academical  edu-
cation, and  ramored  with  his  father's  family  to
oUrlin.  Ohio.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  enlisted  in  the  national  army,  served  in  the
west  until  1S04,  was  tnmsfernsl  to  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  with  which  he  nmiaincd  until  the  close
of  the  war.  Returning  to  Ohio,  he  resumed  busi-
ness as  an  employee  of  the  Sanduskv  tool  company,
was  soon  aft erwanl  made  president  of  the  company,
and  wa.s  elected  on  the  same  day.  without  his  knowl-
edge, president  of  the  Arkansas  central  railway
company.  He  romotad  to  Arkansas,  and  was  chosen
chairman  of  the  Republican  county  ami  state  com-
mittees. ||e  was  elected  M  a Republican to the

C.  s.  senate,  serving  from  :i  March,  1878,  till  3

March,  1ST1>. During  the  presidential  canvass  of


208


DORSHEIMER


DOSTIE


1880  he  was  secretary  of  the  Republican  national
committee,  and  did  much  toward  securing  the
election  of  Garfield  and  Arthur,  llisscrvi..  •
manded  the  tSSPedt  of  his  col  leases,  so  that  he
was  tendered  ana  accepted  a  banquet  in  New  York,
in  February,  1881.  At  the  time  of  the  star-route
exposures  it  was  claimed  that  the  necessary  legis-
lation was  procured  through  his  intluenee  in  the
senate,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  indicted
by  the  grand  jury  of  Washington,  and,  as  he  failed
to  appear  at  the  time  appointed,  a  warrant  was
issued  for  his  arrest,  and  for  months  it  was  impos-
sible to  ascertain  his  whereabouts.  Later  he  ap-
peared in  court,  and  also  addressed  a  card  to  the
public  in  explanation  of  his  connection  with  the
mail  contracts,  claiming  that  his  relations  were
disinterested  except  so  far  as  they  benefited  his
brother  and  brother-in-law,  who  held  contractu
The  first  trial  resulted  in  a  disagreement,  and  at
the  second  a  verdict  of  "  not  guilty  as  indicted  "
was  rendered.  Mr.  Dorsey  has  since  been  largely
occupied  with  real  estate  and  other  interests  in
the  far  southwest.

DORSHEIMER,  William,  journalist,  b.  in
Lyons,  N.  Y.,  5  Feb.,  1832 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  26
March,  1888.  His  father  was  Philip  Dorsheimer,
a  wealthy  citizen  of  Buffalo,  one  of  the  founders
of  the  republican  party.  William  entered  Harvard
in  1849,  but  at  the  end  of  two  years  impaired  health
forced  him  to  leave  his  studies.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1854.  In  politics  he  began  as  a  Demo-
crat, joined  the  Republican  party  in  1856,  and  in
1860  again  supported  the  Republican  ticket.  In
1859  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  ne  was  appointed
major  on  Gen.  Fremont's  staff,  and  at  the  close  of
the  Missouri  hundred-days'  campaign  Maj.  Dor-
sheimer returned  to  civil  life,  and  published  a
series  of  articles  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  en-
titled "  Fremont's  Hundred  Days  in  Missouri."  In
1867  he  was  appointed  by  President  Johnson  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  the  northern  district  of  New
York.  His  term  expired  in  1871.  In  the  Demo-
cratic state  convention  of  1874  he  was  nominated
for  lieutenant-governor,  with  Samuel  J.  Tilden  as
candidate  for  governor,  and  both  were  elected,  Mr.
Dorsheimer  having  a  majority  of  51,488  over  his
opponent.  In  the  prosecution  of  the  measures
against  the  Canal  ring,  Mr.  Dorsheimer  was  an
efficient  worker.  He  was  re-elected  lieutenant-gov-
ernor, serving  from  1  Jan.,  1875,  till  1  Jan.,  1880.
In  1875  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  of  the
state  survey,  and  in  1883  one  of  the  commissioners
of  the  state  reservation  at  Niagara,  being  elected
chairman  of  the  latter  commission.  In  1882  he
was  elected  to  congress  from  the  7th  district  of
New  York,  and  became  a  member  of  the  judiciary
committee,  and  was  also  chairman  on  the  part  of
the  house  of  the  joint  cjr  .Auiztee  having  in  charge
the  proceedings  of  congress  on  the  completion  of
the  Washington  monument.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Liberal  Republican  national  convention  held  in
Cincinnati  in  May,  1872,  and  also  of  the  Democratic
convention  held  in  St.  Louis  in  1876,  a  member  of
the  committee  on  resolutions  in  the  latter  body,
and  reported  the  platform.  He  contributed  to
periodical  literature,  delivered  occasional  addresses,
and  took  part  as  a  public  speaker  in  various  politi-
cal canvasses.  In  1884  he  published  a  biography
of  Grover  Cleveland,  the  Democratic  candidate  for
the  presidency,  and  in  July,  1885,  was  appointed
lr.  S.  attorney  for  the  southern  district  of  New
York,  which  office  he  resigned  in  March,  1886.  In
Septemlier,  1885,  he  purchased  the  New  York
"  Star,"  and  began  its  publication  as  a  daily  paper


■  in  18  Sept.  of  that  year.  Mr.  Dorsheimer  was  one
i if  the  founders  and  original  officers  of  the  Buffalo
line  arts  acadeinv  and  the  Buffalo  historical  society.

DOR80NKEN8,  Eraste.  Canadian  author,  lie
isa  resident  of  Montreal,  and  ha-  contributed  tales
and  -ketches  to  the  French  Canadian  press,  among
others.  '■  K-ijiiisses  .ludiciines"  in  ••  I.a  1'atric"
(1856) and" Angelina "  in  "La  Gruipe"(186ty  Ib-
is the  author  of  "Felluna"  (Montreal,  1856)  and
"  Une  anparitien  "  (1860).

DOStilET,  Peter  Herman,  Canadian  B.  C
bishop,  b  in  Lille,  Flanders,  in  1691;  d.  in  Pari-.
France,  in  1777.  He  studied  theology  in  the  Sem-
inary of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris,  became  a  member  of
the  order,  and  was  sent  to  Canada  in  1721  or  1722.
After  a  short  stay  in  the  Seminary  of  Montreal  he
received  orders  to  go  to  the  Lake  of  the  Two  Moun-
tains, where  the  Sulpitians  had  established  a  mis-
sion among  the  Ottawa  Indians,  but  his  health  was
injured  by  the  fatigues  that  he  underwent  in  the
discharge  of  his  duties,  and  after  two  years  he  re-
turned to  France.  He  was  summoned  to  Paris  to
superintend  the  organization  of  a  house  of  foreign
missions,  and  afterward  sent  to  Rome  as  procura-
tor-general of  the  society.  Here  he  was  named
bishop  of  Samos  by  Benedict  XIII.,  and  conse-
crated in  1725.  He  was  appointed  coadjutor  bishop
of  Quebec  in  1728,  and  arrived  in  that  city  in  1729.
In  1732  the  needs  of  his  diocese  obliged  him  to  go
to  France,  where  he  learned  that  the  resignation
of  Bishop  Duplessis-Mornay  made  him  titular
bishop  of  Quebec.  Several  young  ecclesiastics  of
the  diocese  of  Quebec  had  entered  religious  orders
with  the  view  of  escaping  the  hardships  of  mis-
sionary life,  and  to  counteract  this  evil  he  obtained
a  decree  from  Rome  that  all  candidates  for  orders
should  take  an  oath  before  ordination  to  perform
missionary  duty  in  the  diocese  of  Quebec  unless
they  had  the  licence  of  the  bishop  or  his  successors
to  leave  it.  He  returned  to  Quebec  after  an  ab-
sence of  two  years,  rebuilt  at  his  own  expense  the
Seminarv  of  Quebec,  which  had  been  burned  in
1705,  endowed  it  with  a  valuable  tract  of  land  near
Quebec,  and  erected  a  large  country  house  for  the
students.  He  founded  a  new  Latin  school  in  Que-
bec, and  another  in  Montreal,  and  also  established
a  school  for  girls  in  Louisburg,  conducted  by  sis-
ters of  the  congregation  of  Notre  Dame.  His
health  was  undermined  by  his  labors,  and  he  em-
barked again  for  France  in  1735.  Feeling  his  in-
firmities increase,  he  resigned  his  bishopric  and  was
appointed  vicar-general  of  Paris.

DOSTIE,  Anthony  Paul,  dentist,  b.  in  Sarato-
ga countv,  N.  Y. ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  5  Aug.,
1866.  He  was  a  barber  in  early  life,  but  became  a
dentist,  and  removed  to  Chicago,  and  subsequently
to  New  Orleans.  He  was  an  active  Union  man
during  the  civil  war,  and  by  his  fearlessness  gained
both  warm  friends  and  bitter  enemies.  On  the  re-
organization of  the  Louisiana  government,  during
the  war,  he  was  appointed  state  auditor,  and  he
was  also  a  member  of  the  constitutional  convention
of  1864.  Dr.  Dostie,  in  company  with  a  Republi-
can minority  in  New  Orleans,  was  anxious  to  ex-
tend the  suffrage  to  the  freedmen,  and  to  deny  it
to  all  those  who  had  taken  part  against  the  nation-
al government  in  the  civil  war.  The  convention  of
1864,  in  adjourning,  had  resolved  that  it  should  be
the  duty  of  the  president  to  recall  it  "for  any
cause,  or  in  case  the  constitution  should  not  be
ratified,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  such  measures  as
may  be  necessarv  for  the  formation  of  a  civil  gov-
ernment in  Louisiana."  Dr.  Dostie  and  his  asso-
ciates now  began  to  agitate  the  recall  of  the  old
convention.  The  project  was  at  first  received


DofHLKDAY


no


where  with  di  led  as  a  revolu-

tionary movement,  since  it  VM  oUwd  that  the
resolution  abort  quoted  am  tin-  oonTentiou  no
power  to  MDond  the  ooMUtittion  that  it  bod  adopt-
Finally,  however,  the  president  pro  trnifjore  of
Um  convention  issued  an  order  reoonroking  it  <mi
On  -JT  July  a  meeting  wan  beJd,
which  adopted  resolutions  railing  for  tin-  enfran-
chisement of  tin-  negroes,  and  at  tin-  m  time
speeches  were  made  to  a  large  assembly  <>f  (teed*
iik-ii  outside.  That  of  Dr.  Di«tie  asserted  that,  if
the  convention  wen-  interfered  with, -tin-  streets
of  N.w  Orleans  would  run  with  blood."  This
MB.  was  afterward  s[x»ki-n  of  as  "  iutcin|>cratc  "
by  Sen.  Sh.-ridan.  Tin-  city  authorities  now  threat*
ened  to  break  up  the  convention  as  an  unlawful  a>-
scmhlagc,  luit  the  mayor  was  told  that  this  would
not  be  itermitted  by  the  l*.  S.  forces  then  in  the
eitv.  I 'art  of  the  convention  assembled  on  80
July,  and,  while  a  recess  was  taken  for  the  purpose
of  TrniaJning  a  moras,  a  conflict  l M-t  ween  a  body
Of  negroes  and  the  police  occurred  outside  of  Un-
building. This  precipitated  a  riot,  and  t  he  negroes
took  refuge  in  the  building,  and  were  attacked  by
the  police  and  by  a  mob,  which  also  wreaked  its
animosity  on  members  of  the  convention.  Dr.
Dostie  was  one  of  its  first  victims.  Although  un-
armed, he  was  shot  and  beaten  till  he  was  supposed
to  be  dead,  and  thrown  into  a  cart  with  the  dead
bodies  of  other  victims  of  the  riot.  He  was  final-
ly taken  to  the  hospital,  where  he  died  six  davs
afterward  in  great  suffering.  See  "  Life  of  A.  P.
Dostie,  or  the  Conflict  of  New  Orleans,"  by  Emily
H.  Reed  (New  York,  186%

DOTKN,  Lizzie,  poet,  b.  iu  Plymouth,  Mass.,  1
April.  1H29.  She  received  a  good  early  education,
but  was  mostly  self-taught.  She  has  been  known  as
an  "  inspirational  s|>eaker,"  and  as  an  improviser  of
poetry,  which  she  produces  with  little  or  no  intel-
lectual effort,  claiming  that  it  is  dictated  to  her  by
spirits.  She  has  published  two  collections  of  her
poetry,  "  Poems  from  the  Inner  Life "  (Boston,
1863)  and  "  Poems  of  Progress"  (1871).

DOTON,  Hone  a,  educator,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Vt.,
M  Nov.,  1809;  d.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,  19  Jan.,  1886.
After  recoiling  a  common-school  education,  he
studied  by  himself,  and  became  one  of  the  best
mathematicians  in  the  state.  He  taught  at  various
places  till  1850,  when  he  opened  a  normal  school
in  his  native  town,  and  continued  it  till  1866.
Polly  150  of  Mr.  Doton's  pupils  became  successful
teachers,  and  his  school  was  a  great  aid  to  the  edu-
cational system  of  the  state,  lie  also  worked  as  a
surveyor,  "and  from  1866  till  his  death  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Woodstock  railroad.  His  work  in
determining  the  altitudes  of  Vermont  mountains
is  accepted  as  authority.  He  made  astronomical
calculations  for  the  "\ermont  Register,"  and  for
eighteen  years  kept  a  meteorological  record,  mak-
ing full  monthly  reports  to  the  war  department  at
Washington.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  sen-
ate in  1865-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  tin- legisla-
ture established  his  method  of  computing  interest.
known  as  the"  Vermont  rule."  Mr.  Doton  received
the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Norwich  uni\er>itv,  Vt.,
in  184& He  published  many  scientific  articles.

DOTY,  Kliliii,  missionary,  b,  in  Heme,  Albanv
Y..  90 Sept,  isoo;  dl  at  sea,  80  tfor.,  1864
He  was  apprenticed  to  a  merchant  in  ix'-M,  but
afterward  entered  EttttgeTI  ooUege,  was  graduated
there  in  1816*81  New  Itrunswick  theological  semi-
nary in  1886, and  sailed  asa  missionary  for  Itatavia.
Java,  in  June  of  that  year.  After  working  in  Java
and  Borneo,  be  finally  settled,  in  1*44.  at  Amov,
China,  where  his  labors  were  very  successful. In

VOL.  II. — 14


later  yean  he  gave  himself  ewpecuUly  to  the
literary  work  of  the  mission.  r£  ruin«i

his  health,  and  he  died  on  the  vessel  that  was
carrying  him  home.  Among  his  publications  arv
"Some  Thoughts  on  the  Pru|>er  Term  for  (i.-l  m
the  Chinese"  (Shai

Manual  of  the  Amov  Dialect  "  (1N58):  ami  a  trans-
lation into  thai  dialect  of  .Mil,
lage  Sermons  "  (Anioy,  183

Ixil'Y,  James  Duane,  governor  of  Wisconsin,
b.  in  Bale**,  Washington  c...  N.  V.,  in 1  T1W» ;  d.  in

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  18 June,  18m AfWetafo

ing  law  he  removed  to  Detroit.  Mich.,  in  1*1*.  aiid
became  secretary  . .f  the  territorial  council  and  clerk
of  the  court. In  1H20  he  was  on.- of  the  partf  that.

under  (ien.  Lewis  Cass,  explored  the  opper  lakes  in
canoes,  travelling  4.<MK»  miles,  and  making  tr.
with  the  Indian  tribal  of  that  region.  In  182ft-<82
he  was  U.  S.  judge  for  northern  Michigan,  holding
his  first  court  at  1'rairie  du  (hien,  then  a  military
outpost.  II0  wag  one  0f  a  commissi., n  appofarloa
by  congress  in  1KM)  to  lay  out  a  militarv  r..iul  from
Green  Bay  through  Chicago  to  Prairie  du  Chi.-n.
and  in  1884  was  a  memUr  of  the  Michigan  lai
ture.  Here  he  introduced  a  bill  that  led  to  the  di-
vision of  Michigan  and  the  creation  of  Wisconsin
and  Iowa  territories.  Me  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  present  city  of  Madison.  Wis.,  Mowed  ,ts
adoption  as  the  capital,  and  in  1837-'41  was  dele-
gate to  congress  from  the  new  territory,  having
been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  In  lH41-'4  he  was
governor  of  the  territory;  but  his  administration
was  marked  by  bitter  contentions  and  a  collision
with  the  legislature,  and  after  the  appointment  of
his  successor  he  was  placed  bv  the  war  department
on  a  commission  to  treat  with  the  Indians  of  the
northwest.  He  was  a  member  of  the  constitutional
convention  of  1846,  and,  on  the  admission  of  Wh>
consin  to  the  Union,  ■erred  two  more  terms  in  con-
gress, from  1849  till  lxM.  being  cbotan  the  reoond
time  as  a  free-soiler.  He  was  made  su|«-rintendeiit
of  Indian  affairs  in  1861,  and  in  1864  was  appointed
by  President  Lincoln  governor  of  Utah  territorv.  of
which  he  had  previously  been  treasurer.  Got.  Doty
was  a  man  of  great  ability,  commanding  preseii<i\
and  winning  address.  Though  he  had  many  |«,lit-
ical  enemies,  he  was  personally  a  favorite  with  all.

DOTY,  Lock  wood  Lyon,  lawyer,  b.  in  Qrove-
land,  N.  Y.,  15  May,  1887;  d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  .1..
18  Jan.,  1878.  His  early  years  were  spent  in  his
native  village,  and  when  of  age  he  entered  a  law-
office  in  Geneseo.  N.  Y.  He  was  active  in  procur-
ing enlistments  during  the  war.  was  militarv  sccre-
tary  of  Gov.  Ponton,  and  foundc<l  the  state  military
bureau  at  Albany,  which  collected  the  histories  of
tne  volunteer  regiments  and  provided  for  the  care
of  the  sick  and  wounded.  Iu  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed  pension  agent  in  New  York  city,  which
ofhos  be  held  until  failing  health  ooraneuod  his
ceajgnation  ■  few  weeks  previous  to  his  death.

001  rBLEDAT,  Charles  William.  soldier,  b.
in  Leicestershire.  Bngland,  28  Jan.,  IK2U.  This  sur-
name,  of  Huguenot  origin,  was  originally  Dulmldy.
lie  came  to  this  country  early  in  life,  and  received
a  common-school  education  in  Ohio.  He  went  to
California  in  the  early  days  of  the"  gold  fev.  r  "
and  led  a  life  of  adventure!  Baity  in  1*54  he  em-
barked from  San  Francisco  for  N»-w  York,  by  way
Of  Nicaragua,  but  remained  in  that  count n,  and
e-poiiscd  the  popular  cause  in  the  afffl  war  then
in  progress,  raising  and  commanding  a  coinjiany
of  American  and  English  rifiemen.  He  siilise-
ipientlv  !»niiiii'  major  and  colonel,  and,  after  the
arrival'  of  Walker  and  his  party  (s«>e  Walks*,
William),  was  with  that  adventurer  in  the  battlec


210


DOUBLEDAY


DOUGHERTY


of  Rivas  and  Virgin  hay.  After  Walker  had  un-
(blded  t<>  Doubleday  his  visionary  scheme  of  a
southern  empire,  the  latter  left  him  In  disgust  and
retained  to  New  York  late  in  1855.  Bat  he  after-
ward joined  Lockridge's  unsuccessful  attempt  to
re-enforce  Walker,  was  injured  by  the  boiler  ex-
plosion that  frustrated  that  attempt,  and  subse-
quently accompanied  a  party  of  adventurers  that
sailed  from  Mobile,  and  was  shipwrecked  on  the
coast  of  Central  America.  In  1861-2  Col.  Double-
day  commanded  a  company  of  cavalry  in  the
service  of  the  United  States,  and  was  for  a  time
act  i ni,r  brigadier-general.  He  has  published  "  Reini-
nis! lenoea  of  the  Filibuster  War  in  Nicaragua"
(New  York,  1886).

DOUBLEDAY,  Edward,  English  naturalist,  b.
in  1810;  d.  in  London  in  1849.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Society  of  friends.  After  making  a
tour  of  the  United  States,  he  published  a  paper  on
the  "  Natural  History  of  North  America,"  and  was
made  one  of  the  curators  of  the  British  museum.
He  contributed  largely  to  periodicals  on  ornitholo-
gy, entomology,  and  zoology,  and  published  a  costly,
illustrated,  and  valuable  work  on  the  "Genera  of
Diurnal  Lepidoptcra."

DOUBLEDAY,  Ulysses  Freeman,  congress-
man, b.  in  New  Lebanon,  Conn.,  15  Dec,  1792 ;  d.
in  Belvidere,  111.,  10  March,  1866.  His  father
fought  at  Bunker  Hill  and  Stonv  Point,  and  was
confined  for  some  time  in  the  Jersey  prison-ship
during  the  revolution.  Ulysses  was  apprenticed  to
a  printer  in  1809,  worked  at  the  trade  with  Thur-
low  Weed  at  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1812
served  for  some  months  against  the  British  at
Sackett's  Harbor.  After  working  in  Utica  and
Albany  he  went  to  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y..  in  1816,
where  he  established  and  edited  the  "Saratoga
Courier."  He  removed  to  Auburn  in  1819,  and  pub-
lished and  edited  the  "  Cayuga  Patriot "  there  for
twenty  years.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Jackson  Democrat,  serving  two  terms,  in  1831-'3
and  1835-'7.  He  became  a  farmer  in  Scipio,  Cayuga
co.,  X.  Yr.,  in  1837,  but  in  1846  went  to  New  York
city,  where,  in  company  with  his  brother  Elisha,  he
opened  a  stationery  store  in  John  street,  and  be-
came well  known  as  a  bookseller. — His  son,  Thomas
Donnellr,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,  1816;  d.
in  New  York  city,  9  May,  1864,  was  engaged  in  the
book  trade,  and  In  1862  became  colonel  of  the  4th
New  York  artillery.  He  was  run  over  by  an  omni-
bus in  Broadway,  New  York,  and  fatally  injured.
— Another  son,  Abner,  soldier,  b.  in  Ballston  Spa,
X.  Y.,  26  June,  1819,  was  a  civil  engineer  in  1836 -'8,
when  he  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my, and  on  his  graduation  in  1842  was  assigned  to
the  3d  artillery.  He  served  in  the  1st  artillery
during  the  Mexican  war.  being  engaged  at  Mon-
terey and  at  Itinconada  Pass  during  the  battle  of
Buena  Vista.  He  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,
3  March,  1847,  to  captain,  3  March,  1855,  and
served  against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1856-'8.
He  was  in  Fort  Moultrie  from  1860  till  the  garrison
withdrew  to  Sumter  on  26  Dec.  of  that  year,  and
aimed  the  first  gun  fired  in  defence  of  the  latter
fort  on  12  April,  1861.  He  was  promoted  to  major
in  the  17th  infantry  on  14  May,  1861,  from  June
till  August  was  with  Gen.  Patterson  in  the  Shen-
andoah valley,  and  then 'served  in  defence  of  Wash-
ington, commanding  forts  and  batteries  on  the  Po-
tomac. He  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers on  3  Feb.,  1862,  assigned  to  the  command  of
all  the  defences  of  Washington  on  the  same  date,
and  commanded  a  brigade  on  the  Rappahannock
and  in  the  northern  Virginia  campaign  from  May
till  September,  1862,  including  the  second  battle  of


Bull  Run,  where  on  30  Aug.  he  succeeded  to  the
command  of  Hatch's  divi-ion.  In  the  battle  of
Antietam  hit  dhisioii  held  the  extreme  right  and
opened  the  battle,  losing  heavily,  but  taking  six
battle-flags.  On  29  Nov.,  1862,  he  was  promoted
to  major-general
of  volunteers.
He  was  at  Fred-
ericksburg and
Chanccllorsville.
and  succeeded
Gen.  John  F.
Beynoldsaschief
of  the  1st  corps
when  that  officer
was  appointed  to
the  command  of
one  wing  of  the
army.  OnlJuly,
1863,  he  was  sent
to  Gettysburg  to
supportBuford'8
cavalry,  and,  on
the  fall  of  Gen.
Reynolds,  took
command  of  the
field  till  the  ar-
rival of  Gen.  Howard,  some  hours  later.  His
division  fought  gallantly  in  the  battle  that  fol-
lowed, and  on  the  third  day  aided  in  the  repulse
of  Pickett's  charge.  Gen.  Doubleday  served  on
courts-martial  and  commissions  in  1863- '5,  and  on
12  July,  1864,  temporarily  commanded  the  south-
eastern defences  of  Washington  when  the  city  was
threatened  by  Early's  raiders.  He  was  brevetted
colonel  in  the  regular  array  on  11  March,  1865,  and
brigadier-  and  major-general  on  13  March,  for  his
services  during  the  war.  In  November  and  De-
cember, 1866,  he  was  in  command  at  Galveston,
Tex.,  served  as  assistant  commissioner  of  the  Freed-
man's  bureau  there  till  1  Aug.,  1867,  and,  after  be-
ing mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service,  was
made  colonel  of  the  35th  infantry,  15  Sept.,  1867.
He  was  a  member  of  the  retiring-board  in  New
York  city  in  1868,  and  in  1869-'71  superintended
the  general  recruiting  service  in  San  Francisco,
where  in  1870  he  suggested  and  obtained  a  charter
for  the  first  cable  street-railway  in  the  United
States.  After  commanding  posts  in  Texas  he  was
retired  from  active  service  on  11  Dec,  1873.  He
has  published  "  Reminiscences  of  Forts  Sumter  and
Moultrie  in  1860-'l "  (New  York,  1876);  "(  han-
cellorsville  and  Gettysburg"  (1882):  and  articles
in  periodicals  on  army  matters,  the  water  supply  of
cities,  and  other  subjects. — Another  son,  Uiysses,
soldier,  b.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  31  Aug.,  1824.  was
educated  at  the  academy  in  his  native  town.  He
became  major  in  the  4th  New  York  artillery,  28
Jan..  1862,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  U.  E
ored  troops,  15  Sept.,  1863,  and  colonel  of  the  45th
colored  troops,  8  Oct.,  1864.  He  commanded  a
brigade  at  the  battle  of  Five  Forks,  and  was  bre-
vetted brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  11  March,
1865,  for  his  gallantry  there.  Gen.  Doubleday  was
for  many  years  a  member  of  the  stock  exchange  in
New  York  tit  v.

DOUGHERTY,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  15  Oct.,  1826.  He  was  educated  at  pri-
vate schools,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  his  native  city  on  2  May,  1849,  and  soon  became
noted  as  an  orator  and  humorist.  He  has  been  a
political  speaker,  and  was  a  strong  friend  of  the
national  government  in  1862.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  first  Union  league,  and  w
earnestly  for  President Lincoln'*  re-election  in


DOUQfl

1864.  I 'Ul  sultscqucntly  acted  with  the  I Mnocmtk
party.  Mr.  Dougherty's  lectures  OQ  "The  St. i
an. I  "Orators  ami  Oratory,"  have  lieen  much  ad-
mired. Anions  his  noteworthy  addressee  in  OM
delivered  before  tin-  literary  societies  of  Lafayette
QOUage,  which  was  <|iii>t«-<l  ami  commented  00  by
:  Lytton  in  the  house  of  oommone d^V.ii.  II.
made  the  ■pooofa  <>f  welcome  to  President  Lincoln
at  the  Philadelphia  union  league  in  .January.  1864,
and  the  >|>ce<h  Dominating  den.  Hancock  for  the
presidem-v  in  the  Democratic  convention  of  1880.

DOUGHTY,  Thomas  artist.  1..  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa..  l!i  .Inly.  L796;  d.  in  NOW  York  cit\.  J  I
July.  1804.  Ha  was  apprenticed  in  his  youth  to  a
leather  manufacturer, and  afterward  carried  on  the
business  in  his  own  name.  He  painted  in  his  lei-
sure moments,  without  a  master,  and  had  received
a  quarter's  tuition  in  India-ink  drawing,  when  a
growing  t<iste  for  art  induced  him  to  adopt  it  as  a
profession  alMiut  1S'20.  He  (tainted  for  many  years
in  the  I'nited  States,  ami  afterward  in  London  and
Paris,  enquiring  a  high  reputation  by  his  paintings
of  American  scenery.  He  was  one  of  the  earlit-t
American  artists  to  make  evident  the  charm  of
what  is  called  the  "  silvery  tone,"  and  to  reproduce
autumnal  effects  with  genuine  grace  and  emphasi-.
His  world  include  "A  I'eep  at  the  Catskills";
"View  on  the  Hudson";  "Lake  Sine";  "Old
Mill";  "Delaware  \\'atcr-(iap  "  ;  "Scene  on  the
Susquehanna";  and  "A  View  near  Paris."

IHU'UHTY,  William  Henrj,  surgeon,  b.  in
Augu-ta.  tin.,  5  Veb.,  1836.  He  received  an  aca-
demical education  in  Augusta,  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Geor-
gia  in  1855,  and  in  the  same  year  began  practice  in
Augusta,  giving  esjtecial  attention  to  gynecology.
From  March,  1862,  till  April.  1866,  he  served  181
surgeon  in  the  Confederate  armv,  being  exclusive-
ly employed  in  hospital  duty.  He  was  surgeon-in-
charge  in  the  general  hospital  at  Macon,  Ga.,  in
Walker's  division  hospital  at  Lauderdale  Springs,
Miss,  and  at  the  second  Georgia  hospital  at  Augus-
ta, where  lie  was  engaged  from  October,  1863,  till
the  close  of  the  war.  in  the  course  of  this  long
service  he  tied  the  subclavian  artery  at  its  external
third  twice,  which  operations  have  passed  into  the
jHrinanent  records  of  military  surgery.  From  1867
till  1875  he  three  times  held  the  professorship  of
materia  medica  and  therapeutics  in  the  medical
college  of  Georgia  (now  the  medical  department  of
the  btate  university).  He  is  a  member  of  numer-
ous medical  and  health  associations,  and  in  lss7
was  made  a  member  of  the  international  medical
congress.  His  contributions  to  medical  journals
have  l»cen  numerous,  and  embrace  a  wide  range  of
subjects,  professional  and  otherwise.

DOUGLAS,  Amanda  Minnie,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city.  14  July,  ls:W.  She  was  educated
at  the  city  institute  in  New  York,  removed  to
Newark.  N\  J.,  in  1853,  and  afterward  read  Eng-
lish literature,  history,  and  various  other  branoboi
with  a  private  tutor.  In  early  childhood  she  had
the  gift  of  narration,  and  amused  the  neighboring
children  with  stories  that  would  be  continued  for
weeks.  At  eighteen  years  of  age  she  was  ab>ut  !*•-
ginning  the  study  of  designing  and  engraving,
when  illness  in  the  family  prevented.  For  a  num-
ber of  jraan  she  was  chiefly  devoted  to  norning  the

sick,  and  while  at  the  bedsido  gave  her  leisure  mo-
ments to  writing.  She  participated  in  planning
several  inventions,  patenting  one  herself,  a  folding
frame  for  a  mosquito-net,  to  !*•  used  by  travellers,
artists,  and  others.  Of  her  early  efforts  in  writing
ays;  •■  1  had  no  thought  of  becoming  a  novel-
ist, as  I  was  so  interested  in  other  pursuits;  but


211


this  path  seemed  to  oj.cn.  and  othera  proved  quit,,
impossible,  a-  I  ,,-are  my  home

•  d  in  comparative  retin  1  child-

hood, in  Newark.  N.  .).,  and  it-  niburtja,  and  is  au-
thor of  the  following  stories;  ••  In  Tru

Claudia  me  •*  (1867);

"Sydnie Adriance"  (1H«M); "With 1

Him"  (New  York.  1-.  riee  for

Young  People  "  (ii  voN..  Boston,  1870  '!);  "Lucia:
Ibr  Problem M  (New  York.  1871);  "Santa

Load" (Hostuli, IN?:!,; "Home Nook"

"The  old  Woman who Lived in  a  Shot1 "

M8tfta Daughter-" (1871); "Nelly KinnanTe
Kingdom  "(1876);  "  From  Hand  to  Mouth
Mills" (1879);  "Losl in a G
•Whom  Kathie  Harried  N  (1888) ;  "Floyd
Grandon'i  Honor"  (is8:j);  -out  of  the  w

"A Woman's Inheritam. •  "  (1886);  "FOM

of Her Household  "  ,  1

IMH'GLAS,  Sir  Charles,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  Sootland;  d.  in  17M».  After  being  for  KMH
time  in  the  service  of  Holland  he  entered  the  Brit-
ish navv,  and  at  the  ("'ginning  of  the  American
war  had  command  of  the  squadron  fleet  load  for  the
Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence.  In  the  spring  of  1 7 7 •;  bo
forced  hie  way  up  that  river,  through  11.  Ids  of
drifting  ice,  and  for  the  timely  relief  of  biaooon*
tryinen  at  Qoobec  received  honors  and  promotion.
In  17H7  he  waa created  B  rear-admiral.  Sir  Charles
introduced  the  mode  of  tiring  guns  on  b.anl  ships
by  means  of  locks instead  of  matches.— His son.

Sir  Howard,  soldier,  b,  in  Gosport,  Fngland.  1
July.  177<;:  d.  in  England,  8  Nov..  1861, entered
the  British  army  early  in  life,  and  Barred  in  Portu-
gal  and Spain in 1806-12. He was appointed

governor  oi  New  Brunswick  in  1888, and  remained
there  until  1K>!).  During  his  term  of  office  he  Boo-
st ructed  military  roads,  established  schools,  and
displayed  a  deep  interest  in  the  Presbyterian
church  and  collegiate  instruction.  He  was,  in  fact,
the  energetic  promoter  of  the  material,  education-
al, and  religious  interests  of  the  province.  On  his
return  to  Fngland  he  was  made  lord  high  commis-
sioner of  the  Ionian  Island-  (1885-'40L  and  repre-
sented Liverpool  in  parliament  from  1K42  till  1847.
He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  general  in  1851.
Hifl  scientific  attainments  were  large,  and  his
"Treatise  on  Naval  Ciinnery"  (lsl<»).  which  was
approved  liy  the  admiralty,  is  considered  an  au-
thority. He  was  also  the  author  of  an  "  Fssav  on
Military  Bridges"  (is l»i),  and  other  works  on  for-
tifications ami  gunnery.

DOUGLAS,  DnrlCbotaniat,  b.  at  Scone,  Perth-
shire, Scotland,  in  1708;  d.  in  the  Hawaiian  Isl-
and-. IS  July.  is;t4.  He  was  employed  in  the  bo-
tanic garden  of  the  [Jniveraity  ox  Glasgow,  where
be  attracted  the  notice  of  I >r. '(afterward  Sir  Will-
iam) Hooker,  who  procured  for  him  an  ap]>oint-
iii.  nt  as  botanical  collector  in  the  I'nited  states  to
the  Horticultural  society  of  London.  In  thisca-
pacitv  be  travelled  extensively  in  America.,
mg  his  researches  in  1824  as  far  as  Oregon  and
California,  exploring  Columbia  river  and  part- of
California,  and  in  1S27  traversing  the  continent
from  Fort  VanooUTOT  t<>  Hudson  bay,  wh>
met  Sir  John  Franklin,  and  returned  with  him  to
Fngland,  having  many  valuable  acquisiti.  :
RhgUafa  Oower-gardene,  After  a  -
when  on  a  similar  mi— ion  to  Columbia  river  in
1869.  be  w.nt  to  the  Hawaiian  I-lands.  where  he
was  killed  in  1*U.  Through  his  agency  317  new
of  plants  wen1  introduced  into  Fngland,
and  h>- collected  S00  specimens  ,,f  the  California
flora.  A  gigantic  anoOMO  of  pine,  which  he  dis-
covered in  California,  is  named  JSnus  Duuylaasii.


212


DOUGLAS


DOUGLAS


DOUGLAS,  George,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.

nt  Ashkirk.  Roxburghshire,  Scotland,  in  October,
1825.  In  1832  the  family  removed  to  Canada,  and
made  their  home  in  Montreal.  After  btADC  ap-
prenticed to  a  blacksmith,  attending  a  private
school,  and  serving  in  a  book  store,  he  entered  into
partnership  with  his  brother,  a  carpenter  and
tmildcr.  He  had  become  an  insatiable  reader,  pos-
■Mrfng  a  natural  gift  of  eloquence  and  a  polished
diction  unusual  for  his  age,  and  enrolled  himself
as  a  student  of  medicine.  Uniting  with  the  Metho-
dist church,  he  became  a  class-leader,  a  local
preacher,  and  a  probationer  for  the  ministry,  and
in  1849  went  to  England  to  attend  the  Wesleyan
theological  college,  but  was  at  once  sent  as  a  mis-
sionary to  the  Bahamas.  After  his  ordination  in
1850,  he  was  ordered  to  the  Bermuda  Islands,  re-
siding there  eighteen  months,  until  feeble  health
compelled  him  to  resign,  after  which  he  returned
to  Canada  and  was  engaged  eleven  vears  in  the
pulpit,  and  seven  as  the  president  of  the  Wesleyan
college  in  Montreal.  As  a  minister  he  was  sta-
tioned three  years  in  each  of  the  cities,  Kingston,
Toronto,  and  Hamilton.  The  disadvantages  of  his
youth  made  him  a  student  through  life,  and  he  has
given  special  attention  to  literature,  philosophy,
the  natural  sciences,  and  metaphysics.  He  is  one
of  the  first  orators  of  his  church  in  Canada.  In
1869  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him
by  McGill  university.

DOUGLAS,  James,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
Brechin,  Scotland,  20  May,  1800 ;  d.  in  New  York,
14  April,  1886.  lie  received  his  early  education
in  Aberdeen  and  Dumfries,  and  after  a  period  of
apprenticeship  with  a  surgeon  was  appointed  sur-
geon to  a  vessel  bound  for  Greenland.  Subse-
quently he  passed  two  winters  in  study  in  Edin-
burgh, and  m  1820  was  admitted  to  the  Royal  col-
lege of  surgeons  of  that  city,  and  soon  afterward
to  the  Royal  college  of  surgeons,  London.  After
serving  in  India  as  assistant  surgeon  of  the  Indian
army,  and  in  the  fatal  expedition  to  the  Mosquito
territory,  from  the  coast  of  which  he  was  rescued
and  taken  to  Havana,  he  came  to  New  York  in
1824,  and  after  a  short  residence  there  and  in  Utica
was  appointed  lecturer  on  anatomy  to  the  Auburn
medical  institution.  In  1826  he  arrived  in  Quebec,
and  during  the  succeeding  twenty-five  years  prac-
tised there,  attaining  the  highest  rank  as  a  surgeon
and  physician.  In  1845  he,  together  with  Drs.
Marnn  and  Fremont,  founded  the  lunatic  asylum
at  Beauport,  near  Quebec,  the  institution  being
managed  by  Dr.  Douglas.  He  was  an  enthusiastic
traveller  and  antiquarian.

DOUGLAS,  Sir  James,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
Demerara,  British  Guiana,  14  Aug.,  1803 ;  d.  in
Victoria,  British  Columbia,  2  Aug.,  1877.  He  was
the  son  of  a  poor  Scotchman,  who  had  emigrated
to  the  colony  a  short  time  previous  to  his  birth,
and  was  early  left  an  orphan.  At  the  age  of
twelve  he  set  out  with  an  elder  brother  to  push
his  fortunes  in  the  British  possessions  of  Isorth
America.  At  that  time  the  rivalry  between  the
Hudson  Bay  and  North-west  companies  was  very
keen.  Young  Douglas  entered  the  service  of  the
latter,  bringing  to  his  duties  remarkable  powers  of
endurance,  an  iron  constitution,  and  a  resolute
spirit.  He  soon  displayed  prudence,  determination,
and  executive  capacity  in  the  arduous  service  in
which  he  was  engaged,  and  his  business  ability  and
the  tact  that  he  exhibited  in  his  intercourse  with
the  Indians  secured  him  rapid  advancement.
After  the  consolidation  of  the  rival  companies  he
was  appointed  chief  factor,  the  duties  of  which
office  compelled  him  to  visit  the  remotest  outposts


and  undergo  many  hardships.  He  was  once  capt-
ured and  held  for  weeks  by  a  tribe  of  Indians.
Baring  at  length  succeeded  in  escaping,  he  made
his  way  hack  after  much  suffering  to  one  of  the
company's  forts.  He  had  forsome  time  been  gtvaq
up  as  dead.  In  1833  he  was  appointed  to  the
chief  agency  for  the  region  west  of  the  Rocky
mountains.  In  1843,  his  headquarters  being  at
Fort  Vancouver,  Oregon  territory,  a  company  of
forty  men  landed  by  his  orders  at  what  is  now
Victoria  (called  Tsomus  by  the  natives),  and  nego-
tiations were  concluded  for  the  erection  of  a  fort.
In  1851  he  became  governor  of  the  infant  colony,
and  in  1857  his  commission  was  renewed  for  a
further  period  of  six  years.  In  1859  Vancouver
Island  was  constituted  a  crown  colony,  with  Vic-
toria as  its  capital,  and  Mr.  Douglas  was  appointed
governor,  and  received  the  dignity  of  C.  B.  British
Columbia  having  been  organized  as  a  colony  the
year  previous,  and  the  governorship  also  vested  in
Mr.  Douglas,  he  exercised  the  arduous  and  respon-
sible duties  of  his  double  office  so  well  that  in  1863
he  was  knighted.  The  following  year  he  retired
from  public  life,  on  the  expiration  of  his  term  of
office,  and,  after  making  tne  tour  of  Europe,  re-
turned to  end  his  days  in  the  land  for  which  he
had  done  so  much.  He  married  in  1827,  and  for
some  years  his  eldest  and  only  surviving  son
represented  Victoria  in  the  provincial  legislature.

DOUGLAS,  John  Hancock,  physician,  b.  in
Waterford,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  June,  1824.  He
was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1843,  and  in  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1847.  He  sailed  for  Europe  in  1849,  and,
after  spending  the  intervening  period  in  study
and  travel,  returned  in  1851,  but  again  visited
Europe  in  1854  and  in  1868.  He  had  in  the  mean-
time begun  to  practice  in  New  York  city,  where
from  1856  till  1862  he  edited  twelve  volumes  of  the
"  American  Medical  Monthly,"  and  from  1865  till
1866  three  volumes  of  the  :'New  York  Medical
Journal,"  then  a  monthly,  but  now  a  weekly  pub-
lication. He  has  also  contributed  to  the  columns
of  the  "  New  Orleans  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"
the  "  New  Orleans  Hospital  Gazette,  the  "  Boston
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  other  periodi-
cals. Dr.  Douglas  was  the  attending  phvsician  of
Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  from  22  Oct.,  1884,  till  the  death
of  the  latter,  23  July,  1885.

DOUGLAS,  Silas  Hamilton,  chemist,  b.  in
Fredonia,  N.  Y.,  16  Oct.,  1816.  He  was  educated
at  the  academy  in  Fredonia,  and  then  entered  the
office  of  Dr.  Zi'na  Pitcher  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  for  the
study  of  medicine,  after  which  he  was  graduated
in  Baltimore  as  a  physician,  and  entered  on  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  Dearborn,  Mich.  In
1844  he  was  appointed  instructor  in  chemistry  in
the  University  of  Michigan,  and  at  once  was  given
charge  of  that  department,  Dr.  Douglas  Hough-
ton, the  professor  of  chemistry,  being  absent  in
the  prosecution  of  the  geological  survey  of  Michi-
gan. Two  years  later  lie  was  elected  profc-
chemistry,  and  took  part  in  the  establishment  of
the  department  of  medicine,  which  was  organized
in  1848.  He  secured  at  that  time  the  promise  of
a  chemical  laboratory  in  the  medical  department,
but  its  fulfilment  was  delayed  until  1856.  when  he
was  given  a  separate  building,  provided  with  tables
for  twenty-six  students,  at  a  time  when  few  of  the
older  colleges  of  this  country,  and  not  many  uni-
versities in  Europe,  were  supplied  with  laboratories.
Dr.  Douglas  served  in  charge  of  the  chemical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Michigan  for  thirty-
three  years,  during  which  time  his  labors  were
directed  to  the  establishment  of  A  laboratory  of


MUG  LAS


DOUGLAS


IniOttuatM  the  object  cif  hig  lif..,  n  puqiose  in
which  ho  was  eminently  successful.  A*  |  result
of  hi*  efforts'  the  lal«irat««rv  through  successive  en-
largcments  reached  aca|uu-ity  fur  170  students  in
1880.  He  has  been  connected  with  various  scicn-
t  i li« -  societies,  1m  it  h  as  active  and  corresponding
member.  His  publications  include,  ••  TaM.
(Qualitative  Chemical  Analysis  "(Aim  Arbor,  i
ami.  jointly  with  I'n.f.  Albert  B.  Prescott,  "(Quali-
tative Chemical  Analysis"  (New  York,  1H7J ;  3d
ed..  :

IHH'GL  VS.  Stephen  Arnold,  statesman,  h.  in
Brandon.  Vt..  M  April.  lsi:{:  d.  in  Chicago,  111..  I
June.  1861.  His  father,  a  graduate  of  Middlchury
college  and  a  young  physician  of  Ugh  standing,  died
suddenly  when  Stephen  was  two  months  old,  and
the  widow  with  her  two  children  retired  to  a  farm
near  Brandon.  Here  her  ton  lived  with  her  until
he  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  attending  school  during
the  three  winter  months  and  working  on  the  farm
the  remainder  of  the  year.  Determined  then  to
earn  his  own  living,  he  went  to  Middlchury  and
liecame  an  apprentice  at  cabinet-making.  This
trade  he  followed  for  about  eighteen  months,  when
he  was  forced  to  abandon  it  on  account  of  impaired
health.  He  then  attended  the  academy  at  Bran-
don for  about  a  vear.  In  the  autumn  of  1830  he
moved  to  New  York  state  with  his  mother,  who
hat!  married  Gehazi  Granger,  of  Ontario  county,
and  attended  the  academy  at  Canandaigua  until
December,  181%  when  he  began  the  study  of  law;
but,  finding  that  his  mother  would  be  unable  to
support  him  through  the  long  course  of  legal  stud-
ies prescribed  by  the  state,  he  determined  upon  go-
ing to  the  west,  and  on  24  June.  1833,  set  out  for
Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  was  dangerously  ill  with
fever  for  four  months.  Ho  then  visited  Cincin-
nati, Louisville,  St.  Louis,  and  Jacksonville,  111.,
but  failed  to  obtain  employment.  Finding  his
money  exhausted,  he  walked  to  Winchester,  where
he  arrived  at  night  with  only  thirty-seven  and  a
half  cents.  Here  he  secured  three  days'  employ-
ment as  clerk  to  an  auctioneer  at  an  administrator's
sale,  and  was  paid  six  dollars.  During  the  sale  he
made  so  favorable  an  impression  that  he  at  onee
obtained  a  school  of  about  forty  pupils,  whom  he
taught  for  three  months.  During  this  time  he
studied  law  at  night,  and  on  Saturdays  practised
before  iustices  of  the  peace.

In  March,  1834,  he  removed  to  Jacksonville,  ob-
tained his  licence,  and  began  the  regular  practice
of  law.  Two  weeks  thereafter  he  addressed  a
large  Democratic  meeting  in  defence  of  Gen.  Jack-
son s  administration.  In  a  short  sketch  of  hisearlv
life,  written  in  1838,  from  which  the  foregoing
facts  have  been  taken,  Mr.  Douglas  thus  spoke  of
this. event:  "The  excitement  was  intense,  and  I
was  rather  seven*  in  my  remarks  upon  the  opposi-
tion. .  .  .  The  next  week  the  'I'atriot.'  the  organ
of  the  opposition,  devoted  two  entire  columns  to
me  and  my  speech,  and  continued  the  same  course
for  two  or  three  successive  weeks.  The  necessary
consequence  was  that  I  immediately  became  known
to  .very  man  in  the  county,  and  was  placed  in  such
a  situation  as  to  be  supported  by  one  party  and  op-
posed by  the  other.  .  .  .  Within  one  week  there-
after 1  received  for  collection  demands  to  the
amount  of  thousands  of  dollars  from  pntflM  I  hail
never  seen  or  heard  of.  .  .  .  How  foolish,  how  im-
politic, the  indiscriminate  abuse  of  political  op-
ponents whose  humble  condition  or  insignifi"-..
prevents  the  possibility  of  injury,  and  who  may  In-
greatly  benefited  by  the  notoriety  thus  acquired  !
.  .  .  Indeed,  I  sincerclv  doubt  whether  I  owe  mo-t
to  the  kind  and  tflliaiillt  support  of  my  friends


V^V-l-^,


(and  no  man  similarly  situated  erer  had  better  and
truer  fri.nd-i.  or  to  the  violent,  n«klf»*.  and  im-
prudent o],|H,»ition  of  in v  enemies."  During  the
remainder  of  the  canvass  Mr.  Ifciugla*  U.re  a  pn.mi-
ncnt  |uirt,  and  OB  the  assembling  nf  the  leg:
although  not  yet  twenty-two  \,;irs  ,,f  age,  he  was

ted  attorney-
general,  an  offic'-r
who  then,  in  addi-
tion to his other

fatten, node the

m.trojK.litan cir-
cuit. IMS OIlJM)-

nent  was  (Jen.  John
J. Hardin. This

otiic  he  raflgned

hi  I  '•  ■  iiiiIht.  UK,
having  been  elect-
ed to  the  lower
house  of  the  legis-
lature, of  which  he
was  the  youngest
member.  The  men-
tal vigor  and  ca-
pacity he  there
displayed,  in  strik-
ing contrast  with
his  physical  frame,
which  was  then
very  slight,  won  for  him  the  title  of  the  ••  Kit-
tle Giant."  which  followed  him  through  life.  In
1*3?  he  was  ap|>ointcd  register  of  the  land-office  at
Springfield.  In  1838  he  was  the  Democratic  can-
didate for  congress ;  but  his  opponent  weeded
elected  by  a  majority  of  five  votes.  Over  fifty-
votes  cast  for  Mr.  Douglas  were  rejected  by  the
canvassers  because  his  name  was  misspelled".  In
December,  1840,  he  wasappiintcd  secretary  of  state
of  Illinois,  and  in  the  following  February  elected  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court.  Hen- his  decision  of
character  was  shown  in  the  trial  of  Joseph  Smith,
the  Mormon  prophet.  A  mob  had  taken  poooentioa
of  the  court-room,  intending  to  lynch  the  prisoner,
and  the  officers  of  the  curt  appeared  ixiwerleas.
In  this  emergency  Judge  I'ouglas  saw  a  bystander
idly  looking  on  whoee  great  strength  and  desperate

courage  were  well  known.  Above  the shoote of  the
rioters  rose  the  roios  of  the  judge  appointing  this
man  a  special  officer,  end  directing  aim  to  select
his  deputies  end  clear  the  court-room.  In  ten  min-
utes order  was  restored.

In  1848  Judge  Douglas  was  elected  to  iieiernes
bv  a  majority  of  4oo,  and  be  was  re-elected  in  1M4
by  1,900,  and  again  in  184C  by  over  8JJ00;  but  be-
fore the  term  began  he  was  choeen  C  s.  senator,
and  took  his  seat  in  the  senate,  4  March.  1867. Be

was  re-elected  In  I*-")*-1  end  1868,  and  had  served

fourteen  years  in  that  body  at  the  time  of  hi* death.
His  last  senatorial  canvass  was  remarkable  from
his  joint  discussions  with  Abraham  Lincoln. Kach

was  conceded  to  be  the  lender  of  his  party  and  the

fittest  exponent  of  its  principles,  and  the  flection
of  one  or  the  other  to  the  senate  was  the  real  issue
of  the  oonteot.  which  was  for  memliers  of  the  legis-
lature. Mr.  Buchanan's  administration  was  under-
stood to  be  hostile  to  Mr.  DoOgieCj  The  result  of
the  election  showed  a  Republican  ]>opular  majority
of  4,000;  hut  the  Democrat-  returned  a  majority  of
eight  members  to  tl  ire.  which  secured

Senator  Dougkuri  re-election, In 1808,  at the

Democratic  national  convention in Baltimore,
was  stmngly  sup|>orted  for  the  presidential  nomi-
nation, receiving  a  plurality  OB  the  thirtieth  l«allot.
In  1*56  he  was  again  a  candidate  at the 1  demo-
cratic national  convention  in  Cincinnati,  his  friends


214


DOUGLAS


noniLAs


throughout  the  convention  controlling  more  than
enough  votes  to  prevent  any  nomination  under  the
two-third  rule.  On  the  sixteenth  ballot  he  received
121  votes;  but,  as  he  was  opposed  to  the  principle
of  the  two-third  rule,  he  at  once  withdrew  in  favor
of  Buchanun,  who  had  received  a  majority,  thus
securing  his  nomination.  At  the  Democratic  na-
tional convention  in  Charleston  in  1860,  on  the  first
ballot  he  received  145$  votes  out  of  252$  cast.  On
the  twenty-third  ballot  he  received  152$  votes,
which  was  not  only  a  large  majority  of  the  votes
cast,  but  also  a  majority  of  all  those  entitled  to
representation.  The  convention  having  adjourned
to  Baltimore,  he  received  on  the  first  ballot  17<H
out  of  190$  votes  cast.  On  the  second  ballot  he
received  181$  votes  out  of  194i,  and  his  nomination
was  then  made  unanimous.  The  seceding  delegates
nominated  John  C.  Breckenridge.  Abraham  Lin-
coln was  the  nominee  of  the  Republican  party,  and
John  Bell  of  the  Constitutional  Union  partv.  Of
the  electoral  votes  only  twelve  were  cast  for  Doug-
las, although  he  received  1,375,157  of  the  popular
votes,  distributed  through  every  state  in  the  Union.
Mr.  Lincoln  received  180  electoral  votes  and  1,866,-
352  popular  votes.  From  the  age  of  twenty-one
till  his  death,  with  the  exception  of  about  two
years,  Mr.  Douglas's  entire  life  was  devoted  to  the
public  service.  During  his  congressional  career
his  name  was  prominently  associated  with  numer-
ous important  measures,  many  of  which  were  the
offspring  of  his  own  mind  or  received  its  control-
ling impress.  In  the  house  of  representatives  he
maintained  that  the  title  of  the  United  States  to
the  whole  of  Oregon  up  to  latitude  54°  40'  N.  was
"  clear  and  unquestionable."  He  declared  that  he
"  never  would,  now  or  hereafter,  yield  up  one  inch
of  Oregon  either  to  Great  Britain  or  any  other  gov-
ernment." He  advocated  the  policy  of  giving  no-
tice to  terminate  the  joint  occupation,  of  establish-
ing a  territorial  government  over  Oregon  protected
by  a  sufficient  military  force,  and  of  putting  the
country  at  once  in  a  state  of  preparation,  so  that  if
war  should  result  from  the  assertion  of  our  just
rights  we  might  drive  "  Great  Britain  and  the  last
vestiges  of  royal  authority  from  the  continent  of
2>v,rth  America,  and  make  the  United  States  an
ocean-bound  republic."  In  advocating  the  bill  re-
funding the  fine  imposed  on  Gen.  Jackson  by
Judge  Hall,  he  said :  "  I  maintain  that,  in  the  exer-
cise of  the  power  of  proclaiming  martial  law,  Gen.
Jackson  did  not  violate  the  constitution  nor  assume
to  himself  anv  authority  not  fully  authorized  and
legalized  by  his  position,  his  duty,  and  the  un-
avoidable necessity  of  the  case.  .  .  .  His  power  was
commensurate  with  his  duty,  and  he  was  author-
ized to  use  the  means  essential  to  its  performance.
.  .  .  There  are  exigencies  in  the  history  of  nations
when  necessity  becomes  the  paramount  law,  to
which  all  other  considerations  must  yield."  Gen.
Jackson  personally  thanked  Mr.  Douglas  for  this
speech,  and  a  copy  of  it  was  found  among  Jack-
son's papers  endorsed  by  him :  "  This  speech  con-
stitute! my  defence."  Mr.  Douglas  was  among  the
earliest  advocates  of  the  annexation  of  Texas,  and,
after  the  treaty  for  that  object  had  failed  in  the
senate,  he  introduced  joint  resolutions  having  prac-
tically the  same  effect.  As  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  territories  in  1846,  he  reported  the  joint
resolution  by  which  Texas  was  declared  to  be  one
of  the  United  States,  and  he  vigorously  supported
the  administration  of  President  Polk  in  the  ensu-
ing war  with  Mexico.  He  was  for  two  years  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  territories  in  the  house
(then  its  most  important  committee  in  view  of  the
slavery  question),  and  became  chairman  of  the


same  committee  in  the  senate  immediately  upon
entering  that  body.  This  position  be  held  for
eleven  years,  until  removed  in  Deoember,  1858,  on
account  of  his  opposition  to  some  of  the  measures
of  President  Buchanan's  administration.  Daring.
this  time  he  reported  and  carried  through  the  bills
organizing  the  territories  of  Minnesota,  Oregon,
New  Mexico,  Utah,  Washington,  Kansas,  and  Ne-
braska, and  also  those  for  the  admission  of  the
states  of  Iowa,  Wisconsin,  California,  Minnesota,
and  Oregon.

On  the  question  of  slavery  in  the  territories  he
early  took  the  position,  which  he  consistently  main-
tained, that  congress  should  not  interfere,  but  that
the  people  of  each  state  and  territory  should  be  al-
lowed to  regulate  their  domestic  institutions  to
suit  themselves.  In  accordance  with  this  principle
he  opposed  the  Wilmot  proviso  when  it  passed  the
house  of  representatives  in  1847,  and  afterward  in
the  senate  when  it  was  offered  as  an  amendment
to  the  bill  for  the  organization  of  the  territory  of
Oregon.  Although  opposed  to  the  principles  in-
volved in  the  Missouri  compromise,  he  preferred,
as  it  had  been  so  long  acquiesced  in,  to  carry  it  out
in  good  faith  rather  than  expose  the  country  to
renewed  sectional  agitation  ;  and  hence,  in  August,
1848,  he  offered  an  amendment  to  the  Oregon  bill,
extending  the  Missouri  compromise  line  to  the
Pacific  ocean,  thus  prohibiting  slavery  in  all  the
territory  north  of  the  parallel  of  36°  30',  and  by
implication  tolerating  it  south  of  that  line.  This
amendment  was  adopted  in  the  senate  by  a  large
majority,  receiving  the  support  of  every  southern
and  several  northern  senators ;  but  was  defeated  in
the  house  by  nearly  a  sectional  vote.  This  action
of  the  house  of  representatives,  which  Mr.  Douglas
regarded  as  a  practical  repudiation  of  the  principle
of  the  Missouri  compromise,  together  with  the  re-
fusal of  the  senate  to  prohibit  slavery  in  all  the
territories,  gave  rise  to  the  sectional  agitation  of
1849-'50,  which  was  temporarily  quieted  by  the
legislation  known  as  the  "  compromise  measures  of
1850,"  the  most  famous  of  which  was  the  fugitive-
slave  law  (see  Clay,  Henry,  vol.  i.,  page  644).  Mr.
Douglas  strongly  supported  these  measures,  the
first  four  having  been  originally  reported  by  him
from  the  committee  on  territories.  The  two  others,
including  the  fugitive-slave  law,  were  added  by  the
committee  of  thirteen,  and  the  measures  were  re-
ported back  by  its  chairman,  Henry  Clay.  On  his
return  to  Chicago,  the  city  council  passed  resolu-
tions denouncing  him  as  a  traitor,  and  the  meas-
ures as  violations  of  the  law  of  God  and  of  the
constitution ;  enjoining  the  city  police  to  disregard
the  laws,  and  urging  the  citizens  not  to  obey  them.
The  next  evening  a  large  meeting  of  citizens  was
held,  at  which  it  was  resolved  to  "  defy  death,,  the
dungeon,  and  the  grave,"  in  resistance  to  the  exe-
cution of  the  law.  Mr.  Douglas  immediately  ap-
peared upon  the  stand,  and  announced  that  on  the
following  evening  he  would  speak  at  the  same  place
in  defence  of  his  course.  Accordingly,  on  23  Oct.,
he  defended  the  entire  series  of  measures  in  a
speech  in  which  he  defined  their  principles  as  fol-
lows :  "  These  measures  are  predicated  upon  the
great  fundamental  principle  that  every  people
ought  to  possess  the  right  of  framing  and  regu-
lating their  own  internal  concerns  and  domestic
institutions  in  their  own  way.  .  .  .  These  things
are  all  confided  by  the  constitution  to  each  state
to  decide  for  itself,  and  I  know  of  no  reason  why
the  same  principle  should  not  be  extended  to  the
territories."  This  constituted  the  celebrated  doc-
trine of  "Popular  Sovereignty."'  sometimes  called
by  its  opponents  "  squatter  sovereignty  "  (see  Butts,


(il.AS


I  -  \  *  ■  . At tin-  aloaa  of  Ms  ipttoh  the  meeting  <

uiiuiiiiii"U-1\  resolved  to  sustain  all  I  In*  compromise
measures,  including  the  fugitive-slave  law.  ami  on
the  follow  in:;  evening  tin-  common  council  repealed
tln-ir  nullifying  resolution*  bj  a  vote  of  twvin
one.  In  !>•  •< -ember,  I85JJ,  .Mr.  Douglas  reported  his
celebrated  bill  to  organize the  territories  of  Kansas
Mini  Nebraska,  which  facnwdUx  lf"""MS*tpC**i  which

tin-  Demooraao tod  Republican  parties  became  ar-
il initial  each  other.  The  passage  of  this  hill
caused  intense  excitement  in  the  non-slaveholding
states,  ami  Mr.  Douglas,  as  its  author,  was  bitterly
denounced.  He  said  that  In-  travelleil  from  Wash  -
•II  to  Chicago  by  the  light  of  his  own  hurtling
effigies.  The  controversy  turned  upon  tin- follow-
in  g  i  >iq  v  i  s  jon  repealing  the  Missouri  compromise:
"  Which.  Iieing  inconsistent  with  the  principle  of
non-intervention  by  congress  with  slavery  in  the
■  ■>  ami  territories,  as  recognized  by  the  legisla-
tion of  1850  (commonly  called  the  compromise
measures),  is  hereby  declared  inoperative  and  void;
it  being  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  this  ait
not  to  legislate  slaver)'  into  any  territory  or  state,
nor  to  exclude  it  therefrom,  but  to  leave  the  pao-

Sle  thereof  perfectly  free  to  form  and  regulate  tln-ir
omest ic  institutions  in  their  own  way,  subject
only  to  the  constitution  of  the  United  States."  In
the  congressional  session  of  lK5?-'8  he  denounced
and  oppoaad  the  Ijecompton  constitution,  on  the
ground  that  "it  was  not  the  act  of  the  people  of
Kansas,  and  did  not  embody  their  wilL"

Mr.  Douglas  was  remarkably  successful  in  pro-
moting the  interests  of  his  own  state  during  his
congressional  career.  In  1K48  he  introduced  and
procured  the  passage  of  the  bill  granting  to  t  In-
state of  Illinois  the  alternate  sections  of  land  along
the  line  of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad,  which  so
largely  contributed  to  developing  the  resources  and
restoring  the  credit  of  the  state.  He  was  one  of
the  earliest  and  warmest  advocates  of  a  railroad  to
the  Pacific.  In  foreign  policy  he  opposed  the  treaty
with  England  limiting  the  territory  of  Oregon  to
the  forty-ninth  lutnillel.  He  also  opposed  the  Trist
peace  treaty  with  Mexico.  He  opposed  the  ratifica-
tion of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty,  chiefly  because  it
pledged  the  faith  of  the  United  States  never  to  an-
nex, colonize,  or  exercise  dominion  over  any  part
of  Central  America.  He  maintained  that  the
isthmus  routes  must  be  kept  open  as  highways  to
the  American  possessions  on  the  Pacific;  that  the
time  would  come  when  the  United  States  would
be  compelled  to  occupy  Central  America  ;  and  de-
clared that  he  would  nerer  pledge  the  faith  of  the
republic  not  to  do  in  the  future  what  its  interests
and  safety  might  require.  Be  also  declared  him-
self in  favor  of  the  acquisition  of  Cuba  whenever
it  could  be  obtained  consistently  with  the  laws  of
nations  and  the  honor  of  the  United  State-.
^  In  IK,")  he  introduced  a  bill  for  the  relief  of  the
l*.  S.  supreme  court,  giving  circuit-court  |>owers  to
the  district  courts,  requiring  all  thedistrict  judge-
in  each  circuit  to  meet  once  a  year  as  an  interme-
diate court  of  ap|M-als  under  the  presidency  of  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  proTiding  for  ap-
peals from  the  district  courts  to  these  intermediate
court-,  and  thence  to  the  supreme  court,  in  cases
involving  large  amounts.  In  1M.">7  he  declared  that
the  only  solution  of  the  Mormon  qiltotitMl  in  Utah
was  to  ■•  re|K-al  the  organic  act  attsolutcly  and  un-
conditionally, blotting  out  of  exi-tence  the  territo-
rial government,  and  Bringing  Utah  under  tli-
and  exelu-ive  jurisdiction  of  the  United  Si
government."

In  1858,  and  again  in  1800,  he  vi-ited  tin-  south-
em  states,  and  made  many  s|«e«  he-. Everywhere


heboldb  deeded  the  right  of  aeoaaakm,  and  main-
tained that,  while  tins  was  a  union  of  v»rerakn
states  imle|M-udent  in  all  local  mat tera,  they  wen
bound together  in  an  indimolubli  '|,\  t|„.

constitution,  which  cstnblished  a  national  govern-
ment inherently  poaaaaeing  all  itowen  essential  to
its  own  preservation.  During  the  exciting  session
1  1.  Mr.  Douglas,  as  a  immUr  of  the  com-
mittee of  thirt.-cn,  and  on  th..  looroftfaa  senate,
lalK.red  incessantly  to  avert  civil  war
soiiahle  measures  of  adjustment,  hut  at the  begin*

llillg .-f hostilities he threw the  Whole Weight of

his  intluencv  in  faebnU  of  the  Union,  and  gnve  Mr.
Lincoln's  administration  an unfaltering  -iij.|K.rt.

In  public  sjM-cche-  he dei noad  ■eojaaton  a-  erima

and  madness,  and  declared  that,  if  the  new  system
of  resistance  bv  the  sword  and  bayonet  to  the  re-
sult of  the  Udn.t-l.ox  shall  prevail  in  this  country.
"  the  bjetorj  of  the  United  States  i-  already  written
in  the  history  of  Mexico."  He  said  that  "BOOM
couhl  Ih-  a  true  Democml  without  In-ing  a  patriot,"
In  an  address  t,,  the  legislature  of  Illinois,  deliv-
ered at  its  unanimous  request,  he  urged  the  obliv-
ion  of all party  differences,  „,,,| upealed  to  his

political  friends  and  opponent!  to  unite  m  nnoorl
of  the  government.  In  a  letter  dictated  for  publi-
cation during  his  last  illness,  he  said  that  but  0M
course  was  left  for  patriotic  men.  and  that  was  to
sustain  the  government  against  all  assailants.  On
his  death-!>cd  his  last  coherent  words  expressed  an
ardent  wish  for  the  preservation  of  the  I  nion.aml
his  dying  message  to  his  sons  was  to  "obey  tin-
laws  and  uphold  the  constitution."

Mr.  Douglas  was  somewhat  below  the  middle
height,  but  strongly  built,  ami  ca|>able  of  great
mental  and  physical  exertion.  He  was  a  ready  and
powerful  tpeaker,  discarding  ornament  in  favor  of
simplicity  and  strength.  Eew  equalled  him  in  |»-r-
sonal  influence  over  the  masses  of  the  people,  and
none  inspired  more  devoted  friendship.  While  con-
sidering it  theduty  of  congress  to  protect  the  rights
of  the  slave-
holding  states,
he  was  opposed
to  slaverv  it-
self. His*  first
wife  was  the
only  child  of  a
large  slave-hold-
er, who  in  his
last  will  pro-
vided that,  if
M  n.  Douglas
should  die  with-
out issue,  all  her
slaves  should  lie
freed  and  re-
moved to  Libe-
ria at  tin
pense  of  her  es-
tate, saving  fur-
ther t  hut  this
pro*  ision  was  in
accordance  with
the  wi-hes  of
Judge  Douglas,
who  would  not
consent  to  own
a  slave.  Ib-
married,  T  April.  1S4T.  Martha,  daughter
Robert  Martin,  of  Rockingham  county.  N.  ('..
bv  whom  be  had  three  children,  two  of  whom,
Robert  M.  and  Stephen  A..  iN.th  law  vers,  are  liv-
ing (1887).  Sin-  died  19  Jan.,  1853.  He  mar-
M) Nov., 1KV5, Addle,  daughter  of  James


216


DOUGLAS


DOUGLASS


Madison  Cutts,  of  Washington.  I>.  ('..  who  is  now
the  wife  of  Gen.  Robert  Williams,  V.  S.  A.  The
spot  on  the  bank  of  Lake  Michigan  in  Chicago  that
Mr.  Douglas  had  reserved  for  his  future  home  was
bought  from  bis  widow  by  the  state,  and  there  his
remains  lie  under  a  magnificent  monument  begun
by  private  subscriptions  and  completed  by  the
state  of  Illinois.  It  is  surmounted  by  a  statue  exe-
BOted  bv  Leonard  Volk.  His  life  was  written  by
James  W.  Sheehan  (New  York,  1860),  and  by  Henry
M.  Flint  (Philadelphia,  1860).

DOUGLAS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Plainfield,
Conn.,  17  Jan.,  1742;  d.  in  Northford,  Conn.,  28
May,  1777.  At  sixteen  years  of  age  he  enlisted
among  the  troops  furnished  by  Connecticut  to  serve
in  the  French  war.  He  was  present  at  the  taking
of  Quebec,  and  by  1763  had  attained  the  rank  of
sergeant.  He  then  removed  to  New  Haven,  be-
came a  sailor,  and  in  a  few  years  was  master  of  a
West  India  merchantman.  Before  the  Revolution
he  had  made  a  fortune.  After  the  battle  of  Lex-
ington he  raised  a  company,  became  its  captain,
and  joined  Montgomery's  expedition  against  Cana-
da. He  did  good  service  at  the  capture  of  St.
John's  and  Chambly,  in  command  of  the  flotilla
on  Lake  Champlain,  and  on  his  return  to  New
Haven  was  made  major  of  one  of  the  eight  regi-
ments raised  by  Connecticut  early  in  1776.  He
was  commissioned  colonel  in  June  of  that  year,  and
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  disastrous  campaign
that  ended  with  the  evacuation  of  New  York,  dis-
tinguishing himself  at  the  battles  of  Long  Island
and  Harlem  Plains.  At  the  latter  place  his  horse
was  shot  under  him,  his  clothes  were  riddled  with
bullets,  and  he  received  wounds  that  forced  him  to
retire  to  a  farm  in  Northford,  where  he  died  from
their  effects. — His  brother,  John,  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant-colonel  early  in  the  war,  rose  to
the  rank  of  colonel,  and  finally  to  that  of  general,
and  served  with  distinction  throughout  the  war. —
William's  grandson,  Benjamin,  manufacturer,  b.
in  Northford,  Conn.,  3  April,  1816,  worked  on  a
farm  and  attended  school  till  he  was  sixteen  years
old,  when  he  became  apprentice  to  his  elder  brother,
William,  a  machinist,  at  Middletown,  Conn.  They
formed  a  partnership  in  1839,  and  in  1842  patented
a  revolving  cistern  stand-pump.  Since  that  time
over  one  hundred  new  patents  on  pumps  have  been
granted  to  the  brothers  in  this  country  and  Eu-
rope. William  Douglas  died  in  1858,  and  in  1859
a  company  was  formed  of  which  Benjamin  became
president.  The  company  manufacture  over  twelve
hundred  styles  of  pumps,  besides  other  hydraulic
apparatus.  They  were  awarded  medals  at  Paris
in  1867  and  Vienna  in  1873.  Mr.  Douglas  was
mayor  of  Middletown  for  several  years,  a  republi-
can presidential  elector  in  1860,  and  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state  in  1861-'2.  He  has  been  a
trustee  of  Wesleyan  university  since  1862.

DOUGLASS,*  David,  actor,  b.  in  England
about  1720;  d.  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  W.  I.  Mr.
Douglass  was  a  gentleman  by  birth  and  fortune,
who  had  emigrated  to  Jamaica  about  1750.  Hither
Lewis  Hallam  had  transported  his  company  after
he  found  that  the  colonies  could  not  yield  a  suf-
ficient harvest  in  return  for  his  labor,  and  here  he
formed  a  partnership  with  Mr.  Douglass,  who,  after
the  death  of  Lewis  Hallam,  married  his  widow,  and
with  her  and  the  rest  of  the  company  visited  the
continent  in  1758,  where  he  established  theatres
successively  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Newport,
Perth  Amboy,  and  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  between
these  localities  he  continued  to  travel,  acting  and
superintending  his  company  till  congress  closed
the  theatres  by  an  act  passed  24  Oct.,  1774. After


this  he  returned  to  Jamaica,  and  was  appointed  a

J'udge.  In  early  life  he  had  been  a  printer,  and  on
lis  return  he  became  a  partner  in  a  thriving  print-
ing establishment,  and  received  a  valuable  contract
from  the  government.  He  accumulated  a  fortune
of  £25,000. —  His  wife,  an  actress,  b.  in  England;'
il.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1773.  In  her  own  coun-
try Mrs.  Douglass  had  been  an  eminent  actress  at
Goodman's  Field's  Theatre,  London,  as  Mrs.  Hal-
lam, and  was  the  leading  actress  of  that  threatre
at  the  time  of  Garrick's  first  success.  She  came  to
America  with  her  first  husband,  Lewis  Hallam,  in
1752,  and  made  her  first  American  appearance  at
Williamsburg,  Va.,  5  Sept.,  1752,  as  Portia  in  the
"Merchant  of  Venice."  She  first  appeared  in  New
York  at  the  theatre  in  Nassau  street,  17  Sept.,  1753,
as  Lucinda  in  "The  Conscious  Lovers."  She  had  fine
talents,  and  her  favorite  parts  were  the  pathetic.
Mr.  I  inn  la  |  >  says :  "  In  his  youth  he  had  heard  the
old  ladies  of  Perth  Amboy  speak  almost  in  rapt-
ures of  her  beauty  and  grace,  and  especially  of
her  pathos  in  her  representation  of  Jane  Shore."
She  retired  from  the  stage  in  1769.

DOUGLASS,  David  Bates,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Pompton,  N.  J.,  21  March,  1790;  d.  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813,  in  the  same  year  was  appointed  a  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  corps  of  engineers,  U.  S.  army,  entered
upon  duty  at  West  Point  as  commander  of  sappers
and  miners,  and  later  was  superintendent  of  the
post.  In  the  war  with  Great  Britain  he  command-
ed his  company  in  1814  on  the  northern  frontier,
participated  in  the  battle  of  Niagara,  joined  Gen.
Brown  in  that  year,  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Lundy's  Lane,  repaired  Fort  Erie  under  the  guns
of  the  enemy,  ana  at  its  assault  commanded  a  bat-
tery with  such  skill  and  gallantry  that  he  was  pro-
moted 1st  lieutenant  and  bre vetted  captain.  On
the  extreme  right  of  the  American  encampment,
and  near  the  lake  shore,  a  strong  work  had  been
erected,  and  two  guns  en  barbette.  It  was  called
Douglass  battery,  in  honor  of  Lieut.  David  B.
Douglass,  of  the  engineer  corps,  under  whose  su-
perintendence it  was  built.  He  was  assistant  pro-
fessor of  natural  and  experimental  philosophy  at
West  Point  in  1819-20,  with  the  rank  of  captain.
As  astronomical  surveyor  he  fulfilled  several  im-
portant commissions ;  later  he  became  professor
of  mathematics,  and  in  1823  of  civil  and  military
engineering.  In  1831  he  resigned  his  professor-
ship and  his  commission  in  the  army,  and  became
chief  engineer  of  the  Morris  canal.  His  intro-
duction of  inclined  planes  in  place  of  locks  for
canal  navigation  proved  a  success  on  the  completion
of  the  canal  in  1832.  Subsequent  to  this  he  held
the  professorship  of  natural  philosophy  and  civil
architecture  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York,  and  designed  its  collegiate  building.  In
1833  he  began  his  surveys  for  supplying  New  York
with  water,  and,  in  his  first  report,  showed  how  to
obtain  it  from  the  Croton  river.  He  became  the
chief  engineer  in  this  work  in  1835,  but  was  super-
seded, after  which  he  planned  and  laid  out  in  1838
Greenwood  cemetery,  resigning  its  superintendence
in  1841  to  accept  the  presidency  of  Kenyon  college,
Ohio.  There  ne  remained  four  years,  when  he  re-
turned to  New  York  and  laid  out  the  Catholic
cemetery  in  Albany,  and  the  Protestant  cemetery
in  Quebec.  He  also  designed  the  supporting  wall
for  Brooklyn  Heights,  and  the  supplying  of  that
city  with  water.  In  1848  he  became  professor  ol
mathematics  in  Hobart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y..
which  office  he  retained  during  the  remainder  of
his  life,  at  intervals  delivering  lectures  on  various
subjects  in  colleges. He  received  4he  degree  of


DoCtiLASS


D0U1


217


LL  D.  A'  the  request  <>f  tin-  Uxinl  of  Creenwood
cemetery,  his  remains  were  MBOftd  there,  ami  M
Imposing  monument  raised  t"  his  memory  on  om

of  the  heights  nearest  the  entrance  to  the  ceineterv.
DOI  i.l  ^v  I  redeiiek,  orator,  b,  in  Tucka-

.,  Talbot  eo„  Md.,  in February,

1M17.  Hi-  mother  was  a  negro  slave,  and  la-
father  a  white  man.  He  was  a  slave  on  the  planta-
tion of  Col.  Edward  Lloyd,  until  at  the  age  of  ten
he  was  sent  t<>  Baltimore  to  live  with  a  relative  of
his  ma-ter.  lie  learned  to  mul  and  write  from  one
of  his  master's  relatnes.  to  whom  he  was  lent  when
alx.nt  nine  years  of  age.  1 1  i—  master  allowed  him
later  to  hire  hi-  own  time  for  three  dollars  a  week,
and  he  was  employed  in  a  ship-yard,  and,  in  ac-
cordance with  a  resolution  long  entertained,  lied
from  Baltimore  and  from  slavery,  |  Spt..  I88&
He  made  his  way  to  New  York,  and  thence  to  New
lied  ford,  Mass.,  where  he  married  and  live<l  for  two
or  three  years,  sur>|>orting  himself  by  day-labor  on
the  wharves  and  in  various  workshops.  While
there  he  changed  his  name  from  Lloyd  to  Douglass.
He  was  aided  in  his  efforts  for  self-education  by
William  Lloyd  (iarrison.  In  the  summer  of  1841
he  attended  an  anti-slavery  convention  at  Nan-
tucket, and  made  a  speech,  which  was  so  well  re-
ceived t  hat  he  was
offered  the  agen-
cy of  the  Mas-
sachusetts anti-
slavery  society.
In  this  capacity
he  travelled  and
lectured  through
the  NewEngland
states  for  four
years.  Large  au-
diences were  at-
tracted by  his
graphic  descrip-
tions of  slavery
and  his  eloquent
appeals.  In  1846
he  went  to  Ku-
rope,  and  lect-
ured on  slavery
to  enthusiastic
audiencesinnear-
ly  all  the  large  towns  of  England,  Ireland.  Scot-
land, antl  Wales.  In  1K4<>  his  friends  in  England
contributed  $750  to  have  him  manumitted  in  due
form  of  law.  He  remained  two  years  in  Great
Britain,  and  in  1847  began  at  Rochester.  N.  V.,  the
publication  of  "  Frederick  Douglass's  Paper,"
whose  title  was  changed  to  "The  North  Star,"  a
weekly  journal,  which  ne  continued  for  some  years.
II  roppoaed  implication  in  the  John  lirown  mid
in  1M59  led  Got.  Wise,  of  Virginia,  to  make  a  requi-
sition for  his  arrest  upon  the  governor  of  Michigan,
where  he  then  was,  and  in  consequence  of  this  Mr.
Douglass  went  to  Kngland,  and  remained  six  or
eight  months.  He  then  returned  to  Rochester,
and  continued  the  publication  of  his  paper. When

thecivil  war  began  in  lstu  be  urged  upon  iv-i-

dent  Lincoln  the  employment  of  colored  (MOM
anil  the  proclamation  of  emancipation.  In  U
when  norm  JSS  kill  was  given  to  employ  such  troops,
he  assisted  in  enlisting  men  to  till  colored  regi-
ments. es|>ocially  the  54th  and  55th  Massachusetts.
After  the  abolition  Of  slavery  he  discontinued  his
pal mt  and  applied  himself  to  the  preparation  at  1
delivery  of  lectures  before  lyceuins.  in  September,
I,  be  became  editor  of  the  "New  National
iigton,  which  was  continued  by  his
eons,  Lewis  and Frederick. In 1*71 he  was'  ap-


^~^KXfifl/K\fiii  VcudhM


potfltad  assistant  secretary  to  the  commission  to

Santo  Domingo: and  oil in- return I 'resident

Orant  appointed  him  "t f  the  territorial  coaneil

of  tin-  District  of  Columbia In  1 "  T'J  he  was  elected
presidential  elector  at large f..r  the  -

York,  and  was  appointed  to  earn  the  eleatejnJ
vote  of  the  state  to  Washington. In  I87fl
appointed  C  S.  marshal  for  the  District  of  «
lua,  which  oflice  he  retained  till  l*M,  after  which
he  became  nooidarof  deeds  in  the  Diatrk-t.

which  ofioa  he  was  removed  \<\  President  I
laud  in  lHSy.  In  the  autumn  of  lXNf.  he  r-
Kngland,  to  inform  the  friends  he  had  made  aa
a  fugiti\e  slave  of  the  progress  «,f  tl„.  African
nice  in  the  United  Static,  with  the  intention  of
s|Mtiding  the  winter  <>n  the  continent  and  the  fol-
lowing summer  in  the  United  Kingdom.  His  psj|>
lished  works  m  entitled  ••  Narrative  of  my  K\|«  -
rience  in  Slavery"  (Boston, 1H44):  "My  lUndngv

ami  my  Freedom  "(Rochester,  I860):  and  ••  I.
Times'of  Frederick  D.uglass"  (Hartford,  1-

1)01  tiLASS.  .Margaret  Crittenden,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Washington,  D.  C.  She  removed  at  an
early  age  to  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  she  married,
and  in  1*15  to  Norfolk.  Ya.  She  opened  asohoot
for  the  instruction  of  colored  children,  but  it  was
broken  up  by  the  authorities  in  1888,  ami  aha  her-
self was  imprisoned  for  a  month  in  the  common
jail.  She  published  a  "  Personal  Narrative,"  relat-
ing her  ex|>eriences  (lioston,  1H54).

DOUGLASS,  William,  physician,  b.  in  East
Lothian,  Sot  land.  attout  1091 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
81  Oct..  1788,  He  came  to  this  eountrv  in  1716.
and  settled  in  Boston  in  171*.  Although  a  skilful
practitioner,  he  violently  op|iosed  inoculation  for
the  prevention  of  small-pox.  His  prejudices  were
strong,  and  his  language  frequently  mtemnerato,

He  wrote  much  on  medical  and  jtolitical  subjects,
and  propoeed  "a  stump  duty  upon  all  instruments
used  In  law  affairs"  for  revenue,  but  th<
lucked  novelty.  A  town  in  Worcester  county,
Mass.,  of  which  he  was  the  principal  owner  and
benefactor,  bears  his  name.  His  "Summary,  or
Historical  Account  of  the  British  Settlements"
(174H-'5:l.  left  incomplete  at  his  death)  is  inaccu-
rate, and  records  his  private  grievances  as  well  aa
public  affairs.  He  printed  an  almanac  (l74:t-'4).
entitled  "  Mercurial  Novanglicanus,"  which  is  still
valued  for  its  chronology.  Adam  Smith  Balled  him
"the  honest  and  downright  Dr.  Douglass."  He
also  wrote  treatises  on  "Small-pox"  (lTn-W);  "A
Practical  Biatorr  of  a  New  Eruptive  Milian  Paver

which  Prevailed  in  Boston  in  17:l5-'<i  ';  and  a  work
on  "  Midwiferv."

1MHTRKLKU'.  Gabriel,  clergyman,  h.  in
France  about  17(H).  He  was  a  missionary  among  the
Indiana,  and  in  December,  172!',  was  oompelledto
go  to  New  Orleans  on  busineei  onnnaotad  with  his
mission  He  debarked  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo
in  order  to  sav  mass,  and  while  he  was  making
preparations,  a  party  of  Indians  approached  the
0JUMM  and  said  thev  wen'  Yazoo*.,  friends  of  the
French,  [gnorant  <>f  the  state  of  the  country,  the
French  were  «>tT  their  guard, and  the  only  two  that
had  their  guns  loaded  tired  at  a  Hock  of  birds  that
flew  post  just  as  the  missionary  was  beginning
mass.  This  prevented  them  from  reloading,  all
which  was  earcfullv  observed  by  the  Indiai.
although  pagans,  they  knelt  down  behind  the
French.  .lust  BJ  Dmtreleau  intone,!  the  A'ynr,
the  Indians  Bred,  wounding  him  in  both  arms  and
killing  one  of  his  companions.  Believing  that  he
was  dow  to  die,  be  knelt  and  awaited  the

The  Indians  did  not  rush  01  him.  however,
i.  but  flrvd  three  timee  more  at  him.


218


douviu.i:


Dow


and  missed  him.  Regarding  tin's  as  a  divine  inter-
po-.it  i<  m  in  his  favor,  he  wrapped  up  the  sacred  ves-
sels and  ran  for  the  canoe.  His  two  companions,
bettering  him  dead,  had  put  off;  but  he  wauedand
swam  out  to  them,  and  as  he  was  climbing  into  the
Iwat,  turning  to  see  if  he  was  pursued,  he  received
a  charge  of  duck-shot  in  the  mouth.  They  now
began  their  flight  down  the  river,  Father  Doutre-
leau  steering.  The  Indians  pursued  them  for  more
than  an  hour,  and  kept  up  an  incessant  fire,  but
without  effect.  At  last,  frightened  by  an  old  mus-
ket, which  he  kept  pointing  at  them,  they  gave  up
the  chase.  As  they  drew  near  Natchez,  several
volleys  were  fired  at  them.  The  same  occurred  at
the  Tensas,  where  a  canoe  pursued  them  unsuccess-
fully. While  they  were  passing  the  Tonicas,  a  boat
put  out  after  them,  manned  by  their  own  country-
men. They  were  then  brought  to  the  little  French
army  that  was  marching  against  the  Natchez,  which
had  "halted  among  the  Tonicas.  Here  they  were
attended  to,  and  after  a  night's  rest  they  proceeded
to  New  Orleans.  Father  Doutreleau  accomplished
a  journey  of  over  a  thousand  miles  through  a  hos-
tile country.  The  officers  of  the  French  army
admired  his  bravery,  asked  him  to  remain  as  their
chaplain,  and  he  accompanied  them  in  this  capaci-
ty on  an  expedition ;  but  on  their  return  he  begged
to  go  back  among  the  Illinois  Indians.  He  left
New  Orleans  on  16  April,  1730.

DOUVILLE,  Jean  Baptiste,  French  natural-
ist, b.  in  Hanbie,  France,  15  Feb.,  1794;  disap-
peared in  South  America  about  1833.  He  travelled
in  Europe,  South  America,  and  Asia,  landing  at
Genoa  on  his  return  in  1824.  In  1826  he  went  to
Paris,  where  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  geo-
graphical society,  and  then  sailed  for  Buenos  Ayres.
The  river  La  Plata  was  at  that  time  under  blockade
by  the  Brazilians,  and  the  French  vessel  was  capt-
ured while  endeavoring  to  break  the  blockade;
but  Douville  was  befriended  by  the  Brazilian  ad-
miral, and  sent  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where,  finding  his
resources  nearly  exhausted,  he  attempted  to  replen-
ish them  by  mercantile  operations.  Accused  of
some  fraudulent  transactions  of  which  he  was  ac-
quitted, he  left  Buenos  Ayres  in  disgust,  and  went
to  Rio  Janeiro  in  August,  1827.  A  few  weeks  later
he  embarked  for  Congo,  whence  he  returned  to
France  in  1831.  The  stories  of  his  discoveries  in
several  kingdoms  hitherto  almost  unknown  to  Eu-
ropeans, and  of  his  exploration  of  the  Congo,  or
Zaire,  and  other  rivers,  aroused  great  enthusiasm
among  the  Parisians.  He  received  a  medal  from
the  geographical  society ;  his  researches  were  pub-
lished under  the  title  of  "  Voyage  au  Congo  et  dans
l'Af rique  equinoxiale  "  (4  vols.,  with  a  map,  Paris,
1832),  and  his  book  and  chart  were  used  as  the  basis
of  subsequent  maps  of  Africa.  But  the  evident  ex-
aggerations of  some  of  his  statements  soon  awak-
ened suspicion.  The  "  Foreign  Quarterly  Review  "
assailed  him  as  an  impostor,  and  a  few  weeks  later
his  deceptions  were  more  fully  exposed  in  the
"  Revue  des  deux  raondes."  To  cover  his  shame
by  real  discoveries,  he  sailed  for  Brazil  in  1833,  and
penetrated  to  the  interior  of  South  America  by  the
Amazon,  where,  according  to  an  uncertain  report,
he  was  killed.  Recent  discoveries  in  Africa  prove
the  truth  of  the  accusation  against  him,  although
it  is  supposed  that  he  reached  the  interior  of  that
country,  or  at  least  that  he  obtained  his  informa-
tion from  Portuguese  documents  before  unpub-
lished; and  some  geographers  of  repute  still  credit
a  portion,  of  his  narrative.

DOW,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ashford,  Conn.,
19  Feb.,  1772;  d.  in  Thompson,  Conn.,  19  July,
1849. He  was  graduated  with  honor  at  Yale  in


1 798,  studied  theology  while  teaching  psalmody  for
a  livelihood,  and  on  80  April,  1796,  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Thompson,
Conn.  Mis  discourses  were  never  written,  but  were
remarkable  for  their  logical  arrangement  and  clear-
and  forcible stvle.  He  published  "  Familiar  Letters
to  the  Rev.  John  Sherman  "  (1806) ;  "  The  Pedobap-
tist  Catechism"  (1807);  a  "Dissertation  on  the  Si-
naitic  and  Abrahamic  Covenants"  (1811);  and
"Free  Inquiry  Recommended  on  the  Subject  of
Free  Masonry"  (1829).— His  son,  Jesse  Erskine,
b.  in  Thompson,  Conn.,  21  Jan..  1809,  went  to  sea
with  Commodore  Elliott  in  1835,  as  professor  of
mathematics,  and  later  became  clerk  in  the  United
States  patent  office  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  has
been  a  correspondent  of  various  periodicals,  and
written  frequently  in  prose  and  verse.  His  literary
productions  have  not  been  collected.

DOW,  Lorenzo,  clergvman,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1777 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  2
Feb.,  1834  In  his  youth  he  was  disturbed  by  re-
ligious speculations  until  he  accepted  Methodist
doctrines,  and  determined,  in  opposition  to  the
wishes  of  his  family,  to  become  a  preacher  of  that
denomination,  though  his  education  was  very  lim-
ited. In  1796  he  made  an  unsuccessful  application
for  admission  into  the  Connecticut  conference ;  but
two  years  later  he  was  received,  and  in  1799  was
appointed  to  the  Cambridge  circuit,  N.  Y.  Dur-
ing the  year  he  was  transferred  to  Pittsfield,  Mass.,
and  afterward  to  Essex,  Vt.,  but  remained  there
only  a  brief  time,  as  he  believed  he  had  a  divine
call  to  preach  to  the  Catholics  of  Ireland.  He
made  two  visits  to  Ireland  and  England,  in  1799
and  1805,  and  by  his  eccentric  manners  and  attract-
ive eloquence  drew  after  him  immense  crowds,
who  sometimes  indulged  in  a  spirit  of  bitter  perse-
cution. He  introduced  camp-meetings  into  Eng-
land, and  the  controversy  about  them  resulted  in
the  organization  of  the  Primitive  Methodists.  In
1802  he  preached  in  the  Albany  district,  N.  Y.,
"  against  atheism,  deism,  Calvinism,  and  Universal-
ism."  He  passed  the  years  1803  and  1804  in  Ala-
bama, delivering  the  first  Protestant  sermon  within
the  bounds  of  that  state.  In  1807  he  extended  his
labors  into  Louisiana,  and  followed  the  settlers  to
the  extreme  borders  of  civilization.  After  1799  he
had  no  official  relation  to  the  ministry  of  the  Met  ho-
dist  church,  but  continued  to  adhere  to  and  to
preach  the  prominent  doctrines  of  that  communion
till  his  death.  During  his  later  years  his  efforts
were  more  specially  directed  against  the  Jesuits,
whom  he  regarded  as  dangerous  enemies  to  pure
religion  and  to  republican  government.  His  sin-
gularities of  manner  and  of  dress  excited  prejudices
against  him,  causing  him  to  be  called  "  Crazy  Dow,"
and  counteracted  the  effect  of  his  eloquence.  Nev-
ertheless he  is  said  to  have  preached  to  more  per-
sons than  any  man  of  his  time.  Among  his  nu-
merous writings  are  "Polemical  Works"  (New
York,  1814);  "The  Stranger  in  Charleston,  or  the
Trial  and  Confession  of  Lorenzo  Dow  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1822) ;  "  A  Short  Account  of  a  Long  Travel,
with  Beauties  of  Wesley"  (Philadelphia,  1823);
"Journal  and  Miscellaneous  Writings,'*  edited  M
John  Dowling  (New  York,  1836);  and  "History  of
a  Cosmopolite,  or  the  Writings  of  the  Rev.  Lorenzo
Dow,  containing  his  Experience  and  Travels  in  Eu-
rope and  America  up  to  near  his  Fiftieth  Year :  also
his  Polemic  Writings"  (Cincinnati,  1851 ;  often  re-
printed).— His  wife,  Peggy,  whom  he  married  in
1804,  accompanied  him  in  all  his  travels.

DOW,  Moses  A.,  publisher,  b.  in  Littleton,  N.
H.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass..  82  .lune,
1886. He  learned  the  printer's  trade  in  Haverhill.


I>M\V


IXIWKM.


219


N.  II..  «. nt  t«.  Boston  in  \*-2'.>.  WSJ  f. .r.iium  in  hi-
brother*i  printing-office  for  severe]  vears,  ami  in
1840  established  ■  job  office. In  \*~*>  be  bona

tin-  juililiiiit ion  of  tin-  "  Waverly  .M itLTu/im-."  in
which  be  published  ull  the  contributions  of  fiction
ninl  poetry  that  IM  offered  bj  school  gJIM  ami
Other  young  writer-. 1 1«*  began  with  BO  capital,

printed  without  discrimination  the  articles  of  ama-
teur authors,  ami  was  successful  from  tin-  begin*
ning.  finding  many  traders  among  the  friends  of
the  numerous  contributors.  At  one  time  hi-  en-
gaged an  editor  of  taste  and  experience,  who  re-
•  1  many  of  the  communications;  but  the  cir-
culation at  once  fell  off.  and  the  f w| mt was  restored
to  its  original  liasis.  lie  gave  much  thought  and
care  to  the  t\|>ographvand  sppoanfflfMI  tA  his  maga-
zine, and  it  obtained  a  wide  circulation  among
young  people  of  scanty  education  and  immature
taste  in  the  factory  towns  of  New  England  and
throughout  the  western  states.  Before  the  civil
war  his  income  from  the  paper  had  reached  $00,-
000  a  vear.  The  circulation  for  tnanv  vears  was
50,000  copies,  but  it  afterward  sank  to  StyOOOl  lb
built  a  fine  hotel  in  ( 'harlestown.

DOW,  Neal,  temperance  reformer,  b.  in  Port-
land, Mc  Mi  March,  isoj.  He  is  of  Quaker  par-
entage, attended  the  Friends'  academy  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  and  was  trained  in  mercantile  and
manufacturing  pursuits.  He  was  chief  engineer
of  the  Portland  fire  department  in  1839,  and  in
1851  and  again  in  1854  was  elected  mayor  of  the
city.  He  Ix'came  the  champion  of  the  project  for
the  prohibition  of  the  liquor  traffic,  which  was  first
advocated  by  James  Appleton  in  his  report  to  the
Maine  legislature  in  1837,  and  in  various  speeches
while  a  member  of  that  body.  (See  Applkton,
James.)  Through  Mr.  Dow's  efforts,  while  he  was
mayor,  the  Maine  liquor  law,  prohibiting  under
severe  penalties  the  safe  of  intoxicating  bererages,
was  passed  in  1851.  After  drafting  the  bill,  which
he  called  "  A  bill  for  the  suppression  of  drinking-
houses  and  tippling-shops,"  he  submitted  it  to  the
principal  friends  of  temperance  in  the  citv.  but

they  all  object-
ed to  its  radical
character,  as  cer-
tain to  insure  its
defeat.  It  pro-
vided for  the
search  of  places
where  it  was
suspected  that
liquors  intended
for  sale  wen-
kept  ;  for  the
seizure,  condem-
nation, and  con-

fl-rjltioll of Mich

liquors,  if  found :
and  for  the  pun-
ishment of the

persons  keeping

them by fine
and imprison-
ment. Notwithstanding  the  discouragement  of

friends,  he  went  t<>  the  legislature,  then  in  ses-
sion at  Augusta,  had  a  public  betting  in  the
hall  of  representatives,  which  was  densely  packed
by  the  legislators  and  citizens  of  the  town,  and
at  the  close  of  the  bearing  the  bill  was  unani-
mously accepted  1>V  the  committee.  It  WSJ  printed
that  night,  was  laid  00  the  desks  of  the  member!
the  next  morning,  and  on  that  day,  the  last  <>f  the
session,  was  passed  through  all  fa  itageS,  and  was
enacted  without  any  change  whatever. Mr.  Dow


.*C


was  a  mmtbm  of  ttM  KsJm  legislature  in  1868-*9.
<>n  :(l  l>.<  ,  1861,  |„.  wa-  appointed  oolooel  of  the
1Mb  Maine  rolunteers.  ana  with  hia  regiment  he

t'oined  (Jen.  Batter's  expedition  Orleans,

le  was  com mis«ioncd  a  l  ngadier-genernl  of  rohtt>
W  April.  mVi,  an  u  command  of  the

fOttS  Si the mouth Of the Mississippi, Hie:

ward  of  the  district  Of Florida, lie  wa-  VOttndod

twice  in  the  attack  00  Pott HodSDO,  J7  M«

ami  taken  prisoner  while  lying  m  a  booss  near.

After  imprisonment  for  ov.r  aajdnl  months  m
Iiibby  prison  and  at  Mobile,  he  «»■
He  resigned  <>n  M)  Nov..  1864.  In  !».'.7.  and  again
;n  1800  and  1H74,  Mr.  DOS)  went  to  Kngland  at  the
invitation  of  the  United  Kingdom  temp
alliance,  and  addressed  crowded  meetings  in  all  the
large  cities.  He  hits  spent  many  vears  in  and
ing.  by  public  s|M-eches  in  the  I'nited  State-  and
Canada,  as  well  as  in  (ireat  Britain,  and  by  fre-
quent contributions  to  magazines  and  newstmpers,
to  win  the  popular  sanction  for  prohibitory  legisla-
tion. In  1880  he  was  the  candidate  for  the  nation-
al prohibition  party  for  president  of  the  United
State-,  and  received  10,305  votes.  In  18f
amendment  to  the  constitution  of  Maine  was
adopted  by  a  {topular  vote  of  nearly  three  to  one,
in  which  it  was  declared  that  the  manufacture,
sale,  and  keeping  for  sale  of  intoxicating  btver*
age-  was  forever  forbidden,  and  commanding  the
legislators  to  enact  suitable  laws  for  the  enforce-
ment of  the  prohibition.

1MIWI),  Patrick,  Canadian  clergvman.  b.  in
the  Countv  Louth,  Ireland,  in  l*bt.  lie  was  edu-
cated at Ncwry  and at Paris, where  he  went in

1888, and  pursued  his  theological  studies  in  the  Irish
college  there.  In  18,'JT  he  was  ordained  priest  by
Archbishop  Quelen,  Of  Paris,  and  soon  afterward
returned  to  Ireland,  where  he  resided  until  1K47,
being  for  a  part  of  that  time  president  of  the  dio-
cesan seminary  of  Armagh.  In  1848  he  remoTsd
to  Canada,  and  officiated  as  assistant  to  Father
Connolly,  the  pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church  at
Montreal,  until  1856,  when  he  was  appointed  pas-
tor of  the  congregation.  Soon  after  Father  Dootft
arrival  in  Montreal  be  saw  the  necessity  for  an

asylum  for  Irish  orphans  in  that  city,  and  in  1S4U
he  ontahUnhod  one.  He  was  also  mainly  instru-
mental in  securing  the  erection  of  the  present  St.
Patrick's  orphan  asylum  in  Montreal,  which  was
opened  in  November,  1851,  and  established  in  1864
the  night-refuge  for  the  destitute  and  St.  Bridget's
home  for  the  old  and  infirm,  and  in  lSlK,-'?  he  se-
cured the  erection  of  s  commodioos  bonding  on
Lagaucheticre  street  a-  a  refuge  for  the  |>oor.  In
1ST?  he  organized  the  great  ln-h Roman  Catholic

pilgrimage  to  Lourdes  and  Borne. He  bsj

offered.  00  several  occasions,  the  highest  dignities
of  the  church,  and  refused  the  offer  of  the  Mehop-

ric  of  Toronto,  or  Kingston. He  has  bans  more

thoroughly  identified  with  the  Irish  Catholics  ..f
Montreal  than  anv  other  clcrgvman.

POWELL,  Greensville,  physician,  b.  in  Albe-
marle countv.  Va..  1  Sept,  IBB;  d.  in  (bdveston,
;n  1881.  lie  IM  educated  at  the  I'niver-
-itv  of  Louisville  and  at  Jefferson  medical  college,
anil  was  graduated  M.  I>.  from  the  latter.  After
practising  in  various  -tat--,  he  finally  established
him-elf  in  Qsirsston, Tens,  and  was  for  fifteen
vears  preceding  hi-  death professor  of  surgery  in

the  Texas  medlenl  ooUege. He  was  ■  nugeon  ■

the  Oonfederata  army,  from  1868  to  1875  was  edi-
tor and  publisher  of  the  "OoJsSSfeOO  Medical  Jonr*
mil."  originated  the  Howell  system  for  the  treat-
ment of  hernia,  and  WSJ  the  author  of  several
books  00  that  subject  and  yellow  fever.


220


DOWLER


DOWNES


DOWLER,  Bennet,  physician,  b.  in  Elizabeth
(now  Moundsville),  Ohio  co.,  Va.,  16  April,  17JI7;
(1.  in  New  Orleans  in  1879.  He  was  graduated
M.  I),  at  the  University  of  Maryland  in  1827,
and  settled  in  Clarksburg,  Harrison  co.,  Va.,  where  j
he  was  postmaster  for  four  years,  but  in  1886
he  removed  to  New  Orleans,  and  was  for  a  few
years  editor  of  the  New  Orleans  "  Medical  and  Sur-
gical Journal."  Early  in  his  career  he  began  ex-
perimenting upon  the  human  body,  immediately  or
soon  after  death,  and  the  results  of  his  investiga-
tions, comprising  some  important  discoveries  rela-
tive to  contractibility,  calorification,  capillary  cir-
culation, etc.,  were  published  in  1848-'4.  Since
then  these  and  other  original  experiments  have
been  extended  and  generalized  by  him.  His  re-
searches on  animal  heat,  in  health,  in  disease,  and
after  death,  which  have  been  published  in  various
medical  journals,  have  disclosed  the  fact  that  post-
mortem calorification  after  death  from  fever,  chol-
era, sunstroke,  etc.,  rises  in  some  cases  much  higher
than  its  antecedent  maximum  during  the  progress
of  the  trouble.  Dr.  Dowler  began  in  1845  a  series
of  experiments  in  comparative  physiology  on  the
alligator  of  Louisiana,  which  led  him  to  conclude
that,  after  decapitation,  the  head  and,  especially,  the
trunk  afford  evidences  of  possessing  the  faculties
of  sensation  and  motion  for  hours,  and  that  the
headless  trunk,  deprived  of  all  the  senses  but  that
of  feeling,  still  retains  the  powers  of  perception
and  volition,  and  may  act  with  intelligence  in
avoiding  an  irritant.  As  the  result  of  those  dis-
coveries, he  held  that  the  functions  and  structure
of  the  nervous  system  constitute  a  unity  inconsis-
tent with  the  assumption  of  four  distinct  and  sep-
arate sets  of  nerves,  and  a  corresponding  four-fold
set  of  functions.  He  was  a  fellow  and  founder  of
the  Royal  society  of  northern  antiquities,  Copen-
hagen, a  permanent  member  of  the  American
medical  association,  and  founded  the  New  Orleans
academy  of  sciences.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"Tableau  of  the  Yellow  Fever  of  1853"  (1854),
and  various  other  contributions  to  medical  science.

DOWLING,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pavensey,
Sussex,  England,  12  May,  1807 ;  d.  in  Middletown,
N.  Y.,  4  July,  1878. In  an  irregular  way  he  ac-
quired a  classical  education,  and  became  a  tutor  in
a  classical  institution  in  London  in  1826. Three
years  later  he  established  a  boarding-school  a  few
miles  from  Oxford,  where  he  taught  until  1832.  In
that  year  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States  and
united  with  the  Baptist  church  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,
where  he  was  ordained. In  1834  he  removed  to
Newport,  R.  I.,  and  two  Years  later  was  called  to  a
church  in  New  York. He  afterward  preached  in
Ppvidence,  Philadelphia,  Newark,  and  other  places.
I*he  degree  of  v- d#  was  conferred  upon  him  bv
Transylvania  univ9rsity Dr  £>owijng's  published
works  include  '  V.u-iication  of  the  Baptists  "  (New
York); "Exposition of  the  prophecies»  (1840);
"  Defence  of  the l  i\testant  Scriptures  "  (1843) ;
"History  of  R"m.aD1.sV  (1845),  of  which  30,000
copies  were  sold  mie_ than  ten  years;  «  p0wer
of  Illustration ; „wl»t|a  and Mornings";  and
"Judson Offering. a edited & Conference
hymn-book  (1868); «oei work  on  ..Baptism,"
the  works  of  Lorenzo  don c r,g  „  Middieton
on  the Conformity  o t Po, ' Paganism";
"Memoir  of  the  Missionary  - ^^ „ ^
a  translation  from  the  *rencn  ,  Dr  ^^  ^^

°n«OWNFR  "Samuel,  manufac,  .

IHMfHpJ*!  7,  ,,  "u  1KH7 .-rer,  b.  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.,  8  March,  \WJ Re  left  ^^  ftt

the  age  of  fourteen,  anuafter  spending  six  vears
in  a  shipping  house  »pi}oston>  was  received  into


fartnership  by  his  father,  a  West  India  merchant,
le  afterward  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  sperm
oil  and  candles,  and  in  1854  directed  a  series  of  ex-
periments in  producing  hydro-carbon  oils  by  dis-
tillation from  various  substances.  From  a  kind  of*
bituminous  coal  known  as  Albertite  he  obtained
what  is  now  called  kerosene.  The  demand  for  this
oil  increased  rapidly,  and  it  was  obtained  from  the
Albertite  till  the  discovery  of  petroleum  in  iVnn-
sylvania  in  1861.  Another  result  of  these  experi-
ments, made  principally  by  Mr.  Joshua  Merrill,
superintendent  of  the  Downer  works,  was  the
discovery  in  1869 of  "mineral  sperm  oil," and  these
and  other  products  of  the  distillation  of  crude
petroleum  are  manufactured  by  the  company  under
Mr.  Merrill's  patents.

DOWNES,  John,  author,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
4  Sept.,  1799;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Sept.,
1882.  His  father,  John  Downes,  of  New  Haven,
Conn.,  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  regicides  of  that
name,  died  when  his  son  was  a  few  months  old,
and  the  mother  removed  to  Shrewsbury,  Mass.
After  his  marriage,  John  removed  to  Boston  and
adopted  music  as  a  profession.  He  afterward  be-
came proficient  as  a  wood-engraver  and  as  a  mathe-
matician. After  serving  for  a  time  on  the  board
of  the  U.  S.  commission  for  the  northeast  boundary
survey,  he  resided  for  a  year  or  two  in  Worcester,
and  was  engaged  in  making  wood  engravings  for
John  W.  Barber's  historical  collections.  In  1842
Mr.  Downes  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he
published  the  "  U.  S.  Almanac,"  and  other  astro-
nomical and  mathematical  works.  He  removed
to  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1856,  and  for  more  than
twenty  years  was  employed  as  a  computer  for  the
U.  S.  coast  survey.  When  the  "  U.  S.  Nautical
Almanac"  was  established,  Mr.  Downes  was  the
first  to  receive  an  appointment  as  a  computer,  and
retained  it  till  his  death.  He  collected  many  rare
books.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Peter  Parley's  Al-
manacs for  Old  and  Young  "  (ia36-'7) ;  "  Botany  "
(Boston,  1840) ;  United  States  "  Almanac  Complete,
or  Ephemeris"  (Philadelphia,  1843-'4).  He  also
calculated  mathematical  tables,  but  only  a  part  of
them  have  been  published.

OOWNES,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Canton,
Mass.,  in  1786;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  11  Aug.,
1855.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in
June,  1802 ;  was  in  the  frigate  "  New  York "
during  the  war  with  Tripoli,  and  distinguished
himself  in  a  boat  attack  upon  Tripolitan  feluccas.
In  March,  1807,  he  was  made  a  lieutenant,  and  in
the  war  of  1812  he  served  as  executive  officer  of
the  frigate  "Essex,"  Capt.  Porter,  during  her
cruise  in  the  Pacific.  Among  her  numerous  prizes
was  the  whale-ship  "  Georgians, "  which  Capt.
Porter  fitted  as  a  cruiser,  with  sixteen  guns,
named  the  "  Essex  Junior,"  and  placed  under  the
command  of  Lieut.  Downes,  who  retained  this
place  until  the  capture  of  the  "  Essex "  and  the
conversion  of  the  "  Essex  Junior  "  into  a  cartel,  28
March,  1814.  He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of
master  commandant  in  1813,  and  two  years  later
commanded  the  brig  "  Epervier  "  in  the  squadron
employed  against  Algiers  under  Decatur,  and  cap-
tured, 17  June,  1815,  the  Algerine  frigate  "  X.ish-
ouda."  Two  days  afterwara  the  "  Epervier  "  and
three  of  the  smaller  vessels  of  the  squadron  capt-
ured the  Algerine  brig  of  war  "Estido,"  twiiity-
two  guns  and  180  men,  off  Cape  Palos.  After  the
conclusion  of  peace  with  Algiers,  Decatur  trans-
ferred Downes  to  his  own  ship,  the  "  Guerririv."
He  became  captain  in  March,  1817,  and  from  1*19
till  1821  commanded  the  frigate  "J\Iacedonia  "  in
the  Pacific.  In  1828-'9  he  commanded  the  "  Java  "


|M>\VXKY


DOWNING


m


in the Mediterranean, and fr>>m 1882 to 1884

the  -i|<i;i<Iii>ii  in  the Pacific. Ob his  wav  t<>  hi-

slat i.in In- attack-  l*!-.') IM nearly

: (^uallah Batoo.  OH the  <<ni>t <>f  Sunia-

iNi  an  outrage  had  been  nntnmrtted  <>n  an

riean vessel. lli>  MM  service  terminated  with

hk  omiMi From 1HJJ7  till 1842,  an.l  fr<»m MM

till  1858,  he  commanded  the  navy-yard  at  1  V» »— t « » 1 1 .

— His  son.  John A.,  naval officer,  !>.  in Massa-

cliu-  ;  <1.  in New  Orlean

Sept, 1886, entered  the  navy  on 1  Sept, II

became  passed  ini<lslii[inian  in 1M43,  lieutenant in

1861.  ami  a  commander  in  1889. Daring  the  civil

war  he  commaml<-<l  the  iron-clad  "  Nahant  *'  at  the

bombardment «.f  Port McAlistcr.  :{  March, 1868,

an<l  in  the  first  attack  Opon Fort  Sumter,  7  April,

In  the  report  of  Rear-Admiral  I >u[M>nt  be

is  QMMlttnimil  M  MM  <>f  those  "  who  did  everything

that the utmost  gallantry  and  skill  could  uceom-

flish  in  the  management  of  their  untried  vessels."
le  aided  in  the  capture  of  the  Con  federate  iron-
clad "  Atlanta."  He  was  on  special  duty  at  Boston
a  short  time,  and  was  then  given  command  of  the
Gulf  squadron,  in  which  service  he  died.

DOW  NKY,  John,  educator,  b.  in  (iermantown,
Pa.,  in  1770:  d.  in  Harrisburg,  21  July,  1827.  He
I  ved  a  classical  education  in  the  old  academy
at  (iermantown,  and  in  1795  opened  a  Latin  and
grammar  school  in  Harrisburg.  At  this  time  he
proposed,  in  a  letter  to  Gov.  Thomas  Mifflin,  a
plan  of education that foreshadows  the  present

?>ublic-school  system,  which  placed  him  in  the
ront  rank  of  early  American  educators.  This
plan  was  pronounced  by  Henry  Barnard,  of
Connecticut,  far  in  advance  of  the  age  in  which
he  lived.  He  was  the  first  cashier  in  the  Harris-
burg bank,  was  one  of  the  corporators  of  the
Harrisburg  and  Middletown  turnpike  company,
and  was  largely  instrumental  in  the  erection  of
the  bridge  over  the  Susquehanna.  In  1817  he
was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,
lit-  wrote  frequently  for  the  press,  and  was  the
author  of  a  series  of  humorous  sketches  under  the
signature  of  "Simon  the  Wagoner."  He  com-
piled a  work  entitled  "The  Justice's  Assistant."

DOWNIK,  George,  British  naval  officer,  b.  in
Roes,  Ireland;  d.  near  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,
1814.  He  was  the  son  of  a  clergvman,  and  en-
tered the  navy  at  an  early  age.  He  was  engaged
in  the  battle  of  Camperdown,  served  in  the  Wert
Indies,  and  in  1812  was  placed  in  command  of
the  British  fleet  on  the  lakes  of  Canada.  He  com-
manded the  squadron  in  the  battle  of  Plattsburg,
and  was  killed  while  gallantly  fighting  the  Amer-
ican fleet  under  Commodore  Macdonough.

DOWNING.  Andrew  Jackson,  horticulturist,
b.  in  Newburgh,  N.  Y..  20  Oct.,  1815;  drowned  in
the  Hudson,  near  Yonkers,  28  July,  1852.  From
an  early  age  his  tastes  were  directed  to  horti-
culture, bonny,  and  the  natural  sciences,  which
the  occupation  of  his  father,  a  nurseryman,  gave
him  opport unities  to  cultivate.  His  education
was  acquired  chiefly  in  the  academy  of  the  neigh-
boring town  of  Montgomery.  At  the  age  of  six-
teen he  joined  his  brother  in  the  management  of
the  nursery,  and  began  a  course  of  self  -education.
He  soon  formed  the  acquaintance  of  Baton  de
Lid-n-r,  the  Austrian  consul-general,  and  other
men,  whose  fine  estates  he  visited,  cultivating  his
for  laiid«ca|H'-gardcning. and  writing  des,  rip-
tions  of  the  scenery  for  the  New  York  "  Mirroi
and  other  journals.  In  .lime.  IMoX,  he  married  tin-
daughter  of  John  Peter  de  W'int.  and  in  that  year
built  an  elegant  mansion  ii|>on  his  estate,  in  the
Biaabethan  style,  which  was  his  first  practical


illustration  of  what  an  American  rural  home  might
be.  Ill—  oareer  as  an  author  began  with  the  publi-
cation  of  the -Trent  i»c  and  i  Iscape-

gnrdening"  (New  York,  1841),  whi- h  wa»  higldv
suecessful.  orders  for  the  construction  of  houses
and  decorationa  of  grounds  following  ih«

for copies of the Itook to hi* publidlefs.. Hi.

"Cottage Ue-ideiic«, "  (1H42^ was received with

equal  favor,  and  established  him  as  the  chief  AmeiV

ioanauthorijtj  on
rural  art.  "Fruit
and  Fruit-trees
of  America"  was
printed  simulta-
neously in  Lon-
don and  New
York  in  1845,
and  a  second  edi-
tion with  colored
plat.sinlK'iO.  In
[848.  Mr.  Down-
ing became  edi-
tor of  the  Alba-
ny '•  llorticul-
turist,"forwhich
he  wrote  an  es-
say each  month
until  his  death.
In  1849  he
wrote  "Addition-
al Notesand  Hints  to  persons  about  Building  in  the
Country,"  for  an  American  reprint  of  Wight  wick's
"  Hints  to  Young  Architects."  The  summer  of
1850  he  spent  in  England,  visiting  the  great
country-seats,  of  which  he  wrote  descriptions,  and
in  that  year  published  his  "  Architecture  of  ( 'ountry
Houses,  including  Designs  for  Cottages,  Farm-
houses, and  Villas."  His  remaining  work  is  an
edition  of  Mrs.  Loudon's  "  Landscapc-pirdcning
for  Ladies."  In  1851  he  was  commissioned  to  lav
out  and  plant  the  public  grounds  of  the  Capitol.
the  White  House,  and  the  Smithsonian  buildings.
He  was  employed  in  these  and  other  profaarional
labors,  when  he  set  out  for  Newport,  having  New-
burgh  on  28  July,  1852,  in  the  steamer  "  Henry
Clay."  The  boat  "entered  into  a  contest  with  the
••  Armenia,"  and  when  near  Yonkem waadiaoovered
to  be  on  fire.  Mr.  Downing  perished  in  his  efforts
to  save  other  passengers.  His  "Rami  Kseavs"
were  collected  and  published  in  1^*»:{.  witl'i  a
memoir  by  George  William  Curtis,  and  a  "  Letter
to  hi-  Friends"  by  Frederika  Bremer,  who  was
Mr.  Downing's  guot  during  a  portion  of  her  visit
to  the  United  States,  and  an  enthusiastic  admirer
of  the  man  ami  his  works.

DOWNING,  Colonel,  chief  of  the  Cherokee

Nation.  After  the  death  of  hi*  Indian  wife  bf
married,  in  1*71.  Mi-s  Ami-,  a  wealthv  lady  of
Philadelphia,  who  removed  with  him  to  Taleqtiah.
devoting  her  life  and  fortune  to  the  education  of
the  Cherokccs.  She  made  her  permanent  home
among  the  Indians,  and  adopted  the  son  af  the
chief.  Lewis  Downing,  f«>r  whom  she  built  a  hand-
sonie  residence  overlooking  the  village.

DOWNING. Fanny Miirdainrh. p*1'.  »•• >'»
Portsmouth.  Va..  alx.ut lso">. She is  H  .laughter
of  John  W.  Murdaugh,  who  was  a  noted  la\*
Virginia, In  1851  mm  married  Charles  W.
fang,  who  was  then  secretary  of  the  state  of  Florida.
Her novels include  "Nameless"  (Raleigh.
"  Perfect  through  Suffering";  and  "  Florida,"  nttb>
lished  in  the  u  Southern  Borne  Journal." Her  heal
known  poem*  are  "  Pluto,  the  <  feigtt  of  Mint  Julep.
betng  the Sad  ami lamentable Fate  of  tl
Minthe" (1887); "The Legend of Catawba";


2'2'2


DOWNING


DOYLE


and  "Dixie."  She  has  written  under  the  pen-
name-  of  "  Viola"  and  "  Frank  Dashmore."

DOWNING.  SirfleOTfe,  British  statesman,  b.
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1084;  d.  in  Hast  Hat  ley,
Cambridgeshire,  England,  in  1684  His  father
emigrated  to  Salem.  Mas-.,  in  1688, and  represented
that  place  in  the  general  court  in  ll!3N-'43.  Hi-
wife  was  Lucy,  a  sister  of  Gk)T.  Winthrop.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1642,  returned  to
England  in  1645,  and  became  a  preacher  among
the  Independents;  chaplain  to  Col.  Okey's  regi-
ment in  Cromwell  I  army,  and  in  1653  commissarv-
general  and  scoutmaster-general  to  the  army  in
Scotland;  member  of  parliament  for  a  Scottish  borr
ongh  in  1654  and  16o6,  and  agent  in  Holland  in
90.  Turning  royalist,  he  was  knighted  by
Charles  II.,  21  May,  1660.  He  was  elected  member
of  Parliament  for  Morpeth  in  1661,  and  was  again
made  envoy-extraordinary  to  Holland.  Here  he
caused  the  arrest  of  Cols.  Okey  and  Barksted,  and
Miles  Corbet,  three  of  the  judges  of  Charles  I.,  who
were  sent  to  England  and  executed.  Principally
through  his  agency  the  New  Netherlands  were
wrested  from  the  Dutch  and  annexed  to  the  Eng-
lish possessions  as  New  York.  He  was  afterward
secretary  of  the  treasury  and  a  commissioner  of  the
customs.  He  was  created  a  baronet,  1  July,  1663.
In  1(17 1  he  was  sent  on  a  commission  to  Holland,
but  returned  before  completing  his  errand  to  the
satisfaction  of  the  king,  and  was  imprisoned  in  the
Tower,  but  was  again  received  into  favor.  Gov.
Bradstreet  was  his  brother-in-law.  Downing  street.
London,  perpetuates  his  name.  He  was  a  man  of
ability  and  natural  fitness  for  politics,  and  was
author  of  "  Political  Tracts  "(1664-72).— His  grand-
son, Sir  George,  d.  in  1747,  founded  Downing  col-
lege, Cambridge,  England,  in  1717.

DOWNING,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  near  Exeter,
N.  H.,  in  1706:  d.  near  Amsterdam,  N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,
1867.  He  enlisted  in  the  Continental  army  in
1780,  and  served  for  three  years.  He  received  a
pension  in  1818  of  eight  dollars  a  month,  but  this
was  taken  from  him  in  1820  on  account  of  his  pos-
session of  property,  and  in  1828  was  made  $80  per
annum,  increased  in  1864  by  the  addition  of  $100
per  annum,  and  in  1865  by  the  further  addition  of
$300  per  annum.  By  act  of  18  Feb.,  1867,  Con-
gress directed  that  helae  paid  a  pension  of  $500  per
annum. He  died  the  same  day.

DOWSE,  Thomas,  book-collector,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  28  Dec,  1772;  d.  in  Cambridgeport,  4
Nov.,  1856.  He  was  called  "the  literary  leather-
dresser."  His  father,  Eleazer  Dowse,  was  a  leather-
dresser,  and  was  driven  with  his  family  from  Charles-
town  on  17  June,  1775,  his  house  being  one  of  those
burned  by  the  British  forces.  He  settled  at  Sher-
burne, Middlesex  co.,  where  Thomas  spent  his
youth,  receiving  no  other  education  than  that  of
the  town  school.  On  attaining  his  majority  he
entered  the  service  of  a  leather-dresser  at  Iioxbury,
Mass.,  and  remained  in  that  employment  for  ten
years.  He  once  informed  a  friend  that,  at  the  age
of  twenty-eight,  his  highest  income  had  been  twenty-
five  dollars  a  month ;  that  he  had  never  paid  five
dollars  for  conveyance  from  one  place  to  another ;
had  never  owned  a  pair  of  boots,  but  possessed  sev-
eral hundred  volumes  of  good  books  well  bound.
In  1803  he  set  up  in  business  as  a  leather-dresser  at
Cambridgeport,  and  pursued  the  occupation  suc-
cessfully till  he  was  far  advanced  in  life.  From
the  earliest  period  he  devoted  a  large  part  of  his
income  to  the  purchase  of  books.  Standing  at  his
bench,  he  would  buy  books,  speculate  on  philo-
sophical truths,  and  discuss  the  great  problems  of
existence. By  diligent  search,  great  knowledge  of


bibliography,  shrewdness,  and  strict  economy  in
his  purchases,  he  amassed  a  remarkable  library.  It
consisted  of  about  5,000  volumes  in  good,  often  ele-
gant, binding,  and  of  the  beet  edition-.  It  was
mostly  English,  though  containing  translations  of
the  principal  authors  in  the  ancient  languages  and
the  cultivated  languages  of  modern  Europe.  The
library  was  estimated  to  have  cost  $40,000.  Mr.
Dowse  had  a  golden  lamb  in  front  of  his  store  as  a
sign ;  and,  when  some  Harvard  students  broke  off
its  head,  he  was  so  irritated  that  he  changed  his
will,  by  which  he  had  intended  to  give  property
valued  at  $100,000  to  Harvard,  and  bequeathed  it
in-trad  to  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.
His  library  was  deposited  in  a  special  room  in  their
building  in  Boston,  and  he  left  $10,000  as  a  i>erma-
nent  fund  for  its  preservation  and  care,  fie  was
an  admirer  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  and  erected  a
monument  to  his  memory  in  Mount  Auburn  ceme-
tery. A  collection  of  engravings  and  water-colors,
which  he  drew  in  a  lottery  about  1820,  was  given
to  the  Boston  athenaeum.  A  jocose  society  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.,  which  was  interpreted
as  "  Literary  Leather-Dresser. "

DOX,  Peter  Myndert,  lawyer,  b.  in  Geneva,
Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1813.  His  maternal
grandfather  was  John  Nicholas,  a  representative  in
congress  during  the  administrations  of  Washing-
ton and  Adams.  Peter  was  graduated  at  Hobart
in  1833,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice.
He  was  elected  to  the  New  York  legislature  in
1841,  and  was  afterward  chosen  judge  of  the  On-
tario county  courts.  In  1855  he  removed  to  Ala-
bama, where  he  became  a  planter.  He  was  elected
to  the  convention  that  revised  the  state  constitu-
tion in  1865,  and  took  an  active  interest  in  restor-
ing Alabama  to  its  place  in  the  Union.  From
1869  till  1873  he  was  a  member  of  congress,  having
been  elected  as  a  Union  democrat,  and  served  on
the  committee  on  banking  and  currency.  He  has
held  many  minor  offices,  such  as  commissioner  of
schools,  justice  of  the  peace,  etc.  He  is  the  author
of  numerous  speeches  in  congress,  including  one
delivered  6  June,  1870,  on  the  admission  of  Georgia
to  the  Union,  the  true  condition  of  the  south,  and
in  favor  of  universal  amnesty.

DOYLE,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  in  1756;  d.  8  Aug.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  entered  the  army,
and  was  a  lieutenant  of  light  infantry  at  Boston  in
1775.  He  served  as  adjutant  at  the  battles  of
Long  Island  and  Germantown,  captain  of  the  vol-
unteers of  Ireland,  then  a  major  of  brigade  at  the
capture  of  Charleston,  and  in  the  battles  of  Cam-
den and  Hobkirk's  Hill.  In  command  of  a  corps  of
light  cavalry,  he  operated  against  Gen.  Marion
in  the  spring  of  1781,  and  destroyed  his  camp
at  Snow  Island,  but,  being  pursued  bv  Marion,
escaped  with  the  loss  of  his  baggage.  He  served
in  Holland  in  1794,  in  1796  was  made  a  colonel,
and  was  soon  afterward  appointed  secretary  of  war
in  Ireland.  He  served  as.  a  brigadier-general  with
Abercrombie  in  Egypt  in  1800,  distinguished  him-
self, and  was  made  a  baronet  in  1805,  and  a  full
feneral  in  1819. — His  nephew,  Sir  Charles  Hast
ngs,  British  officer,  b.  about  1804.  He  entered
the  British  army  as  an  ensign  in  1819,  became
captain  in  1825,  and  colonel  in  1854,  serving  in
both  the  East  and  West  Indies.  He  was  on  the
staff  as  assistant  adjutant-general  and  assistant
quartermaster-general  in  1847-'56,  and  served  in
the  army  of  the  Crimea.  He  was  inspector-general
of  the  militia  of  Ireland,  1856-'61,and  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  troops  in  Nova  Scot  ia  in
the  latter  year. In  1867  he  was  m%de  lieutenant-


hi:  \ki:


DK.VKK


nil  of thai province  BOOB  the  confederation

<if  the  prorinottof  Britten  North  America,  being

placed  iii  command  of  bat  Majesty*!  force*  in
Hoitfa America. For  li  ;n  these  i-a|>a<  i-

tics  he  whs  knighted.  In  1874  he  wh  s**igiicd  t<>
tin*  command  <>f  the  southern  district  of  England  :
in  1NH0  he  became  a  major-general,  and  in  1010  a
liriiNnant-pMirral.  Hi-  in  also  colonel  of  the  87th
regiment  (Soyal  Irish  fusileers).

Ml.'  \W  E,  Iti-iijain i ii  M..  i rgvmsn,  b.  in  North
ina.  II  Sept.,  I*<K»;  il.  in Mississippi in  18(H).

Be  Joined  the  TenneatM  eooierenoa  in  1886^  end

tin-  m\t year  was  transferred  to  the Mississippi

■OBfereuee.  in  ooaneetioo  with  which  in-  etteined

a  commanding  position. I  If  was  in*tnimcntal in

building  the  i*t  Methodiet eharoh  In  NewOrtotna,
wee  president  of  Rlitnhirth  female  totdttsy,  the

fir*t  Methodist  school  established  in  that  state,  and
wee  also  president  of  Centenary  college.

WKVKK. Daniel, physician.  >>. in Plainficld.

N.  .1.,  80  OoL,  i  ?h.">  :  d.  In  PiiMihmati.  Onto.  <>  Nov..

1868.  At  an  early  aye  he  and  his  family  emigrated
to  Mavdnk.  Ky..  where  they  dwelt  in  a  log  cabin.
In  his  sixteenth  year  the  1m>v  left  home,  to  study
medicine  in  Cincinnati,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty
found  his  way  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  attended
two  courses  of  lectures  at  toe  medical  school  of  the
I'niversity  of  Pennsylvania.  Returning  to  the
west,  he  practised  medicine  for  a  year  near  his  old
home  in  Kentucky,  and  finally  settled  in  Cincin-
nati. In  1815  Dr.  Drake  attended  a  second  course
of  lectures  in  the  I'niversity  of  Pennsylvania,  when
he  was  graduated,  and,  returning  to  Cincinnati,  he
soon  gained  a  large  and  profitable  practice.  Dur-
ing the  two  years  preceding  he  had  entered  on  sev-
eral business  ventures  and  spcculationi  in  connec-
tion with  his  father,  all  of  which  miscarried.  In
1816  he  was  appointed  professor  of  materia  inedica
in  Transylvania  university,  Ky.,  and  thereafter  oc-
cupied a  rlutir  in  other  nodical  schools  in  succes-
sioii.  until  1888|  when  he  organized  the  medical
department  of  the  Cincinnati  college.  Here  he  re-
mained four  years,  and  then  accepted  the  chair  of
clinical  medicine  and  pathological  anatomy  in  the
Cniversity  of  Louisville.  Ky.  He  returned  to  Cin-
cinnati, and  once  more,  for  a  single  session,  filled
the  chair  of  medicine  in  the  medical  college  of
<»hio.  In  1866  he  again  went  to  Louisville,  and
finally  re-entered  the  medical  college  of  Ohio.  In
lv-7  he  projected  the  "  Western  Journal  of  tin-
Medical  and  Physical  Science*."  continuing  as  one
of  the  editors  until  IMS.  Among  his  publication*
are  "Tbpognphr,  Climate,  anil  Diseases  of  Cincin-
nati" (a  pamphlet,  1810);  "Picture  of  Cincinnati
and  the  Miami  Country"  (Cincinnati,  1815);
"Practical  Treatise  on  the  History,  Prevention.
and  Treatment  of  Epidemic  Cholera"  (1888);
"Practical  Kssays  on  Medical  Education  n  (1888) ;
and  "Systematic  Treatise  on  the  Principal  Di*-
eases  of  the  Interior  Vallev  of  North  America"
(lH.-)0;  id  vol.,  Philadelphia^  1854).  The  last  pro-
duction of  his  [Mil  whs  h  small  volume  of  "l>i*-
Bourne"  (1808). — His  brother,  Benjamin,  biogra-
pher, b.  in  Kami  Bounty,  Ky..  in  1784;  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati. Ohio.  1  April.  1841.  studied  ami  at  fir*t
(iracti*cd  law  in  Cincinnati.  In  18M  he  estab-
i-hed  a  weekly  paper,  "The  Western  Agricultu-
rist." continuing  for  many  vears  its  editor  end  pro-
prietor. Like  his  brother,  he  was  much  devoted  to
its.  His  publication*  include  "Cin-
cinnati in  1888"  (Cincinnati.  1827);  "Life  and
Adventures  of  Black Hawk"  I'ales  and

Sketches  from  the  Queen  Cit  -Life  of

William  Ilenrv  Harrison"  (1840);  and  "Life  of
uneeh"  (1841). To  the  last-named  work  he


much  time  and  attention,  and  it  i«  historically

rateable.— Another  son.  Chariot  Daniel.

b.  m  Cincinnati,  n  April,  1811,  lattfotd  umnd-

■CO  school  education  an

.  ami  at  a  military  aeadcu
Mid'lletown,  i  'miii,

lahlptnan  in  the  fj.8  i  iKtt  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Iwr  in  Cincinnati,  and  in  1884  re-
moeedto  St  Look,  Ma  In  i*t7  Mr.  Drake  re-
turned to  Cincinnati,  whence  in
went  to  St.  Lout  to  practise  In*  nrnfatsjon.  In
1868  he  wn>  atetted  a  memlier  of  the  Mil
honse  of representative  and was  Conspicuous  for

Us  opposition  to  the  ■seession  movement,  h>  1868

a  iiiciiiInt  of  the  state  convention,  and  in  ]*4H  was

ohoasn  ■  Bassbaroi  i  convention  to  revtei  the
oonstitution.  In  1867  bs  baoaaM  U.  s.  senator  fr..m

Missouri,  but  this  ..nice  bt  rattened  to  accept  the
appointment  of  chief  tettsM  of  the  court  of  chum*
in  Washington.  He  has  published  a  "  Treat  i»c  tfl
the  Law  of  .suits  bt  Attachment  in  the  United
States"  (Boston,  1H.V4).  tad  t  "Life  of  Daniel
Drake."  his  father  (18711

DRAKK,  Sir  Francis,  navigator.!.,  near  Tsvis-
tock.  Derooahire,  according  to  BOOM  authorities  in
1888,  and  to  others  in  1549  BT  1646;  d.  near  Puer-
to Bello,  87  Dec..  1886.  Hi*  father  was  a  poor
clergyman, and  Francis  was  the  eldest  of  twelve
■one,  nearly  all  of  whom  followed  the  sea.  He  re-
ceived I  scanty  education  through  the  liberality  of
a  kinsman,  and  was  apprenticed  to  the  Batter  of
a  liark,  who  bequeathed  him  his  rests]  a*  a  reward
for  his  faithful  tBrrioe.  Ilcing  that  at  the  age  of
eighteen  years  not  only  a  good  sailor,  but  the  pro-
prietor of ;a  ship,  he  made  commercial  voyages  to
the  bay  of  Biscay  and  the  coast  of  Guinea,  lie
then  sold  hi*  vessel  and  invested  the  proceeds,
with  all  his  sayings,  in  an  expedition  of  CapC
Hawkins  to  Mexico,  made  in  1567.  There  were
five  ships.  Drake  receiving  command  of  the  "Ju-
dith," a  vessel  of  fifty  tons.  The  expedition,  after
capturing  400  or  500  negroes  on  the  African  coast.
crossed  to  Dominica  for  trade,  then  attempted  to
reach  Florida,  but  was  driven  by  teiii|>e*t  into  the
harbor  of  San  Juan  da  I'liia  (now  Vera  Cruz)  for
repairs  and  supplies.  The  next  day  a  fleet  of
twelve  ships  arrived  from  Spain.  A  naval  bat-
tle followed,  in
which  only  two
of  the  English
>*hi|>s escaped.

Drake  returned
to  England,  hay-
ing lo>t  hi*  en-
tire property,

and fruit  lc*.*iy

petitioned the

court  of  Spate
for  indemnity  ;
but getting no

satisfaction,  and
enraged  at the

treatment  he  re-
ceived, he  began
to  sail  with  the
avowed  object
of  pillaging  the

Spaniards. In

1670  he  obtained
a  commission
fromO/iccn  Kliz-

alteth.  and  m l-'iT'.'  he  armed  two  ships  at Plym-
outh. With which, joined by a third at
Pheasant  on  the  coast  of  South America,  bt  made
a  descent on New  Granada,  captured  and  plun-


224


DRAKE


DRAKE


dflnd  various  Spanish  settlements,  and  made,  at
the  expense  of  his  enemies,  a  fortune  vastly  larger
than  that  they  had  taken  from  him.  He  visited
the  isthmus  of  Darien,  saw  from  a  mountain-top
the  waves  of  the  Pacific,  and  planned  an  expe-
dition into  those  waters.  He  returned  to  England
in  l.~»7:i,  and  was  welcomed  as  a  hero.  Under  the
patronage  of  Elizabeth,  he  set  sail  from  Plymouth,
13  Dec,  1577,  with  five  vessels  and  164  gentlemen
and  sailors,  to  follow  the  route  that  had  been  traced
by  Magellan.  Of  these  vessels,  the  "  Pelican  "  was
the  only  one  that  completed  the  adventure.  Her
armament  was  twenty  guns  of  brass  and  iron,  with
others  stowed  away  in  the  hold.  Drake  pillaged
the  Spanish  settlements  of  Chili  and  Peru,  and
♦  very  vessel  he  found,  among  them  a  royal  galleon,
laden  with  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones,  to  the
value  of  about  $3,000,000.  He  then  sailed  north-
ward, and,  landing  on  the  coast  of  California,  took
possession  in  the  name  of  his  sovereign,  and  named
it  Nova  Albion.  He  remained  for  some  weeks,  and
made  friends  with  the  natives,  who  regarded  the
new-comers  as  gods.  The  chief,  dressed  in  furs,
came  with  his  official  attendants,  and  indulged  in
a  wild  dance.  Drake  was  asked  to  sit  down,  and
the  king,  singing  with  all  the  rest,  set  a  crown  on
Drake's  head  and  saluted  him  as  Hioh  ("  sover-
eign.") On  leaving  the  place,  Drake,  fearing  lest
he  should  meet  the  Spaniards  in  superior  force  if
he  returned  by  the  way  he  came,  sailed  to  the
north,  and  sought  a  passage  to  the  Atlantic  through
Bering  strait.  Repelled  by  the  intense  cold,  he
again  sought  the  Pacific,  and  determined  by  sail-
ing westward  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  globe.
He  traversed  the  Pacific  and  the  Indian  Ocean,
doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  arrived  at
Plymouth  in  November,  1580,  after  an  absence  of
two  years  and  ten  months.  Elizabeth  received
him  with  favor,  dined  on  board  his  ship,  and  made
him  a  knight.  The  Spaniards  demanded  that  he
should  be  given  up  to  them  as  a  pirate,  but  Eliza-
beth refused,  and  the  rupture  tnat  followed  be-
tween her  and  Philip  II.  gave  Drake  a  new  oppor-
tunity. Within  one  year  he  captured  and  plun-
dered Cartagena  and  other  towns,  burned  the  forts
of  San  Antonio  and  Saint  Augustine,  then  visited
and  carried  back  to  England  the  remains  of  the
colony  that  Raleigh  had  planted  in  Virginia.  In
1587  he  was  placed  in  command  of  a  fleet  of  about
thirty  sail  designed  to  attack  the  Spanish  ports.
He  destroyed  100  ships  in  the  harbor  of  Cadiz,

which  were  des-
tined for  the  in-
vasion of  Eng-
land, and  capt-
ured an  immense
carrack,  from  pa-
pers in  which
the  English  first
learned  the  value
of  the  East  India
traffic,  and  the
mode  of  carrying
it  on.  In  1588,
as  vice-admiral,
he  commanded
one  squadron  of  the  fleet,  by  which,  with  the  assist-
ance of  the  elements,  the  armada  sent  by  Spain
against  England  was  annihilated,  and  in  1589  rav-
aged the  coasts  of  the  Spanish  peninsula.  In  1592-'3
he  was  a  member  of  parliament  for  Plymouth.  In
1594,  a  report  having  reached  England  that  Spain
was  preparing  a  fleet  more  numerous  and  powerful
than  the  armada,  he  again  entered  the  service.
Convinced  that  the  West Indies  was  the  point


where  Spain  could  be  best  attacked,  he  sailed  for
America  in  1595  with  ',!•'.  VMMla,  in  company  with
Admiral  Hawkins.  A  divided  command  produced
its  usual  bad  results,  and  their  first  attempts  were
fruitless.  The  Spaniards  were  also  forewarned,
and  the  English  expedition  proved  a  melancholy^
failure.  At  Puerto  Rico  Hawkins  died,  either  of
a  wound  or  of  chagrin,  and  Drake  then  gained  new
triumphs.  He  burned  Santa  Marta,  Kancheria,
Nombre  de  Dios,  and  Rio  Hacha;  but  a  fatal  mal-
ady broke  out  among  the  sailors,  and  as  he  heard
of  the  defeat  of  a  division  of  his  forces,  which  he
had  sent  to  operate  by  land,  he  fell  sick  and  died
from  the  combined  effects  of  fever  and  of  mental
agitation  on  account  of  the  reverses  of  the  expedi-
tion. His  remains  were  placed  in  a  leaden  casket
and  buried  at  sea  off  Puerto  Cabello,  Venezuela.

DRAKE,  Joseph  Rodman,  poet,  b.  in  New
York  city,  7  Aug.,  1795 ;  d.  there,  21  Sept.,  1820.
He  was  an  only  son,  one  of  four  children,  who,
early  bereaved  of  their  parents,  were  subjected
to  many  of  the
pains  and  pri-
vations incident
to  poverty  and
the  loss  of  their
natural  protect-
ors. Like  his  sis-
ters Caroline  and
Louise,  he  was  a
poet  from  child-
hood. Some  of  his
juvenile  verses
were  found  by
the  writer  among
Halleek's  pa-
pers. At  four-
teen Drake  wrote
the  "  Mocking-
Bird"and"The
Past  and  Pres-
ent," a  part  of

which  furnished  the  concluding  passage  of  "  Leon  "
in  the  published  volume  of  his  poems.  Four  years
later  he  abandoned  merchandise  from  a  distaste  for
business,  and  began  the  study  of  medicine  with  Drs.
Bruce  and  Romayne.  In  the  winter  of  1812-'3  Drake
and  Halleck  met  and  immediately  became  friends.
When  the  young  and  handsome  physician  was  mar-
ried in  the  summer  of  1816  to  a  daughter  of  Henry
Eckford,  the  opulent  ship-builder,  it  was  Halleck
who  officiated  as  groomsman ;  when  he  went  to
Europe  with  his  accomplished  wife,  it  was  to  his
brother-poet  that  he  addressed  several  amusing
epistles ;  when  their  daughter  and  only  child  was
born,  she  was  christened  Halleck ;  when  the  pulsa-
tions of  his  gentle  heart  were  daily  growing  weaker,
it  was  his  faithful  friend  "  Fitz  who  with  more
than  a  brother's  love  soothed  his  dying  pillow ;
and,  when  the  grave  had  forever  closed  over  Drake,
it  was  the  same  sorrow-stricken  friend  who  wrote
those  exquisitely  touching  lines  so  familiar  to  the
English-speaking  world,  and  which  will  ever  con-
tinue to  be  among  Halleck's  and  Drake's  ma
during  monuments.  "  The  Culprit  Fay,"  on  which
Drakes  reputation  as  a  poet  chiefly  rests,  was  writ-
ten in  his  twenty-second  year,  and  not,  as  it  has
always  been  said,  in  the  summer  of  1819.  A  MS.
copy  now  before  the  writer  states  that  it  was  com-
posed in  August,  1816.  In  March,  1819,  the  liter-
ary partners  began  contributing  anonymously  to
the  "  Evening  Post "  a  series  of  good-natured  verses
known  as  "The  Croakers,"  which  appeared  ftlmotj
daily  during  three  months  and  occasionally
ward. These  humorous  poems  wev  in  1860  col-


£__/ /£*-c/>*  t^J/raM-t^


DKAKK


DRAKE


MS


lected  and  issued  in  a  handsome  ootaro  by  the
Bradford  dob  rk,  and  in  1868  the)

included,  with  several  unpublished  "Croakers,"  in

an  edition  <»f  Halleck's  poema. In  phut  <>f  the

iw  of  CroakiT,  Croaker  .Junior,  and

In-  editor  of  tin-  volume  made  known

for tin- lir>t tunc the res|H-ctive  author  of  each

poem,  hutinating  alon  by  the  letters  D.  and  li.  the
joint  authorship  of  the  literary  partners,  or.  to
noote  Halleck's  familiar  words  to  his  biographer,
that  "«■•  aaefa  had  a  laglf  in  tin-  pic"  Whoever
anions  the  present  generation  wishes  to  learn  some-
thing of  the  leading  men  of  the  city  and  state,  and
of  the  social,  scientific,  and  political  events  of  to
interesting  a  decade  as  that  of  1H1J>-'2J>  in  New
York  history,  cannot  hut  bo  enlightened  as  well  pj
greatly  amused  by  a  |>crusal  of  these  sprightly
jhm-ius.  When  Drake  was  on  his  dcath-ltcd,  at  his
wife's  request  Dr.  DeKay.an  intimate  friend,  collect-
ed and  copied  all  his  poems  which  could  be  found
and  took  them  to  him.  " See,  Joe,"  he  said,  "  what
I  have  done."  "  Bum  them,"  was  the  reply  of  the
dying  |MH-t  ;  "  they  are  valueless."  A  judicious  se-
lection of  her  father's  poems,  including  "The  Cul-
prit Fay"  and  "The  American  Flag."  was,  how-
ever, made  in  October,  1835,  by  the  jx>et's  daughter,
I  Mine;  the  volume  issued  in  New  \ork  during  the
following  year,  and  fitly  dedicated  to  Fitz-Grceiic
Malleck.  Thirty  years  later  an  illustrated  edition
of  "The  Culprit  Pay"  was  issued  in  New  York,  of
which  many  thousunds  have  been  sold.  The  young
poet,  who  was  described  by  his  literary  partner  "  as
jM-rhaps  the  handsomest  man  in  New  York,"  left
behind  him  two  portraits,  one  a  miniature,  from
which  the  accompanying  picture  is  copied,  the
other  an  oil-painting  by  Henry  Inman.  It  was  for
half  a  century  in  the  possession  of  Charles  P.  Clinch,
the  last  survivor  among  Drake's  intimate  friends.
See  Wilson's  "  Life  of  Halleck  "  (New  York,  1809),
and  "  Bryant  and  his  Friends"  (1886).

DKAKK,  Samuel,  actor.b.  in  England,  15Nov.,
1768;  d.  in  Oldham  county,  Ky.,  16  Oct.,  1854.
He  may  properly  be  called  the  pioneer  of  the
drama  in  the  west.  It  is  said  that  his  name  was
Bryant,  but  he  assumed  that  of  Drake  on  the  stage.
In  early  life  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,  but
ran  away  before  his  term  had  expired  and  became
an  actor.  Previous  to  his  coming  to  the  United
States  he  was  manager  of  a  country  theatre  in  the

•  of  England. Mr.  Drake  and  his  family  landed
in  the  United  States  in  1809  and  appeared  at  the

'  i  >n  theatre  the  same  year,  remaining  there  until
Is  bl,  when  they  joined  the  company  of  John  Bern-
hard  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  Mr.  Drake  was  stage
manager.  Mrs.  Drake  died  in  Albany  in  1814.  and
in  the  spring  of  1815  Mr.  Drake  and  his  family
went  to  Kentucky,  he  having  made  arrangements
for  the  occupancy  of  the  Frankfort,  Lexington,
and  Louisville  theatres.  On  their  way  they  gave
performances  in  sevejal  towns  of  northwestern  New
York.  With  this  company  two  persons,  who  after-
ward became  noted  in  the"  history  of  the  American
drama  (Miss  Danney  and  N.  M.  Ludlow),  made
their  first  appearance  on  the  stage.  In  their  jour-
to  (Mean,  on  Alleghany  river,  the  path  lay
through  a  wilderness,  the  men  walking  most  of
the  way,  and  the  women  riding  in  the  wagOO  that
carried  their  scenery.  Arrived  at  <  Mean  (which
then  cunsisted  of  a  few  log-cabins),  Mr.  Drake  pur-
d  a  flat-boat,  and  in  this  they  floated  down
Mleghany  to  Pittsburg,  I'a..  where  Mr.  Drake
and  his  company  gave  the  Aral  regular  theatrical
performance  ever  given  in  that  town.  After  their
Pittsburg  season  they  landed  at  liaysville  (then
called  Limestone),  and  made  the  rest  of  their  jour-

vou  ii. — la


by  land  to  Frankfort,  where  they  opened  the
theatre  that hail  been built  tour  year*  before  by
Kohls  Luke  Usher. .Mr.  l»i.'ikeu;t.',j.,iicMicct«*fiiI
during  the  first  ten  or  twelve  yean  of  In*  K
QUeer,  and afterward managed theatn  i

Tet sjee,  Missouri,  and Indiana.— His  daugl

in-law,  F  run  res  Ann,  actress,  b.  in  Schenectady.
N.  Y.,  »;  Nov..  17HT:  d.  in  Oldham  eoonl

Sept.,  IhTo. Her  maiden  name  was Deoney. She

made  her  tirst  appearanoson  1 1  |  be  »pring

of  1611  at  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y..  with  her  future
hther  la  law's  company  in  the  character  of  Julia

in "The Midnight Hour." The first
in  tragedy that she  acted  was  lmma in "  Add-
git  ha. At  Pittsburg, Pa.,  she  j.laved many im-
portant jiarts,  and  in  Kentucky  s|„.  jM njsjm  I  great
favorite. In  181!)  she  tried  her'fortune  in  the  north-
ern and  eastern  theatres,  going  first  to  Canada  and
jHTforming  at  Montreal  and  vjucl.ee,  then  t
ton.  and  thence  to  New  York  city,  when-  ehl
her  tirst  ap|>caruncc. 17  April,  IflfA  at  the  Park
theatre  in  the  character  of  Helen  Worret  in  the
comedy  of  "Man  and Wife."  in  which  she  gave
great satisfaction. She then l>ecame a regular

member  of  the  Park  eompaay,  and.  after  the  Enra>

ing  of  that  theatre,  was  with  the  same  company,
performing  at  the  Anthony  street  theati
York,  during  the  season  of"l820-'l.  In  1828  she
married  Alexander  Dmke.  and  in  \*'24  ap]>caredat
the  Chatham  theatre.  New  York,  as  Imogens  in
"  Bertram."  Shortly  after  this  she  returned  to  the
west  with  her  hustmnd  to  his  father's  theatres,  oc-
casionally visiting  the  e»ist  during  the  vacations  of
her  western  engagements.  Her  last  appearance  in
New  York  was  in  1835  at  the  Park  theatre.  2*2
April,  as  Biauca  in  ••  Fazio."  Mrs.  Drake,  after
the  death  of  her  husband,  married  George  W.  Cut-
ter (q.  P.);  but  the  match  proved  unhappy,  they
sc|iarated  upon  mutual  agreement,  and  she  returned
to  the  stage,  resuming  the  name  of  Drake,  and  man-
aged theatres  in  Kentucky  and  Ohio.

DKAKK.  Samuel  Gardner,  autimiarian,  b.  in
Pittsfleld.  N.  EL  11  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass*
14  June,  1875.  lie  was  brought  upon  a  farm,  edu-
cated in  the  common  schools  of  his  nsighborhood,
and  in  lSlS-^S  was  a  teacher.  He  early  showed  a
fondness  for  literary  pursuits,  and  in  1828  estab-
lished in  Boston,  whither  he  had  removed,  the  lirst
antiquarian  book-store  in  the  United  States,  de-
voting special  attention  to  the  collection  of  books
relating  to  the  early  history  of  this  country.  He
continued  to  do  business  as  a  bookseller  and  pub-
lisher during  his  life,  and  the  most  noted  writers
of  his  day  availed  themselves  of  the  store  of  in-
formation that  he  had  collected.  Mr.  Drake  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  England  historic
genealogical  society  in  1*47.  its  president  hi
and  for  many  years  edited  its  quarterly  •
bnt"  contributing  manv  articles  to  its  pages,  in
1858-'60  he  resided  in  London,  England.  He  pejb-
lished  Church's  "Entertaining  History  of  King
Philip's  War."  with  additions  (Boston.  1825);  "  In-
dian Biography"  (1818)1  "  Book  of  the  Indians,"  a
standard  authority  (1*:M;  11th  ed„  enlarged,
-old  Indian  Chmni.  \<  i>-w  series,  1867);

-Indian  Captivities"  (1839);  "Account  of  the
Familv  of  Drake"  (1^-  u-w  of  Savage's

Edition  of  Winthn.].'s  .b.uinal"  (1*54);  "Historj
and  Antiquities  of  Boston"  (1856);  "Result  of
fJoortlini  among  the  British  Archives'"  (I860);
••  Memoir  of  Sir  Walter  Baleigh  "  litioca,

with  introduction  and  notes.  «,f  Mather's  "Indian
War  <>f  1678  '«•"  (1868);  "Early  History  of  Hew

England "(1864);  and  Hublwrd's  "Indian  Wars
The  Witchcraft Delusion  in  New  Eng-


220


DRAPER


DRAPER


land."  lx'injj  reprints  of  Mather's  "Wonders  of  the
Invi.-iUe  World,"  und  Robert  Calefs  "More  Won-
den  at  the  Invisible  World,"  with  introduction
and  notes  (3  vols.,  1866) ;  "  Annals  of  Witchcraft
in  the  United  States"  (1860);  and  "  History  of  the
French  and  Indian  War"  (1870). — His  son,  Francis
Samuel,  b.  in  Northwood,  N.  H.,  22  Feb.,  1828;
(1.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  22  Feb.,  1885,  was  edu-
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Boston.  After  aid-
ing his  father  in  his
Boston  book-store
he  entered  a  count-
ing-house in  that
city,  but  went  to
Leavenworth,  Kan.,
in  1862,  and  engaged
in  bookselling  there
till  1867,  when  he
returned  to  Boston.
Mr.  Drake  inherited
his  father's  taste  for
historical  work,  and
was  an  eager  collect-
or long  before  he
wrote  anything  for
*  publication.  He  pre-

American  Biogra-
phy," the  materials  for  which  he  was  twenty  years
in  collecting  (Boston,  1872).  He  also  published  a
"  Memorial  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati "  (1873) ;  "  Life  of  Gen.  Henry  Knox  "  (1873) ;
"The  Town  of  Roxbury"  (1873);  "Tea-Leaves"
(1884);  and  "Indian  History  for  Young  Folks"
(1885).  He  edited  Schoolcraft's  "History  of  the
Indians,"  and  contributed  articles  on  Brighton,
Watertown,  and  Roxbury  to  the  "Memorial  His-
tory of  Boston."  His  "Dictionary  of  American
Biography,"  with  his  latest  corrections  and  all  the
materials  that  he  had  gathered  for  a  new  edition,  is
incorporated  in  "  Appletons'  Cyclopaedia  of  Ameri-
can Biographv." — Another  son,  Samuel  Adams,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  Dec,  1833,  was  educated  in
the  public  schools  of  his  native  city.  He  went  to
Kansas  in  1858  as  telegraphic  agent  of  the  New
York  associated  press,  Decame  the  regular  corre-
spondent of  the  St.  Louis  "  Republican  "  and  the
Louisville  "Journal,"  and  for  a  while  edited  the
Leavenworth  "  Times."  On  the  organization  of  the
state  militia  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
became  adjutant-general  of  the  northern  division,
and  in  1861  was  a  captain  of  militia  in  the  service
of  the  United  States.  He  had  risen  to  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  of  militia  in  1863,  and  in  1864
was  colonel  of  the  17th  Kansas  volunteers,  com-
manding the  post  of  Paola,  Kan.,  during  Price's
invasion  of  Missouri  in  that  year.  In  1871  Gen.
Drake  returned  to  Massachusetts.  His  first  publi-
cation was  "  Hints  for  Emigrants  to  Pike's  Peak  "
(a  pamphlet,  1860).  He  has  since  written  "Old
Landmarks  of  Boston"  (1872);  "Old  Landmarks
of  Middlesex  "  (1873) ;  "  Nooks  and  Corners  of  the
New  England  Coast"  ,1875);  "Bunker  Hill"
(1875);  "Captain  Nelson"  (1879);  "History  of
Middlesex  County,  Mass."  (1880) ;  "  Heart  of  the
White  Mountains"  (1881);  "Around  the  Hub"
(1881);  "New  England  Legends"  (1883);  "Our
Great  Benefactors7'  (1885) ;  and  "  The  Making  of
New  England"  (1886).

DRAPER,  Alonzo  Granville,  soldier,  b.  in
Brattleboro,  Vt,  6  Sept.,  1835 ;  d.  in  Brazos,  Tex.,
8  Sept.,  1865.  He  early  settled  in  Boston,  and  was
graduated  at  the  English  high-school  in  1854,  after
which  he  removed  to  Lynn,  where  he  edited  the


"New  England  Mechanic,"  and  held  office  in  the
city  government.  At  the  bagfaminjl  of  the  civil
war  he  recruited  a  company  of  volunteers  for  tin-
l-lth  Kamehusetta  regiment,  and  was  commis-
sioned captain,  6  May,  1861.  In  January,  1863,  he
was  promoted  major,  and,  after  being  transferred
to  tne  2d  national  colored  regiment,  was  made
colonel  in  August,  1863,  and  afterward  attached
to  the  25th  corps,  where  for  a  month  he  had  charge
of  a  brigade  in  Maj.-Gen.  Paine's  division,  and
where  he  won  the  title  of  brevet  brigadier-general,
28  Oct.,  1864.  A  few  months  previous  to  his  death
he  left  Virginia  in  command  of  a  brigade,  and  died
from  wounds  received  in  Texas.

DRAPER,  Andrew  Sloan,  lawyer,  b.  in  West-
ford,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  June,  1848.  He  was
graduated  at  Albany  academy  in  1866,  and  at  Al-
bany law-school  in  1871,  and  began  practice  in  that
place.  He  was  a  member  of  the  city  board  of  edu-
cation in  1879-'81,  and  of  the  legislature  in  the
latter  year.  He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
court  of  commissioners  of  Alabama  claims  by  Presi-
dent Arthur,  and  sat  in  that  court  during  the  last
year  of  its  existence,  when  over  2,000  cases  were
tried.  In  1886  he  became  state  superintendent  of
public  instruction.

DRAPER,  John  William,  scientist,  b.  in  St
Helen's,  near  Liverpool,  England,  5  May,  1811 ;  d.
in  Hastings-on- Hudson,  4  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  the
son  of  John  C.  Draper,  a  Wesleyan  clergyman,  who
was  interested  in  scientific  subjects.  Young  Draper
was  educated  at  home  under  private  tutors  and  at
Woodhouse  grove,  a  public-school  of  the  Wesleyans,
where  he  developed  a  fondness  for  science.  In  1829
the  University  of  London  was  opened,  and  he  was
sent  there  to  receive  a  course  of  instruction  in
chemistry  under  Dr.  Edward  Turner,  but  the  death
of  his  father  prevented  his  taking  a  degree,  and  in
1832  he  came  to  the  United  States  with  his  mother
and  his  sister  Catherine,  settling  in  the  Wesleyan
colony  in  Christiansville,  Va.,  where  for  a  time  he
devoted  himself  entirely  to  scientific  pursuits.  He
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1836.  The  results
of  several  investigations  published  in  the  "  Journal
of  the  Franklin  Institute"  and  in  Sillimans
"American  Journal  of  Science"  gave  him  reputa-
tion, and  he  was
called  to  the
chair  of  chemis-
try and  natural
fhilosophy  in
lampuen  -  Sid-
ney college,  Va.,
where  he  began
his  official  duties
in  the  autumn  of
1836,  meanwhile
prosecuting  his
researches  in  va-
rious directions.
In  1837  he  was
elected  professor
of  the  proposed
medical  depart-
ment in  the  Uni-
versity of  New
York,  but  the
financial  difficul-
ties of  that  year  caused  the  abandonment  of  the
project  Two  years  later,  however,  he  was  appointed
professor  in  the  university  itself,  and  in  184i»  WM
very  active  in  the  organization  of  the  medical  de-
partment, becoming  its  professor  of  chemisl  r  k  In
1850  he  succeeded  Dr.  Valentine  Mott  in  the  pres-


DRAPES

f tin- Ileal college. ""'I rnnint«iti.«l

.  Iiiii..ii-  with  that  institution  until  1*7:5. HJf
lectures at tin- university its.  If Ml  continued

until 188L During  Um  d»U  war  he  wm  ap-

pointed  MM  <>f  khl  commissioners  U)  in-j.«-<t  h.»-

E  after  the  battles  of Antictam  ami  (iettys-

urg.  Of  his  many  investigation*.  OM  of  the
earli^t  was  in  rt'latioti  to  capillary  attraction,  ami
in  1834  he  published  a  tm-im>ir  on  that  subject.
Hi-  study  of  osmose,  especially  in  reference  to  its
pli\-iolok'ical  relations,  dates  from  1880.  The  ap-
plication of  the  principles  investigated  to  the  i\-
plauation  of  np  in  plants  and  of  blood  in  animals
is  admirable.  His  researches  on  the  chemical
phenomena  of  light  in  Uith  the  organic  and  inor-
ganic world  include  the  most  valuable  work  done
bv  him.  Daguerres  announcement  of  hisdiecoTStlf
01  the  action  of  sunlight  on  silver,  ami  its  appli-
cation to  the  |>cnnanent  preservation  of  view-,  in
».  was  at  once  taken  up  by  Draper.  He  made
it  the  subject  of  special  study,  and  was  the  first
person  in  the  world  to  apply  it  to  individuals.
"The  first  photographic  portrait  from  life  was
made  by  me.  '  he  says,  and  "  the  face  of  the  sitter."
his  sister  Catherine,  "  was  dusted  with  a  white
|H>wder";  but  a  few  trials  showed  that  this  was
unnecessary.  In  March,  1840,  he  presented  the
Lyceum  of  natural  history  in  New  York  with  the
Iirst  representation  of  the  moon's  surface  ever
taken  by  photography.  In  the  investigation  pre-
sented to  the  British  association  in  1843,  on  the
action  of  light  on  chlorine  gas,  he  showed  that  this
gas  underwent  a  decided  modification,  in  conse-
quence of  its  absorption  of  the  chemical  rays  from
sunlight.  He  also  investigated  light  from  the  stand-
point of  its  action  on  the  growth  of  plants,  and  his
results  were  presented  in  a  memoir  read  before  the
American  philosophical  society  on  the  occasion  of  its
centennial  anniversary  in  1834.  Besides  his  connec-
tion with  the  development  of  photography,  he  was
actively  engaged  with  Samuel  F.  H.  Horse  in  his
production  of  the  electro-magnetic  telegraph.  The
series  of  experiments  made  by  Prof.  Draper  in  the
lalMiratory  of  the  university  was  the  first  to  estab-
lish with  certainty  the  practicability  of  utilizing
electricity  for  sending  messages  over  long  distances.
In  1847  he  published  his  "  Production  of  Light  by
Heat,"  an  important  and  early  contribution  to
spectrum  analysis,  and  one  that  is  worthy  of  spe-
cial recognition,  for  it  clearly  outlines  the  princi-
ples that  subsequently  wore  recognized  and:  form
part  of  the  brilliant  researches  of  Kirchhoff,  who
has  since  specialized  the  department  of  prismatic
analysis.  In  this  connection  he  also  deserves  men-
tion as  the  first  to  photograph  the  diffract  ion  spec-
trum. His  ••  Production  of  Light  by  Chemical  Ac-
tion "  (1848)  and  his  "  Researches  in  Aetino-Chem-
istry"  (1872)  were  most  important  contributions
to  science.  He  received  in  1875  the  Iiumford  med-
als from  the  American  academy  of  science  and
arts  for  his  researches  in  "  Radiant  Energy."  In
1800  Princeton  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of
Id,.  D.  He  was  a  member  of  many  of  the  learned
societies  of  Europe,  including  the  Accademia  dei
Lincci  of  Home  and  the  Physical  society  in  London.
In  the  United  State!  he  was  elected  to  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society  in  1848  and  to  the  Nation-
al academy  of  sciences  in  1877.  He  was  the  first
president  of  the  American  chemical  society,  and
Ins  inaugural  address,  delivered  in  November,  1S76,
was  on  "Science  In  America."  The  titles  of  hi-
papers  exceed  100.  and  extend  from  W>  till  1880.
His  lectures  and  addresses,  princi|»allv  delivered  at
the  beginning  of  the  medical  ooone  in  the  univer-
sity, also  include  "  Thoughts  on  the  Future  Civil


DICAPKK


m


Policy  of  America, "  I-  f..re  the  Historical  society

of New York in I*<14,  and |»

institute  in  Springfield, Mas*.,  in I

on  "  Evolution— ita  Origin. I'

quencea," The  im-*!  I  of  his  larger  works

ry  of  the  Conflict  between  Kel
S-icnce"  ,N,W York. 1h74>. which ha- paned
through  twenty  editions  m  the  English  language.
and  hasln-en  translated  int., ti„- I
(ierman.  Dutch.  Kus>ian,  Italian, Portuguese,
lish.  ami  S-rvian  languages. Home  placed  it  on
her "Index Expurgatorius,"  and Dn»i«  r  joined

(iaiileo,  Oopankaa,  Kapler,  Loskkaftd  Mill  on  the

list  of  those  under  the  Um  of  the  <hur>  h.  His
other  works  an-  "  Elements  of  Chemistry."  by
Bobatt  Kane,  American  edition,  edited  (New  York.
1842);  "A  Treatise  on  the  Forces  which  prodwa
the  organization  of  Plants "(1844);  ••Text-k-.koti
Chemistry"  (1846);  "Text-Hook  on  Natural  Phi-
losophy" (1847);  "  Human  Physiology,  Statical
and  Dynamical"  (ls.*>«i);  "History  of  Um  [ttteUsO*
tual  Development  of  Ruops"  (lM)i  "Thou.
on  the  Future  Civil  Policv  of  America
"A  Text-Book  on  PhjesOMgy'*  (18fN);  "History
of  the  American  Civil  War''  flj  vol*..  |
and  "Scientific  Memoirs;  being  Kxf>crimental  I
trilmtions  to  a  Knowledge  Of  Radiant  Energy "
(1878).  See  Memoir  by  Prof.  QeorgS  F.  RurkVr.
contributed  to  the  ••  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the
National  Academy  of  ScwnCM  *'  (vol.  ii.). —  His  s,,r,.
John  Christopher,  physician,  b.  in  Mecklenburg
county.  Ya..  81  March.  lSs{."i;  d.  in  New  York  city.
M  Dec..  1SH."),  entered  the  University  of  New  York
in  1832,  but,  leaving  the  classical  department,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  school  in  ls.">7.  Eroin
March.  18.V5.  till  July.  1867,  he  held  the  office  of
house  physician  and  surgeon  to  BeRevue  hospital,
and  published  at  that  time  paj>ers  00  "The  Pro-
duction of  Urea"  (February,  18."><>)  and  "  Experi-
ments on  Respiration  "  (July,  lHTiti).  The  year  siil>-
sequent  to  his  graduation  was  spent  in  Europe  in
travel  and  study.  In  December,  1K.X.  he  became
professor  of  analytical  chemistry  in  the  University
of  New  York,  holding  that  chair  until  187L
From  1860  till  18(58  he  was  professor  of  chemist  rv
in  Cooper  Union,  and  in  1862  accompanied  tin-  12th
New  York  regiment  to  the  front  as  assistant  sur-
geon, serving  for  three  months.  In  lNUt  he  was
elected  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  the  College
of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  in  lsi'rfi  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  medical  department  of  the  Cni-
versity of  New  York,  which  chairs  he  held  until
his  death.  Dr.  Dra|>er  was  a  memU-r  of  the  New
York  academy  of  medicine,  and  in  1*7:5  received
the  degree  of  LI*  D.  from  Trinity  college.  He  was
an  occasional  contributor  t<>  medical  and  scientific
journals,  and,  besides  twenty-four  original  pa|iers,
published  numerous  articles  on  diet,  dress,  and
ventilation,  in  the  "  Galaxy  "0888-71 ). In  \*7Z-'S

he  edited  tl Ycar-15ook  of  Nature  and  Science,"

and  also  the  department  of  "Natural  .Science"  in
"Scribner's Monthly"  from 1872 till 18TO EU

publish. -d  uText-Bool  on  Au«t v,  Phniolagv.

and Hvgietie"  (New Y..rk. l8oT.>;'"A I'rac:
Laboratorv-Coursc  in Medical  Chemist  rv  "  (1888);
and  a  "Text-Book  of  Medical Phy  •  '».—

Another  son.  Henry,  phvsicist,  b.  in  Prince  Ed-
ward  county,  Va.,  7  March.  1K57;  d.  in  New  York
city.  '20  NovemU'r,  1882.  studied  at  the  University
of  New  York,  but  on  the  completion  of  his  sopho-
more year  abandoned  the  classical  course  to  study
medicine,  and  was  graduated  in  18.*>8.  publishing  a
thesis  on  "The  Changes  of  Blood-Cells  in  the
Spleen."  Sul»seipieiitly  he  travelled  in  Euro|>e.  and
netted  the  grass  telescopeof  LordUossein  Ireland,


398


DRAPER


DRAPER


the  sight  of  which  impressed  him  with  a  desire  to
(•(instruct  a  similar  but  smaller  instrument,  and  at-
tracted his  attention  toward  astronomy  and  astro-
nomical photography.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  applied  himself  to  accomplish  this  pur-
pose, and  built  the  observatory  at  Hastings-on-
lludxiii.  A  description  of  the  details  of  grinding,
polishing,  silvering,  testing,  and  mounting  the  re-
flector, all  of  which  he  did  himself,  was  published
by  the  Smithsonian  institution  in  1865,  and  became
the  standard  authority  on  the  subject.  Meanwhile
he  had  been  appointed  on  the  medical  staff  in  Belle-
vue  hospital,  and  served  for  eighteen  months.  In
1860  he  was  elected  professor  of  physiology  in  the
university,  and  in  1866  to  the  similar  chair  in  the
medical  department,  becoming  soon  afterward  its
dean.  His  specialty  of  celestial  photography  was
not  neglected,  and  a  photograph  of  the  fixed  lines
in  the  spectra  of  the  stars  is  of  this  period.  His
most  celebrated  photograph  is  that  of  the  moon,
and  it  probably  gives  the  best  representation  of  its
surface  thus  far  made.  Upward  of  1,500  negatives
were  made  by  Dr.  Draper  with  this  instrument  In
1807  he  married  Mary  Anna,  the  daughter  of
Courtland  Palmer,  who  became  his  assistant  in
scientific  work.  In  1872  he  photographed  the
spectrum  of  a  Lyne  (Vega),  showing  dark  lines,  a
result  then  unique  in  science,  and  in  1873  the
finest  photograph  of  the  diffraction  spectrum  ever
made.  He  resigned  his  chair  in  the  medical  de-
partment in  1873,  in  order  to  devote  more  time  to
original  research,  but  the  death  of  Mr.  Palmer  in
1874  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  take  charge  of  a
large  estate.  In  1874  he  was  chosen  by  congress
to  superintend  the  photographic  department  of
the  commission  appointed  to  observe  the  transit  of
Venus.  For  three  months  he  was  busily  occupied
in  Washington,  organizing,  experimenting,  and  in-
structing. Home  duties  prevented  him  from  join-
ing the  expedition,  but  he  received  from  congress
a  gold  medal  in  recognition  of  his  services.  In
1876  he  made  a  negative  of  the  solar  spectrum,
and  one  of  the  spectrum  of  an  incandescent  gas
upon  the  same  plate,  with  their  edges  in  contact.
These  results  and  corroborative  experiments  led
him  to  assume  the  presence  of  oxygen  in  the  sun,
and  in  July,  1877.  he  announced  "  The  Discovery
of  Oxygen  in  the  Sun  by  Photography,  and  a  New
Theory  of  the  Solar  Spectrum."  Ihis  brilliant  in-
vestigation, culminating  in  perhaps  the  most
original  discovery  ever  made  in  physical  science  by
an  American,  could  not  pass  unchallenged.  Eng-
lish astronomers  were  slow  to  accept  the  results,
and  in  1879  Dr.  Draper  submitted  his  research  to
the  Royal  astronomical  society  in  London.  The
sun  told  its  own  story,  and  its  light,  acting  on  the
delicate  metallic  film  on  the  glass  negative,  was
evidence  that  could  not  be  disputed.  In  1878  he
observed  the  solar  eclipse  of  29  July,  in  Rawlings,
W.  T.,  and  obtained  excellent  photographs  of  the
corona.  Later  he  photographed  the  great  nebula
of  Orion,  and  in  1880  photographed  the  spectrum
of  Jupiter.  In  1882  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  I),  from  the  University  of  New  York  and
also  from  the  University  of  Wisconsin  during  the
same  vear.  Dr.  Draper  was  a  member  of  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  and
in  1877  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  His  original  papers  number  but  a  score,
and  are  principally  devoted  to  researches  on  the
chemistry  of  neavenly  bodies.  They  appeared
chiefly  in  the  "American  Journal  of  Science."  Dr.
Draper  also  published  "  A  Text- Book  on  Chemis-
try'  (New  York,  1866).  Biographical  sketches
of  Henry  Draper  were  contributed  by  Prof.  George


F.  Barker  to  the  "American  Journal  of  Science"
(February,  1NK5),  the  ••  Proceedings  of  the  Ameri-
can Philosophies]  Society"  (December,  1868),  and

to  the  "Biographies]  Memoirs  of  the  National
Academy  of  Sciences"  (vol.  hi.). — Another  son*
Daniel,  meteorologist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  2
April,  1841,  was  educated  at  the  University  gram-
mar-school, and  subsequently  followed  scientific
studies  under  his  father,  whom  he  assisted  in  his
lectures,  also  becoming  his  amanuensis  in  the  prep-
aration of  the  "History  of  the  Intellectual  De-
velopment of  Europe"  and  in  the  "History  of  the
American  Civil  War."  In  the  designing  and  con-
struction of  the  observatory  in  Hast ings-on- Hud-
son, Daniel  was  associated  with  his  brother  Henry,
For  five  years  he  served  an  apprenticeship  in  the
Novelty  iron-works,  New  York,  where  he  was  em-
ployed during  the  building  of  the  "  Roanoke  "  and
other  iron-clads  for  the  U.  S.  government  in  the
early  years  of  the  civil  war.  In  1869  he  was  ap-
pointed director  of  the  New  York  meteorological
observatory  established  at  that  time  in  Central
park.  For  the  work  under  his  control  he  designed
and  manufactured  the  self-recording  instruments,
including  the  photographic  barograph  and  thermo-
graphs (dry  and  wet),  pencil  gauges  for  rain  and
snow,  for  direction  of  the  wind,  and  for  the  velocity
and  force  of  the  wind.  In  1871  he  began  a  series
of  meteorological  investigations  in  connection  with
the  observatory.  Of  these,  his  consideration  of  the
question  "Does  the  clearing  of  land  increase  or
diminish  the  fall  of  rain  f  "  showed  that  the  preva-
lent impression  of  its  diminishing  was  not  founded
on  fact.  Besides  several  researches  concerning
the  variations  in  temperature,  he  took  up  the  ques-
tion "  Do  American  storms  cross  the  Atlantic  V'  It
was  found  that  from  1869  till  1873  eighty-six  out
of  eighty-nine  disturbances  were  felt  on  the  Euro-
pean coast.  This  led  to  telegraphic  announcement
of  storms  from  the  United  States  to  Great  Britain.
A  more  recent  investigation  has  shown  the  in-
creased prevalence  of  pneumonia  at  times  when
the  atmosphere  is  richest  in  ozone.  His  researches
have  earned  for  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
University  of  New  York,  and  they  have  been  fully
described  in  scientific  journals  both  in  the  United
States  and  Europe.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies  and  has  published  annual  reports  of  the
observatory  since  nis  appointment.

DRAPER,  Lyman  Copeland,  antiquarian,  b.
in  Hamburg  (now  Evans),  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,
1815 ;  d.  in  Madison.  Wis..  27  Aug.,  1891.  He  re-
moved with  his  father  to  Springfield,  Pa.,  and  in
1821  to  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  educated  at
the  village  school,  worked  on  his  father's  farm,  and
in  1830-  &  served  as  clerk  in  various  stores.  In  the
latter  year  he  went  to  Mobile  with  a  relative,  and
began  obtaining  information  about  the  Creek  chief
Weatherford.  Since  then  he  devoted  his  life  to  the
collection  of  material  relating  to  western  history
and  biography,  and  was  regarded  as  an  authority  on
those  subjects.  In  1835-'6  he  was  a  student  in  Gran-
ville college,  Ohio.  In  1838  he  began  an  extensivs
correspondence  with  well-known  western  pioneers.
and  had  personal  interviews  with  many  of  them,
thus  collecting  a  great  amount  of  valuable  histori-
cal information.  He  became  editor  of  a  paper  in
Pontotoc,  Miss.,  in  1840,  and  in  1842  was  clerk  in  the
office  of  the  Erie  canal  at  Buffalo.  N.  Y.  The  next
ten  years  were  spent  mostly  in  the  family  of  a  rehv
tive  in  Philadelphia,  in  the  prosecution  of  his
search  for  historical  data.  He  removed  to  MadisoBL
Wis.,  in  1853,  to  become  corresponding  secretary  "f
the  State  historical  society,  and  was  instrumental
in  securing  for  it  a  library  of  116,000  volurai


i>ra


valuable  antiquarian  collations.  In  lH.V*-'9  he
was  state  ■npsrmtsndenl  of  Instruction,  inn  in  i860
returned  tOMi  foriiu-r  oases.  On  6  Jan.,  16
declined  a  re-election,  intending  todtVOM  bJnsttf
to  literature.  utnl  was  appointed  honorary  secre-
tary  f<>r  life  Thfl  stats  university  gave  liiin  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1*71.  Dr.  Draper  has  pub-
lished "Collections  "  of  the  State  historical  society,
mostly  gathered  by  himself  d<>  vols.,  1868-^87);
"  Madison,  the  Capital  of  Wisconsin  "  (1m."i7):  "The
Helping  Hand,"  with  W.  A.  Crofful  dsiijj);  and
"Kind's  Mountain  and  its  Heroes"  (Cincinnati,
lie  has  manv  works  in  preparation,  two  <'f
which.  "Tin-  Mecklenburg  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence" and  "  Border  Korays  and  Adventures,"
ere  nearlv  ready  for  publication.

DRAPES,  Richard,  journalist,  b.  in  1787;  d.
ft  .1  him-,  1774.  He  was  early  appointed  printer  to
the  governor  and  council  of  Massachusetts,  and  re-
tained the  olVice  through  his  life,  becoming  the
proprietor  of  the  "  Massachusetts  Gazette  and  Bos-
ton News  Letter,"  which  strongly  sup|>orted  Un-
crown in  its  eontroyersies  with  the  colonies.  Mr.
Draper  was  esteemed  the  best  compiler  of  news  of
his  nay. He  was  a  man  of  feeble  health  and  of

r»t  gentleness  of  manner. —  His  wife,  Margaret,
in  England  about  1800,  continued,  with  the  aid
of  John  Howe,  the  publication  of  her  husband's
journal  from  his  death  to  the  evacuation  of  Boston
in  177i>.  and  her  paper  was  the  only  one  published
there  during  the  siege.  She  went  with  the  British
army  to  Halifax,  and  thence  to  England,  where  she
spent  the  rest  of  her  life,  receiving  a  pension  from
the  government.  Trumbull,  in  his  ••  McKingal,"
s(H'aks  of  her  as  "  Mother  Draper."

DRAPER,  SiiiHMMi.  politician,  b.  in  1804;  d.  in
Whitestone,  L.  I.,  6  Nov.,  1866.  He  was  for  many
years  a  prominent  merchant  in  New  York,  but  was
unfortunate  in  business,  and  became  an  auctioneer.
He  was  an  active  whig,  and  was  long  the  personal
and  political  friend  of  William  H.  Seward,  but
soon  after  the  formation  of  the  republican  party
he  opposed  Gov.  Seward's  policy.  He  was  several
times  a  member  of  the  Whig  state  central  commit-
tee, and  in  1864  was  chairman  of  that  of  the  Union
party.  He  was  provost  marshal  for  New  York  city
in  1862,  and  in  1864  was  appointed  by  President
Lincoln  collector  of  the  port  of  New  York,  but  re-
signed in  1865.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
government  cotton  agent,  having  charge  of  all  the
cotton  received  at  New  York.  F  or  many  years  be-
fore the  war  Mr.  Draper  was  one  of  the  board  of
governors  in  charge  of  the  city  charities,  and  after
the  law  creating  this  board  was  repealed  he  was  a
commissioner  of  public  charities  and  corrections
until  his  resignation  of  the  office  in  1864.

DRAPKR,  William  Henry.  Canadian  jurist,
b.  near  London,  Kngland.  |]  March,  lsill  ;  d.  in
Yorkville  (then  a  suburb  of  Toronto).  :*  Nov.,  1877.
His  father  was  rector  of  St.  Anthony's  church,
London,  and  when  the  son  was  a  mere  lad  he  ran
sway  from  home  and  went  to  sea.  He  was  after-
ward a  cadet  on  an  East  Indiaman.  but  in  his
eighteenth  year  he  gave  up  the  sea  and  set  out  for
Canada,  where  he  arrived  in  ISfML  After  teaching
for  a  time,  he  U-gan  the  study  of  law,  and  in  1888
was  called  to  the  bar.  In  1837  he  was  called  to  the
legislative  council,  and  accepted  a  seat  in  the  ex-
ecutive without  otlice.  In  ls;{s  )„.  beoallK  solici-
icral  of  Upper  C/Thada,  and.  OB  the  resigna-
tion of  Mr.  Haprinan,  was  apjM>inted  to -
him  as  attorney-general.  He  was  not  in  favor  of
many  of  the  reforms  introduced  into  the  system  of
governing  the  British- A merioan  colonies  subse-
quent to  the  rclHllionof  is;*7. In  ls47Mr.  Draper


withdrew  from  notttJesl  life  and  became  puisne
Judge  of  the  court  of  onsen*!  ben*  h,  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1856,  was  made  chief  justice  of  Um

common  plea*,  and  in  1*6:1  chief  fastJoSOf  I'pper
Csnsds,  He  retained  this  office  till  I *•;'.».  when  be
became  president  of  the  court  of  errors  and  ap-
peals, lie  was  a  brilliant  man,  and  so  eloquent
and  persuasive  was  hi^  style  of  address  that  he  was
known  among  In-  associates  as  "Sweet  William."
DRAPKR.  William Henry,  .an.  b.  ...

BretUeborough,  Vt.,  14  <»<  t..  ikjo.  lb-  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1  h."»  1 .  and  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  lx.V>.  After  stud}  in
Paris  and  London,  he  nettled  in  New  York  city  as
a  general practitioner,  and  has  acquired  a  ll

Sractice.  In  1869  he  became  clinical  profsssorflf
iseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in  tin-  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  which  chair  he  held  until  1880,
when  he  MM  appointed  professor  of  clinieul  medi-
cine. He  is  attending  plivsician  <>f  the  New  York
and  the  Roosevelt  hospitals,  also  consulting  physi-
cian  of  St.  Luke's  and  of  the  Presbyterian  hospitals.
In  1886  Dr.  DrajK-r  became  president  of  the  x
York  academy  of  medicine.  He  has  contributed
numerous  professional  |<ajx-rs  to  medical  journals.

DRAYTON,  William,  juri-t.  b.  in  South
Una  in  17M;  d.  IN  May.  17SM).  After  studying
law  four  years  in  the  Middle  Temple.  fffflrfflB.  he
returned  to  this  country  in  1754.  and  in  1768  waa
appointed  chief  justice  of  the  province  of  Kast
Florida.  He  was  deprived  of  his  office  during  the
Revolution  00  account  of  ■Pspootsd  sympathy  with
the  patriots  of  his  native  state,  but  was  afterward
reinstated,  and  spent  some  time  in  Kngland  with
his  family.  After  the  aloes  of  the  war  he  became
judge  of  the  admiralty  court  of  South  Carolina,
was  associate  justice  of  the  state  from  March  till
October,  17S!»,  and  in  the  latter  month  was  ap-
pointed the  lir-t  l'.  S.  Judge  for  the  district  of
South  Carolina.— His  son,  William,  soldier,  b.  in
St.  Augustine.  Pis* 80  Deo,  1776 ;d. in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  M  May.  1846,  was  the  youngest  of  tSSJ
brothers;  hi-  mother  died  soon  after  his  birth,  and
he  was  brought  up  as  the  foster-brother  of  Roliort
James  Turnhull.  the  champion  of  nullification.  He
was  educated  in  Kngland.  but  returned  to  his  home
at  his  father's  death  and  beosine  an  assistant  to
his  brother,  Jacob  Drayton,  then  clerk  of  the  eourl
of  general  sessions  in  Charleston.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  17t»7.  and  before  1*12  had  an
extensive  practice.  He  had  Income  a  lieutenant
in  the  "ancient  bsttaliotl  of  artillery"  in  1*01.  and

at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1*12.  though,  as  an

earnest federalist, he bed opposed it,  he  offered

hisserriosi  to  the  government,  gsve  up  his  law-
practice,  and  WM  HHIimhafc d  lieutenant-colonel

Of  the  Kith  C.  S.  infantry.  He  beOSWM  colonel  Of
tin-  isth  infantry  on  88  July.  1*12.  and  laspiOlOf
genend  OU 1 Aug.. 1814.  and  shortly  before  the

ilo-e  of  the  war  was  associated  with  Sen.  Boott  ami

Sen.  Macomb  in  the  preparation  of  ■  system  of  in-
fantry tactics  which  was  afterward  adopted  by  the
war  department. <m  his  resignation,  lo  June.  1C
the  government  WM  sbool  to  tender  him  a  brigadicr-
■eneraft  oonunhnion. lb-  was  recorder  of  Charles-
t«.n  in  1819-*24,and  was  then  elected  too
a  Union  democrat,  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the
resignation  of  Joel R.  Poinsett,  who  had  been  ap-
pointed  C.  S.  minister  to  Mexico. He  served  fn>m
[888  till  1888, end  in  1880;  though  bosttts  to  the
tarilT,  unllinchinglv  opposed  nullification. He  waa
a warm friend 3  President Jackson, and
offered  by  him  the  |M»rt folio  of  war  after  the  resig-
nation of  Sen.  Baton,  an<l  eJsotho  Bngltah  mission,

N.th  of  which  he  declined. After  the  QlOM  of  his


230


DRAYTON


DRAYTON


coinrn'ssional  career  he  retired  from  public  life
and  removed  to  Philadelphia,  partly  influenced  by
the  political  differences  resulting  from  his  course
in  the  nullification  contest.  In  1839-'40  he  was
Nicholas  Biddle's  successor  as  president  of  the  U.
S.  hank,  and  tried  to  revive  it,  but  retired  as  soon
as  he  had  placed  the  remaining  assets  of  the  bank
in  the  hands  of  assignees,  which  he  had  decided  to
be  the  only  honest  and  manly  course,  though  it
was  unpopular, — Thomas  Fe'nw  ick,  son  of  the
second  William,  b.  in  South  Carolina  about  1807;
d.  in  Florence,  S.  0, 18  Feb.,  1891.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1828,  and
served  in  garrison  in  Jefferson  barracks.  Mo.,
and  Newport,  Ky.,  in  1828-'32,  and  then  on  topo-
graphical duty,  but  resigned  on  15  Aug.,  1836,
and  became  a  civil  engineer  in  Charleston,  Louis-
ville, Kv.,  and  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  was  also  a
planter  In  St.  Luke's  parish,  S.  C,  in  1838-'61,  was
a  state  senator  in  1853-'6,  and  president  of  the
Charleston  and  Savannah  railroad  in  1853-'61.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Con-
federate service,  was  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  commanded  the  Confederate  troops  on
Hilton  Head  island  at  the  time  of  the  Port  Royal
expedition,  in  which  his  brother,  Capt.  Percival
Drayton,  commanded  a  national  vessel.  After  the
war  Gen.  Drayton  became  a  farmer  in  Georgia,  and
in  1878  was  made  president  of  the  South  Carolina
immigrant  association,  and  removed  to  Charlotte,
N.  ('.—  His  brother,  Percival,  naval  officer,  b.  in
South  Carolina,  25  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  4  Aug.,  1865,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man, 1  Dec,  1827,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  28
Feb.,  1838,  and  served  on  the  Brazilian,  Mediterra-
nean, and  Pacific  squadrons.  He  was  attached  to
the  naval  observatory  in  Washington  in  1852,  and
soon  afterward  was  associated  with  Commander,
afterward  Admiral,  Farragut  in  ordnance  experi-
ments, forming  a  close  intimacy  with  that  officer
that  lasted  through  life.  He  was  made  commander,
14  S-pt.,  1855,  took  part  in  the  Paraguay  expedi-
tion of  1858,  and  in  1860  was  on  ordnance  duty
at  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard.  Though  strongly
bound  by  family  ties  to  the  seceding  states,  he
rejected  all  offers  of  place  in  the  southern  confed-
eracy, and  remained  loyal  to  the  national  govern-
ment. He  commanded  the  "  Pocahontas  in  the
Port  Royal  expedition,  and  was  afterward  trans-
ferred to  the  "  Pawnee,"  in  which  he  made  val-
uable reconnois-
sancesof  St.  He-
lena sound  and
adjacent  waters.
He  was  pro-
moted to  cap-
tain on  16  July,
1862,  and  in  the
autumn  of  that
year  was  ordered
to  the  new  Er-
icsson monitor
•'  Passaic."  In
this  iron-clad  he
bombarded  Fort
McAllister,  and
was  in  the  first
attack  on  Sum-
ter under  Admi-
ral Du  Pont,  who
spoke  in  the
highest  terms,  in  his  last  report,  of  Drayton's
"  capacity  and  courage."  He  afterward  became
fleet-captain  of  the  West  Gulf  squadron,  and  com-
manded Farragut's  flag-ship,  the  "  Hartford,"  in


J^lfy&u


the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  5  Aug.,  1864.  In  his
detailed  report  of  that  action  Farragut  spoke  of
Dravton's  "coolness  and  ability,"  and  said:  ••  He
is  the  fleet-captain  of  my  squadron,  and  one  of
more  determined  energy,  untiring  devotion  to.
duty,  and  zeal  for  the  service,  tempered  by  great*
calmness,  I  do  not  think  adorns  anv  navy."  Capt.
Drayton  afterward  accompanied  Farragut  i
York,  where  a  formal  reception  was  given  to  the
two  officers  on  12  Dec.,  1864.  On  28  April,  1865,
Capt.  Drayton  was  made  chief  of  the  bureau  of
navigation,  and  died  while  discharging  the  duties
of  that  office.  He  was  especially  distinguished  as
a  flag-officer,  and  his  refined  manners  and  knowl-
edge of  languages  caused  his  services  in  that  posi-
tion to  be  sought  by  every  commanding  officer
with  whom  he  sailed.

DRAYTON,  William  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in
Drayton  Hall,  on  Ashley  river,  S.  C,  in  September,
1742;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  September,  1779. He
went  to  England
in 1753, under
the  care  of  Chief-
Justice Charles
Pinckney,incom-

f>any  with  the
atter's  two  sons
Charles  Cotes-
worth  and  Thom-
as, where,  after
studyingat  West-
minster school,
he  entered  Baliol
college,  Oxford,
in  1761,  and  re-
mained there  for
three  years.  Af-
ter his  return,  at
his  father's  call,

sued  a  course  o"f  //\/rJ  <!r?'tl<<t/W7l  ■

reading in his-  ^

tory  and  interna-
tional law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  becanie
an  active  writer  on  political  topics.  In  1769  he
published  letters  opposing  the  patriotic  associa-
tions in  the  colonies,  which  were  answered  by
Christopher  Gadsden  and  John  McKenzie.  Dray-
ton then  went  to  England,  republished  his  letters
there,  was  introduced  at  court,  and  on  27  Feb.,
1771,  received  from  the  king  the  appointment
of  privy  councillor  for  the  province  of  South  Caro-
lina. He  took  his  seat  on  3  April,  1772,  but  as  the
revolutionary  crisis  approached  he  was  often  in
opposition  to  the  crown  officers  and  judges,  and
aided  the  passage  of  laws  that  would  otherwise
have  been  negatived.  On  25  Jan.,  1774,  in  spite  of
the  jealousy  aroused by  his  course,  he  was  ap-

Sointed  an  assistant  judge  by  his  uncle,  Lieut.-Gov.
lull.  Just  before  the  session  of  the  first  Conti-
nental congress  he  published  a  pamphlet,  addressed
to  that  body,  in  which,  under  the  signature  of
"  Freeman,"  he  drew  up  a  bill  of  rights,  and  sub-
stantially marked  out  the  line  of  conduct  that  it
afterward  pursued.  This  brought  on  him  an  attack
from  the  chief  justice,  Thomas  Knox  Gordon,  in
consequence  of  which  he  was  suspended  from  his
offices  under  the  crown,  but  he  lost  none  of  his  in-
fluence in  the  state.  He  became  a  member  of  the
"council  of  safety"  in  1775, and  soon  afterward  its
president,  and  was  active  in  advising  the  seizure
of  the  provincial  arsenals  and  British  mails.  1 1 « -
was  also  president  of  the  provincial  congress  in
1775.  and  in  March,  1776,  after  the  formation  of  a
temporary  constitution,  became  a  privy  councillor


DRKW


*«


and  chief  jn^t »«■«•  <>f  the  state.  lie  delivered  a
OBirga  1<>  tin-  grand  jury  of  Charleston  "ii  88  April.
in  wni.  h  hi  declared  that  tin-  kinc  had  aUlicated
t Ii**  government,  iiml  luul  DO  BOM  authority  over
til.-  |m-..|i|.-  of  Booth  Carolina.  <  >n  10  Oot.  1776,
ami  in  October,  1777.  hi  •  l.-li v.r.-<  1  other  charge*
bearing  <>u  tin*  question  of  indctteudeucc,  which
had  a  puowful  effect  both  in  this  country  ami
Great  Britain.  During  tin-  alwence  of  John  Kut-
. in  1777  tin'  douse  of  prccidenl  of  tin-  state

devolved  upon  him,  and  in  1778  he  was  elected  a
Bate  to  the  Continental  congress,  of  which  he
continued  an  active  member  till  his  death.  Bi
strongly  opjMsed,  in  a  pamphlet,  the  proposition^
of  conciliation  presented  by  Ijord  Howe,  and  on  IS
July.  177M,  was  appointe<l.  with  John  Hancock  and
William  I>uer.  t<>  conduct  the  French  minister  to
Philadelphia.  Hi  left  a  narrative  of  the  events  of
the  Revolution,  which  wa-  edited  and  published  by
his  son.  (iov.  John  Drayton,  under  the  title
'•  Memoirs  of  the  American  Revolution  "  (2  vols.,
Charleston,  1821). — His  only  son.  John,  governor
of  Booth  Carolina,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in  1  T*»<» ;
d.  in  Charleston,  S.  ('.,  U  Nov.,  1888,  was  educated
at  Princeton,  under  Dr.  Withenpoon,  and  in  Kng-
laml.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  began  practice
in  Charleston,  and  was  elected  lieutenant-governor
in  1?J8,  becoming  governor  by  the  death  of  Gov.
Kdward  Uutledge,  23  Jan.,  1800.  He  was  elected
to  the  office  in  December,  served  two  years,  and
was  again  elected  for  the  term  of  1808-'10.  While
governor  in  1801,  he  used  his  influence  for  the
establishment  of  South  Carolina  college.  On  7
May,  1812,  he  was  appointed  by  President  Madison
l'.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  South  Carolina,  and
served  till  his  death.  Besides  his  father's  memoirs.
Gov.  Drayton  published  "  Lottitl  written  during  a
Tour  through  the  Northern  and  Eastern  States  "
(17941  and  -  A  View  of  South  Carolina"  (1802).

DRKSSKR,  Horace,  lawyer,  d.  27  Jan..  1877.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1828.  Mr.  Dreeeer
was  one  of  the  first  lawyers  who  spoke  in  the  New
York  courts  in  behalf  of  the  negro  race,  and  his
best  energies  were  devoted  to  defending  ami  assist-
ing fugitive  slaves.  He  wrote  much  on  constitu-
tional questions,  and  published  "The  Mat  tic
Record  of  the  American  lb-hellion"  (New  York,
1863),  and  "  Internal  Revenue  Laws  as  Amended
to  Julv.  lHCC,"  (New  York,  1866).

DEEU1LLETTB8,  Gabriel,  iesuit,  b.  in
Franco  in  1593 ;  d.  in  Quebec  in  1681.  He  came
to  this  country  in  August,  1643,  and  was  sent  the
next  year  to  winter  among  the  Algonquin*  Here
he  lost  his  sight,  which  he  recovered  in  an  extraor-
dinary manner — miraculously,  as  he  supposed.  In
1650  he  was  sent  to  Boston  to  pro|x>se  a  per-
petual alliance  between  the  French  and  Knglish
colonies  independent  of  any  wars  between  the
sovereigns  of  England  and  France.  From  some  of
the  writings  of  Father  Dreuillettes  it  would  appear
that  a  proposal  to  this  effect  had  come  from  the
elder  Winthrop.  Dreuillettes  set  out  in  August,
1650,  and  after  much  suffering  reached  Coussinook
rusta)  and  presented  his  credentials  to  John
Winthrop,  the  Plymouth  agent,  who  went  with
him  to  Boston.  There  he  saw  Gov.  Dudlev,  of
Massachusetts,  who  referred  him  to  Plymouth,  as
Konnabeo  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  that  col-
ony. He  was  received  favorably  by  (iov.  Bradford,
but  bond  that  only  the  commissioners  of  the
I'nited  colonies  had  power  to  enter  into  any  tr.
After  many  unsuccessful  efforts  to  influence  th.

gateo  of  the  colonies,  he  returned  to  K~enn<
vi-itmg the Knglish missionary John Eliot on
the  way,  and  then  went  to  Quebec, Full  details  of


his  JOfJOMJ are  given in his  "Narrc  du  voyage
pour  h~  and  in  hi  i  ad

Don,  Joaiin.iii  Winthrop."  lb-  wv  next  placed
among  the  Montagnai*.  KristinOMB.  Papinachoia,
and  Abnaki-.  He  a.-coiii|*anie<l  a  French  exp
tion  to  the  west  in  1656,  and  made  an  unsuccessful
attempt  to  reach  Hudson's  I  my  by  land  in  1661.
After  instructing  Marquette  in  th.' Indian  dialect,
he  followed  him  to  the  vast,  and.  although  broken
by  age  and  infirmities,  he  labored  at  Sault  St.  Marie
up  to  Ii70|  wbiO  hi  returned  to  l^iii

MtEW,  Daniel, capitalist,  b.  in  Carmel,  Putnam
N.  Y.,  in  178M;  d.  in  New  York  city,  I!»  Sent,
1H7!».  He  bOfM  active  lib-  n>  a  cattle-dealer,  hut
soon  became  connected  with  st.amlx>at-buildmg,
ami  constructed  many  of  the  Hudson  river  hoau.
Still  later  he  became  ideiititied  with  railroad  enter-
prises, and  was  a  prominent  speoulaftof  in  Wall
street.  When  in  the  height  of  pros|«-ritv  his
fortune  was  estimated  at  from  $5,000,000  to'$l.*.,-
000,000.  In  1866  he  was  treasurer  of  the  Erie
railroad  company,  to  which  he  lent  the  sum  of
$3,500,000,  receiving  as  security  $3.<M»0,ooo  of
shares  of  unused  stock  and  $3,01)0,000  of  boadi
convertible  into  stock.  He  U-gan  to  sell  the  »t(M  k
"short"  at  the  prevailing  high  prion-  OomoHm
Vanderbilt  and  his  adherents  being  the  purchasers.
When  the  OOntWOti  matured  Drew  converted  the
bonds  into  stock  and  threw  into  the  market  the
58,000  shares  of  stock  that  he  possessed.  The
matter  resulted  in  litigation,  which  drove  Drew
and  his  party  to  New  Jersey,  where  they  remained
until  the  case  was  settled.  Drew  afterward  lost
heavily,  and  when  the  firm  of  Ketiyon.  C«.x  \  I
of  which  he  was  a  partner.  Coiled,  hi  was  noipollon
to  make  an  assignment  ami  ultimately  to  go  into
bankruptcy.  He  gave  liltcrally  to  Methodist  edu-
cational institutions,  bonding  the  "  Drew  ladies'
seminary"  at  Carmel,  and  giving  large  sums  to
Weslevan  universitv,  Middletown,  Conn.  In  1866
he  gave  $250,000  to  found  the  Drew  theological
seminary  of  Madison,  N.  J.,  and  increased  this  sum
by  successive  donations  to  nearly  $1,000,000.

DREW,  George  Alexander,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  mar  the  village  of  Williamstown.  Glengarry  OOl,
Out..  88  Feb..  1827.  He  is  descended  from  Scotofa
loyalists  who  settled  in  Canada  at  the  time  of  the
American  Revolution.  He  was  educated  at  the
grammar-schools  in  Williamstown  and  Cornwall,
studied  law  under  the  late  John  Sandfidd  Mac-
doneid  at  Cornwall,  and  was  calle<l  to  the  l>ar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1854.  In  1866  hi  settl.-d  in
Flora,  in  that  province,  and  practised  his  profes-
sion. In  1*»:7  he  was  elected  to  parliament  for
North  Wellington,  and  was  re-elected  for  the  same
constituency  in  is7*. At  Inert  loot  Jut  ton  of  portln

ment  In  1886  he  retired  from  |H>litics.  and  was  ap-
points! judge  of  the  countv  of  Wellington,  and
afterward  local  Jodgi  of  the  liigh  court  of  justice.
DKFAV.  John,  actor,  b.  in  Dublin.  Inland.  3
Sept,  1886:  d.  In  Philadelphia.  Pa, 61  May.  1868.
lb- made  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage  at  the
Bower v  theatre.  New  York,  in  1846,  as  Dr.  O'Toole
in  "The  Irish  Tutor."  After  acting  for  several
seasons  at  the  AHnuiv.  N.  Y..  museum,  he  visited
Philadelphia,  and  at  'once  boOHM  a  favorite,  ap-
poaling  then"  for  thi  tiiM  time  at  the  Chestnut
street  theatre.  88  Auu'..  1866, OJ  Trapanti  in  "She
Would  and  She  Would  Not."  In  1868,  in  conjunc-
tion with  William  Wheathv.  he  became  manager
Of  the  Arch  street  theatre  in  the  same  city.  After
acting  throughout  the  I'nited  States,  he  visited
England  in  1865,  California  in  1K5H.  ami  Australia
in  1868.  He  returned  (O  this  country  in  1862,  and
modi  his  last  appearance  on  any  stage  on  9  May  of


389


DREXKI.


DIMSLER


that  year.  He  was  considered  the  best  Iri-h  <■<>-
median  on  the  American  stage.— His  wife,  Louisa,
actress,  b.  in  London,  England,  10  Jan.,  1820,  was
the  daughter  of  an  English  actor  named  Lane,
and  first  appeared  in  child's  parts  at  right  years
of  age.  In  1828  she  came  to  the  United  States
with  her  mother,  acted  in  New  York  and  Phila-
delphia, and  then  visited  Jamaica  and  other  West
India  islands,  returning  to  this  count ry  in  1832.
In  1888  she  again  played  in  the  New  York  theatres,
and  in  1834,  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  essayed  the
part  of  Julia  in  the  "  Hunchback,"  at  the  Boston
theatre.  In  1835  Miss  Lam-  went  to  New  Orleans,
where  she  played  Lady  Teazle  in  "  School  for  Scan-
dal," and  other  high  comedy  parts ;  as  she  says,
"  being  leading  lady  at  the  pay  of  twenty  dollars
per  week."  She  married  Henry  Hunt,  a  veteran
English  opera  singer,  in  1836,  and  in  1842-'6  ap-
peared at  intervals  in  New  York  city  as  a  member
of  the  stock  companies  of  various  theatres,  sustain-
ing parts  in  domestic  dramas,  burlesques,  and  light
comedy.  In  1847  she  went  to  Chicago,  Milwaukee,
St.  Louis,  Mobile,  and  New  Orleans,  where,  as  she
says,  "  cold  tea  and  molasses  and  water  were  pro-
vided as  beverages  in  plays  where  the  business  re-
quired actors  to  partake  of  liquid  refreshments,  the
management,  for  once,  taking  high  temperance

f rounds."  In  1848,  after  separating  from  her  first
usband,  she  married  George  Mossop,a  young  Irish
comedian,  who  died  in  1840,  and  in  the  following
year  she  became  the  wife  of  Mr.  Drew.  In  1857  Mrs.
Drew  went  on  a  tour  through  the  country  with  her
husband,  and  in  1861  she  assumed  the  sole  manage-
ment of  the  Arch  street  theatre,  which  has  since  been
under  her  control.  In  her  youth,  notwithstanding
the  grace  and  refinement  of  her  manner,  she  was  too
self-conscious,  and  her  acting  displayed  neither
force  nor  originality.  But  study,  experience,  and
earnest  emulation  have  finally  made  her  one  of  the
most  versatile  and  finished  artists  on  the  English-
speaking  stage.  Her  greatest  successes  have  been
in  high  comedy  parts.

DREXEL,  Francis  Martin,  banker,  b.  in
Dornbirn,  Austrian  Tyrol,  7  April,  1792 :  d;  5  June,
1863.  In  1803  he  was  sent  to  study  Italian  and
the  fine  arts  in  a  Catholic  institution  near  Turin.
On  his  return  in  1809  he  found  his  country  invaded
by  the  French,  and  to  escape  conscription  he  went
to  Switzerland  and  subsequently  to  Paris.  In  1812
he  returned  to  the  Tyrol  incognito,  and,  finding  the
conscription  still  in  force,  went  to  Berne  and  con-
tinued his  study  of  painting.  He  sailed  for  the
United  States  in  1817,  from  Amsterdam,  and  set-
tled in  Philadelphia.  After  a  few  years  he  went
to  Peru  and  Chili,  painting  portraits,  among  which
was  one  of  Gen.  Simon  Bolivar,  with  whom  he
contracted  a  warm  friendship.  He  visited  South
America  twice,  and  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  re-
mained for  some  time.  After  his  permanent  set-
tlement in  Philadelphia  he  founded  the  banking
house  of  Drexel  &  Co.  in  1837,  which  represents
one  of  the  largest  enterprises  of  that  character  in
the  United  States. The  Paris  house,  Drexel,  Har-

{'es  &  Co..  was  founded  in  1868,  and  the  New  York
louse,  Drexel,  Morgan  &  Co.,  in  1871. — His  son,
Anthony  Joseph,  banker,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1826.  is  now  at  the  head  of  the  Philadelphia
bank,  having  been  identified  with  this  enterprise
since  the  age  of  thirteen.  He  is  zealous  in  pro-
moting science  and  art,  especially  music,  and  con-
tributes largely  to  philanthropic  and  educational
interests. — Another  son,  Joseph  Wilhelm,  bank-
er, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  Jan.,  1833 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  25  March,  1888,  was  educated  in  the
Philadelphia  high-school,  and  travelled  extensively.


He  retired  from  business  in  1876.  He  held  the
offices  in  New  York  of  chairman  of  sanitary  com-
mission, commissioner  of  education,  president  of
the  New  York  philharmonic  society,  trustee  of  the
Metropolitan  museum  of  art.  trustee  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences,  and  director  of  the  Met*
ropolitan  opera-house.  Among  his  philanthropic
interests  is  a  200-acre  farm  near  New  York,  where
persons  without  work  are  lodged,  clothed,  fed,  and
taught  agriculture  until  places  are  procured  for
them.  He  owned  a  large  tract  of  land  in  Maryland,
which  has  been  divided  into  lota,  and  houses,  mills,
etc,  erected  upon  them.  These  farms  are  sold  to
poor  persons  at  cost.  About  7,000  acres  in  Michi-
gan is  destined  for  the  same  purpose.

DRINKER,  Anna,  poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa,  8  Dec,  1827.  She  was  educated  in  Philadel-
phia, and  has  resided  principally  in  Montrose,  Pa.
She  is  best  known  by  her  pen-name,  "  Edith  May."
Her  contributions  to  "  Sartain's  Magazine  "  and  to
the  "Home  Journal,"  about  1848-'50,  attracted
much  attention.  She  has  published  "  Poems  by
Edith  May"  (Philadelphia,  1854);  "Tales  and
Verses  for  Children  "  (1855) ;  and  "  Katy's  Story."

DRISCOL,  Michael,  clergyman,  b.  in  Drum-
beagh,  county  Clare,  Ireland,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Troy,
N.  Y..  in  1880.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in
1831,  and  was  ordained  in  1840.  He  exercised  his
ministry  in  Kentucky  and  New  York,  and  attended
the  victims  of  the  ship-fever  in  Canada.  He  was
superior  of  the  theological  seminary  at  Fordham,
and  afterward  president  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  col-
lege, New  York.  He  erected  the  church  of  St.
Michael  in  Troy,  N.  Y.

DIM SIl'S.  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  1602;  d.
about  1673.  His  name  is  also  written  as  Dries  and
Driesch.  His  parents  were  Germans,  and  he  was
educated  in  the  German  language.  He  was  pastor
of  the  Dutch  church  in  London,  and  could  preach
in  German,  Dutch,  French,  and  English.  The
West  India  company  were  anxious  to  have  a  min-
ister that  could  occasionally  officiate  in  English,
and  requested  his  appointment  to  New  Amsterdam.
The  Classis  asked  him  deliver  a  sermon  before  them
in  Dutch,  in  order  to  test  his  pronunciation,  and
he  left  Holland  on  4  April,  1652,  and  came  to  New
Amsterdam,  having  charge  of  the  church  until
1673.  On  account  of  his  knowledge  of  English  he
was  employed  as  envoy  to  the  governor  of  Virginia,
to  negotiate  a  treaty.  He  united  with  Megapolen-
sis  in  protesting  against  the  Lutherans.  In  order
that  the  youth  might  secure  a  classical  education
in  New  Amsterdam,  Drisius  proposed  to  establish
a  Latin  school.  He  was  often  called  to  preach  to
the  French  and  English,  and  for  a  while  did  so
once  a  month  to  the  Huguenot  and  Vandois  set-
tlers on  St  a t  iMi  Island,  but  after  a  few  years  was
compelled  to  relinquish  these  services  on  account
of  failing  health.

DRISLER,  Henry,  scholar,  b.  on  Staten  Island,
N.  Y.,  27  Dec,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1839,  for  several  years  ne  was  classical  in-
structor in  the  grammar-school  of  the  college,  was
appointed  tutor  of  Greek  and  Latin  in  Colum-
bia in  1843,  adjunct  professor  of  those  languages
in  1845,  professor  of  Latin  in  1857,  and  professor
of  Greek  in  1867.  During  the  absence  of  Presi-
dent Barnard  in  1878  he  was  acting  president  of
the  university.  He  was  engaged  with  Dr.  Anthon
in  the  preparation  of  a  series  of  text-books,  ami
has  re-edited,  with  additions.  Liddell  and  Scott's
edition  of  Passow's  Greek  Lexicon,  which  roachai
a  sale  of  25.000  copies  in  two  years  after  publica-
tion (1851-'3).  He  had  in  press  a  greatly  enlarged
edition  of  Yonge's  English-Greek  Lexicon,  which


DUO:


drum


WSJ)  destroyed  by  fire,  but  was  re-stere<  t  \ ;
printed  in  l*?i».  lie  has  also  published  psjnphlsU
bool-booki|  tad  was  associate  editor  of  the
seventh  revised  Oxford  edition  of  Liddell  and
Scott,  published  in  1NX1.  and  is  general  editor  <>f
Harper  and  Brothers'  new  classical  serlML

DBOLET,  Unstav*  kdolphe,  Canadian  lawyer,
h.  in  St.  Pie,  (^ucliec,  10  Feb.,  1844  Be  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Hyaointhe  college,  and  admitted  to  the
Montreal  i«ir  in  18M. Be  waa  a  member  <>f  the

£i  hi-  oentennial  exhibition  at  Philadelphia
commissioner  for  Canada  at  tin-  Paris uni-
versal exhibition  of  1H7X.  and  a  member  of  thl  in-
ternational jury  of  a  wan  Is  in  Paris  the  same  year.
Bl  travelled much in Bajropn,  Asia,  and  Africa.

He  has  lan'ii  a  promoter  of  the  projeol  ofontthmnV*

men  permanent  Canadian  exhibition  m  Paris  to

promote  trade  and  establish  new  eoinmercial  rela-
tions lift  ween  Canada  and  the  continent  of  BttlOna.
He  was  decorated  and  made  a  knight  of  the  Legion
of  Honor  bj  the  French  government  in  1879*  and
was  created  a  knight  of  the  Older  of  St.  Gregory
the  («reat  by  Pope  Pius  IX.  in  1M77.  Be  has  writ-
ten many  valuable  pnpere  for  reviews  and  period-
icals  of  Canada  on  topics  in  politics,  political
economy,  and  literature.

RROS'K,  Eaton  Sylvester,  journalist,  b.  in
Zanesville.  Ohio.  25  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  18M,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  New  York  liar  in  1*09.  Since  1880  he  has
hasjj  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Her-
ald." as  a  writer  on  law  subjects.  He  has  contrib-
uted numerous  articles  to  periodical  literature  and
to  the  ••  American  Cyclopaedia,"  the  "Annual  Cy-
clopaedia," and  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."
and  is  the  author  of  a  treatise  on  "  Law  of  Prop-
erty in  Intellectual  Productions,  embracing  Copy-
right and  Playright "  (Boston  and  London,  1879),
winch  was  the  first  exhaustive  treatise  ever  pub-
lished on  that  subject.

DROWN,  Thomas  Messlnger,  chemist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  March.  1848.  Be  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Philadelphia  high-school  in  1859,  and
at  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  18J52.  Subsequently  he  studied  at
the  Freilterg,  Saxonv,  mining-school  and  in  the
University  of  Heidelberg.  During  1869-'?0  he  was
instructor  of  metallurgy  in  Harvard,  and  from
1*74  till  1KX1  he  held  the  chair  of  analytical  chem-
istry in  Lafayette  college.  In  1885  he  was  called
to  a  similar  place  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of
technology,  Boston.  Prof.  Drown  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  American  institute  of
mining  engineers,  its  secretary,  and  editor  of  its
"Transactions"  from  1H71  till  1881  He  has  pub-
lishe.l  numerous  professional  papers  on  metallurgy
and  chemistry,  and  also  addresses,  which  have  ap-
peared chiefly  in  the  "Transactions  of  the  Ameri-
can Institute  of  Engineers."

DROWN K,  Solomon,  physician,  b.  In  Provi-
dence. BL  I.,  ii  March,  I7.*>:f;'d.  at  Mount  BygeJa.
in  Poster,  BL  !..•*»  Feb..  1h:{4.  Bis  grandfather  and
father  were  also  named  Solomon.  The  latter  set-
tled m  Proridonos  as  ■  merchant  in  1780,  and  for

half  a  century  l>ore  a  prominent  part  in  the  affairs
of  the  town.  Dr.  Drowne  was  graduated  at  Rhode
Island  oollegs  (now  Brown  university)  in  177:5.
studied  medicine,  and  received  medical  degreei
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  and  from

Dartmouth.  Be  served  in  several  states  as  •UfSjBOU
in  various  hospitals  and  regiments  during  the  wif
of  the  Revolution.  In  the  autumn  of  I
went  on  a  cruise  as  surgeon  in  the  privateer
"Hope,"  and  Ids  journal  of  this  cruise,  with  the
gy  of  hi.s  family,  has  been  printed. He  won


the  regard  of  [aUhyattoand  the  Counts  de  Rorham-

beau  and  d'Kstaing,  as  well  as  of

cers,  to  such  a  dogTM by his  msdiosl  abilr

skill  as  a  surgeon that the  chief  of  I

staff  intrusted  invalid  r4lttfH  to  his  care  when

they left for  home. In 1781  Bl I  to the

Imard of fellows  in Brown  univi  \fter  a

tour  in  17*4  '*»  in  Kngland,  Holland.  Belgium,  and
France,  visiting  hospitals,  medical  schools,  etc., and
besoming  aoqnainted  at  Paris  with  Franklin,  Jef-
ferson, and  other  distinguished  nun.  he  resumed
rractice  at  Providence,  but  in  l?sx  went  t..  Ohio,
le  nitastpnttd  with  Gen.  St.  Clair  and  others  in
the  treaties  at  Fort  Mannar  in  l>s  'It,  with  <  orn-
Planter  and  other  chiefs,  and  delivered  the  first
anniversary  oration  on  the  settlement  of  Marietta,
7  April,  17*9.  Inquired  health  lad  H  his  sending
several  years  in  western  Yirgitiia  ami  southern
Pennsylvania,  but  in  1*<H  he  returned  to  Rhode
Island,  and  resided  in  Foster  the  remainder  of  his
days,  occupied  with  his  professional  duties,  Mi  ex-
tensive botanical  garden,  and  various  scientific,
classical,  and  literary  studies. In  1811  he  was  ap-

Jtointcd  professor  of  botany  and  materia  mediennt
Jrown,  and  in  1H19  was  emoted  a  delegate  to  the
convention  that  formed  the  national  pharma< .  cm  as
by  the  Rhode  Island  medical  society,  of  which  he
was  vice-president,  fle  took  an  active  j»art  in  the
organization  and  proceedings  of  the  Rhode  Island
society  for  the  encouragement  of  domestic  imlus-
try,  before  which  he  delivered  addresses.  In  1*24,
in  connection  with  his  son,  William  Dmwne,  he
published  "The  Fanner's  Guide,"  a  comprehensive
work  on  husbandry  and  gardening.  He  filled  sev-
eral public  offices,  contributed  nnmeroos  s,  (an-
tific  and  literary  articles  to  journals  of  the  day.
and  participated  in  the  ntww— Aingm  ,,(  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  arts  and  sciences  and  other  learned
bodies,  of  which  he  was  a  member.  During  the
latter  part  of  his  life  he  delivered  several  OOttTMS
of  botanical  lectures,  and  many  public oratkme  and
addressee  of  decided  merit,  among  the  most  im-
portant of  which  wen-  a  "  Kulogy  00  Washing-
ton." 22  Feb.,  1800,  and  an  "Oration  in  Aid  of  the
Cause  Of  the  Creeks."  88  Feb..  Ii

DRUM,  Richard  Coulter,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania, 88  May.  1885,  Be  studied  at  Jefferson
college,  entered  the  army  as  a  private  in  the  1st
Pennsylvania  volunteers  on  8  Dec.,  1846,  was  en-
gaged at  the  siege
of  Yera  Cruz,  and
appointed  a  2d  lieu-
tenant of  U.  S.  in-
fantry oil  18  Feb.,
1*47.  Be  was  bre-
vetted  1st  lieuten-
ant for  bravery  at
Chapultepecand  the

capture  of  the  city

Of  Mexico.  After
the  war  with  Mexi-
co he  was  transferred
to  the  artillery,  was

engaged  in  the

ti<  n  at  Blue  Water.
Neb.,  served  M  aide-
de-camp to (tell.

Barney  in  the  Biou

expeduion,  and  Wit  in  Kansas  during  the  troubles
Of  1858.  From  1KVJ  till  1858  he  served  |
ing  assistant  adjutant-general  at  the  headquar-
ters of  the  Deportment  of  the  West,  ami  subse-
quently as  adjutant  in  the  artillcry-sehool.  At
the  lie'ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  ap|«ointed
assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  U.  3.  army,  and


234


dkumooolk


DRUM MONO


promoted  to  captain  on  14  May,  1861,  major  on  8
Aug.,  1861,  and  lieutenant-colonel  on  17  July,  \8to.
On  84  Sept..  is(i4,  he  was  brevetted  colonel,  and  on
18  March,  1865,  brigadier-general  for  st-rviccs  during
the  war.  He  continued  in  the  adjutant-general's
department,  was  stationed  in  1866-'8  at  Phila-
delphia, in  1868-'9  at  Atlanta,  the  headquarters  of
the  Department  of  the  South,  receiving  promotion
as  colonel  on  22  Feb.,  1869,  and  on  15  June,  1880,
succeeded  Gen.  Townsend,  on  the  latter's  retire-
ment, as  adjutant-general  of  the  army,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-genoral. — His  elder  brother,
Simon  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Greensburg,  West-
moreland co.,  Pa.,  in  June,  1807;  killed  in  action
at  the  storming  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  13  Sept.,
1847,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1830.  He  was  assistant  instructor  of  infantry
tactics  there  in  1830-'2,  was  engaged  in  the  Florida
war  and  the  Canada  border  disturbances,  and  as
captain  of  artillery  in  the  occupation  of  Texas  in
1846,  served  through  the  Mexican  war,  distin-
guished himself  at  Contreras,  where  he  recaptured
two  field-pieces  taken  from  his  regiment  at  Buena
Vista,  ana  fell  at  the  assault  on  the  city  of  Mexico
after  he  had  entered  the  Belen  gate  while  directing
the  fire  of  a  gun  he  had  captured.

DRUMGOOLE,  John  C,  clergyman,  b.  in
County  Longford,  Ireland,  in  1828;  d.  >in  New
York  city,  28  March,  1888.  He  studied  in  the
United  States,  and,  after  being  ordained  priest,
offered  himself  to  Archbishop  McCloskey  to  estab-
lish a  mission  for  homeless  and  houseless  chil-
dren. His  first  effort  was  to  take  charge  of  "St.
Vincent's  lodging-house  "  in  Warren  street,  which
was  transferred  to  his  care  by  the  Society  of  St.
Vincent  de  Paul  in  1871.  He  changed  the  title
to  that  of  "  St.  Vincent's  home  for  the  protec-
tion of  homeless  and  destitute  boys."  Here  he
opened  evening-schools,  and  lodged  homeless  boys
at  a  nominal  price,  with  a  free  dinner  on  Sun-
days to  encourage  them  to  come  for  religious  in-
struction. The  extraordinary  efforts  the  boys
made  to  throw  off  bad  habits  encouraged  him  to
greater  enterprises.  As  there  was  not  room  enough
in  the  building  in  Warren  street  for  the  children
who  applied  for  admission,  Father  Drumgoole  was
forced  to  build  a  larger  house.  To  obtain  funds
he  established  the  Mission  of  the  immaculate  virgin
and  St.  Joseph's  union,  and  made  arrangements  lor

Sublishing  an  illustrated  annual,  entitled  "The
[omeless  Child  and  Messenger  of  St.  Joseph's
Union."  The  fund  accumulated  from  the  sub-
scriptions to  this  paper  enabled  Father  Drum-
foole  to  purchase  the  property  on  the  corner  of
iafayette  place  and  Great  Jones  street,  and  to
erect  there,  at  a  cost  of  over  $400,000,  the  first  house
of  the  "Mission  of  the  immaculate  virgin,"  in
which  more  than  500  boys  are  boarded  and  edu-
cated. Shortly  afterward  he  purchased  a  farm  of
over  600  acres  on  Staten  Island,  gave  it  the  name
of  Mount  Loretto  farm,  and  erected  on  it  large
buildings  in  which  nearly  700  children  are  com-
fortably housed.  The  expense  of  carrying  on  these
establishments  has  come  almost  entirely  from  the
subscriptions  to  Father  Drumgoole's  paper.  From
1871  he  provided  for  15,730  children.  But  the
benefits  of  his  mission  have  not  been  confined  to
children.  During  the  same  period  6,264  destitute
adults  have  been  clothed,  thousands  of  outside
poor  have  been  fed  every  year,  and  the  number
who  receive  their  breakfasts  gratuitously  every
day  exceeds  200.

DRUMMOND,  Sir  Gordon,  British  soldier,  b.
in  Quebec  in  1771 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  10
Oct.,  1854. His  father,  a  member  of  a  Perthshire


(Scotland)  family  of  distinction,  was  paymaster*
genemlof  the  forces  at  Quebec.  The  son  entered
the  army,  as  ensign  in  the  1st  royals,  in  17B0L  In
1794  he  had  attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,
with  the  command  of  the  8th  or  king's  regiment
He  served  in  the  campaign  in  Holland  in  1 1
and  especially  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege  of
Nimeguen  in  1795;  was  at  Minorca  in  1800,  and
took  part  in  all  the  battles  in  Egypt  until  the  sur-
render of  Cairo  and  Alexandria.  He  afterward
served  as  a  staff -officer  at  Jamaica  for  a  few  years,
and  in  Canada  in  1808— '11,  being  promoted  lieu-
tenant-general in  the  latter  year.  In  August,
1H1:{,  he  went  to  Canada  again  as  second  in  com-
mand to  Sir  George  Prevost.  In  December  he
stormed  Fort  Niagara,  captured  a  large  amount  of
naval  and  military  stores,  and  planned  the  attack
on  Black  Rock  and  Buffalo,  which  was  successfully
executed,  31  Dec.,  1818,  by  a  small  force  under  Sir
P.  Riall.  In  May,  1814,  the  military  force  under
Lieut.-Gen.  Drummond,  and  the  fleet  under  Sir
James  Yeo,  attacked  and  took  Oswego,  and  de-
stroyed a  sixty-four-gun  ship  which  had  just  been
completed,  together  with  barracks,  works,  and
stores.  He  commanded  at  the  obstinately  con-
tested battle  of  Lundv's  Lane,  25  July,  1814,  and
next  invested  Fort  Erie,  assaulting  the  outer
works  so  vigorously  that  an  entrance  was  effected
by  Col.  William  Drummond.  But  at  the  moment
when  the  assailants  were  confident  of  victory  a
large  quantity  of  ammunition  which  had  been  placed
under  the  platform  ignited  from  the  firing  of
the  guns  in  the  rear,  the  result  being  that  the
greater  part  of  the  British  forces  which  had  en-
tered the  fort  was  blown  into  the  air.  This  dis-
aster compelled  Gen.  Drummond  to  relinquish  the
Eroject  of  capturing  Fort  Erie.  Soon  afterward
e  succeeded  Gen.  Prevost  in  command  of  the
forces  in  Canada,  and  as  administrator  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  was  eminently  successful.  He  re-
turned to  Great  Britain  in  June,  1816,  and  in  1817
received  the  grand  cross  of  the  Bath.

DRUMMOND,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Bristol
Mills,  Me.,  16  Oct.,  1H0<>;  d.  in  Wheaton,  111..  15
May,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin.  studied
law  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
fhere.  He  removed  to  Galena,  111.,  in  1835.  and  in
1840-'l  was  a  member  of  the  Illinois  legislature.
He  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of
Illinois  in  February,  1850,  and  in  1854  removed  to
Chicago  In  1855  the  state  was  divided  into  two
judicial  districts,  and  he  became  judge  of  the
northern  one.  In  December,  1869.  ne  was  made
judge  of  the  U.  6.  circuit  court  for  the  7th  dis-
trict, including  the  states  of  Illinois,  Indiana,  and
Wisconsin,  but  resigned  in  July.  1884.  and  after-
ward lived  in  retirement  at  Wheaton,  111.

DRUMMOND,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.
in  Scotland ;  d.  in  Virginia,  20  Jan.,  1677.  In  1663,
when  a  charter  to  the  territory  extending  from
the  36th  degree  of  latitude  to  the  St.  John's  river  in
Florida  was  granted  by  Charles  II.  to  the  Duke  of
Albemarle,  Lord  Clarendon,  Lord  Ashley  Cooper,
Lord  Berkeley,  and  his  brother,  Sir  William,  the
settlement  on  the  Chowan,  near  Edenton,  N.  < '..
established  ten  years  before  by  Roger  Green,  was
organized  as  the  Albemarle  County  Colony,  with
Drummond  for  governor.  He  received  his  ap-
pointment from  Sir  William  Berkeley,  governor
of  Virginia  and  joint  proprietary  of  Carolina,  who,
according  to  instructions  from  his  associates,  insti-
tuted a  simplel  form  of  government  and  an  easy
tenure  of  lands.  In  order  to  encourage  settle-
ment, dissenters  were  tolerated  in  the  new  colon  v.
Drummond himself being a Pn?sbyterian. lie


IHCl  MM-.M,


DUANB


MP


mid  returned  t«.  Virginia,  where  he  enjoyed
esteem  and  |m .[.iilnri t y.  in  the  great  rebellion  <>f
be  ixitv  •  prominent  put.  When  Berkeley,
after  being  tricnteoed  Into  laming  ■  commission
fight  tin-  Indians,  proclaimed  tin-
general  ami  his  (oilowara  rebels,  anil  endeavored
t<>  raise  a  force  to  surprise  them.  I >ruiiiiii<>nil
brought tin-  news  t<>  the  catni>. WMB  the  gov-

r  Bed  before  Bacon's  returning  km  hi  pro-
posed thiit  Berkeley  atoold  be  deposed,  asserting
that  be  could  find  precedents  in  em  ami. hi

Otdi  <>f  Virginia.  The  Utjdfag  planters,  meeting
\|  ill. llr  Plantation,  now  Williamsburg,  agreed
ipiM.rt  Baoon  against  the  governor.  When
Sir  William  Berkeley  returned  with  a  band  of
hirelings,  collected  at  Accomack,  and  occupied
Jamestown,  Dnimmnnd  prepared  for  defence,  and
for  Bacon,  who  had  returned  from  an  MM-
ditiuii  against  the  Indians,  and  had  disbanded  his
men.  After  the  recapture  of  Jamestown  he  coun-
selled the  burning  of  the  capital,  removed  the
records  to  a  place  of  safety,  and  with  his  own
hand  applied  the  torch  to  his  dwelling,  one  of
the  l»e>t  boom  in  the  town.  After  the  death  of
Bacon  the  insurgents  were  conquered  through  the
ability  of  Boben  Beverley,  and  Berkeley  wreaked
his  vengeance  by  having  all  the  principal  offenders
summarily  executed.  "I  am  more  glad  to  see  you,"
he  said  when  Drummond  was  brought  into  an
presence,  "  than  any  man  in  Virginia;  you  shall
he  hanged  in  half  an  hour."  Drummond  avowed
bate*  the  court-martial  that  condemned  him  the
fMirt  that  he  had  taken  in  the  rebellion. — His  wife,
Sarah,  was  as  zealous  a  patriot  as  himself,  and
was  denounced  as  a  wicked  and  notorious  rebel.
"The  child  that  is  unliorn,"  she  declared,  "shall
have  cause  to  reioice  for  the  good  that  will  come
by  the  rising  of  the  country."  After  the  execution
of  her  husliand  she  was  driven  from  her  home
with  her  children,  and  compelled  to  depend  on
the  charitvof  the  planters.

URl'MMONU,  William,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Keltic,  Perthshire,  Scotland  ;  killed  at  Fort  Erie,
Canada,  15  Aug.,  1814.  He  entered  the  army  at
an  early  age.  and  at  St.  Vincent,  when  a  lieutenant
in  the  2d  West  India  regiment,  received  the  highest
testimonial  from  Lieut.-Gen.  Hunter,  under  whom
he  served.  At  the  attack  on  Sackett's  HarlN.r.  in
the  war  with  the  United  States,  he  was  wounded,
and  so  distinguished  himself  that  he  was  mentioned
in  the  public  destwitches.  He  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  104th  regiment,  and  quartermaster-
general  in  Camilla  at  the  time  of  his  death.  .He
nriakad.  according  to  some  accounts,  in  the  explo-
sion of  the  mine  at  Fort  Erie  (see  Drummond.  Sir
Gordon);  but  other  authorities  say  that  Drum-
mond ordered  his  men  to  "give  the  Vankees  no
quarter,"  and  that  he  was  killed  by  the  side  of
Lieut.  Mardonough.  who  had  asked  him  for  quarter,
but  was  shot  bv  him.

DRY8DALS,  Alexander  Irvin,  clergyman.
b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1841  ;  d.  in  Waukesha,
I  M  Aug.,  1866.  He  entered  the  Protectant
Episcopal  ministry  in  early  manhood,  and  after  a
i  vice  in  his  native  city  received  a  call
from  Mobile,  where  he  remained  seven  years.  In
1880  he  returned  to  New  Orleans  as  rector  of  Christ
church.  A  few  days  before  his  death  he  was
elected  to  the  vacant  bishopric  at  Easton.  M.I..
but  it  was  not  supposed  by  his  friends  that  he
would  have  accepted,  as  he  "was  greatly  interested
in  the  growth  of  hisown  parish.  11  is  congregation
was  much  attacked  to  him,  and  built  him  OM  of
the  finest  church  edifices  in  the  city.  Dr.  Drysdalc
was  a  man  of  extensive  learning,  but  was  aotad


ntth.r  for  the  seal  with  which  be  engaged  in  his
<i  work  than  for  his  eloquence. He  died  in
nsin,  when-  he  had  gone  for  hit  health.
M.'lsliU.I.  Thomas  .Murray,  physician,  b,
to  Philadelphia.  Pk,  tl  Aug..  lfltT After  ■pend-
ing some  time  in  a  drug-store,  in  order  to  become
familiar  with  pharmacy,  be  studied  medk

nnsylvania  medical  college,  and  under  the
instruction  of  Dr.  Washington  1..  Atlee,  whom  he
assisted  in  the  chemical  Jworatorjof  the  college,
and  whose  daughter  he  married  in  1k',7.  1|.  «n,
graduated  at  1».  in  1852.  He  lectured  -m  chemis-
try in  the  Wagner  science  Institute  in  1850,  but  re-
signed to  devote  himself  to  his  practice  in  surgerv
and  gynecology.  In  1862  he  delhend  a  curse  of
lectures  on  the  microscope  in  the  Franklin  m»ti-
tute. He  a  I -o  made valuable microscopical  ol>-

servat ions,  and  discovered  and  descril»cd  tl \a-

rian  cell  which  exists  in  ovarian  tumors,  lb  vej
one  of  the  first  to  parfona  ovariotomy  in  Phila-
delphia. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  International
medical  congress  in  L9HL and 0Q0 of  the  founders
of  the American  gynecological  society. He has

published  papers  on  rupture  of  the  common  duct

of  the  liver,  and  the  granular  cell  in  ovarian  fluid,
"Dropsical  Fluids  of  the  Abdomen,'*  being  chap,
xxiv  of  W.  L.  Atlee's  work  on  "  DklgDOaifl  <»f  Ova-
rian Tumors"  (Philadelphia,  1878),  and  addr
on  tracheotomy,  and  the  use  of  chlorate  of  pot
in  diphtheria  and  pseudo-membranous  croup.

DIANE,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  citv.  G
Feb.,  1738;  d.  in  Duanesburg,  N.  V..  1  Feb..  1797.
He  inherited  a  tract  of  land  at  Duanesburg,  on
which  he  established  a  settlement  in  1765.  He
became  a  lawyer,
married  in  1759  a
daughter  of  CoL
Robert  Livingston,
and  attained  emi-
nence in  his  profes-
sion in  New  York.
He  was  the  leading
advocate  of  the
rights  of  New  York
to  the  New  Hamp-
shire grants,  and
drew  up  a  memo-
rial to  the  assem-
bly in  1773  in  sup-
port of  the  claim
of  his  state  to  an
eastern1  boundary
on  the  Connecticut
river.  He  was  one
.if  the  principal  New  York  grantees  of  territory  in
Vermont,  ana  when  Kthan  Allen.  S-th  Warner,  and
Bemember  BakerdroTeool  the  Hew  York  officials,

he  headed  the  applicants  who  induced  the  legisla-
ture to  declare  those  men  traitors  and  outlaws.
He  was  one  of  t  he  conservative  candidates  pro|>osed
for  congress  by  the  committee  of  fifty-one  in  1774.
and  was  sleeted  a  delegate  to  the  1st  Continental
Uaieiiaa  In  that  bodj  he  promised  the  recognition
of  the  British  acts  of  navigation,  and  encountered
violent  op|M."itinn.  though  the  resolution  of  John
Adams  that  was  adopted  was  nearly  identical  with  his
own.  I!.-".  <  onded  Galloway's  proposal  for  a  union
of  the  colonies  under  a  grand  council.  suUmlinate
to  parliament,  and  a  president,  nominated  by  the
king,  and  with  Galloway  entered  a  protest  a)

lution  of  6  <Vt..  1774,  in  favor  of  support-
ing Massachusetts  in  her  opposition  to  the  acts  of
parliament. Be  opposed  t lie  idea  that n<>  |
parliament  could  bind  the  congress,  and  BJOVnd to
strike  the  QaabM  act  out  of  the  list  of  grievances.


236


DUANE


DUARTE


With  John  Jay  and  Peter  Van  Schaack  he  drew  up
an  article  of  association  which  all  the  revolution-
ists in  the  town  signed  after  the  battle  of  Lexing-
ton. Like  Jay,  he  was  in  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  devoted  to  the  English  form  of  govern-
ment and  to  the  English  church,  and  opposed  to
the  republican  sentiments  that  prevailed  among  the
mechanics  of  New  York.  In  the  contest  between
the  two  revolutionary  factions,  the  party  of  con-
ciliation, of  which  those  two  prominent  lawyers
were  exponents,  obtained  the  representation  in
congress.  In  the  2d  congress,  on  24  May,  1775,
Mr.  Duane  moved  the  opening  of  negotiations  to
settle  the  disputes  between  the  colonies  and  Great
Britain.  He  was  prepared  for  extreme  measures
if  the  British  ministry  offered  no  substantial  con-
cessions, but  in  April,  1776,  he  opposed  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence  before  the  arrival  of  the  com-
missioners appointed  to  treat  with  the  colonists.
In  May  he  still  urged  delay  in  order  to  ascertain
the  wishes  of  the  people  before  changing  the  gov-
ernment. He  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  during  the  whole  period  of  its  existence ;
also  of  the  New  York  provincial  congress  in  April,
1775,  and  from  June,  1770,  to  April,  1777,  also  serv-
ing on  the  committee  appointed  to  draft  a  state
constitution.  In  1776-'7  he  was  a  member  of  the
committee  of  safety.  He  returned  to  New  York
city  after  its  evacuation  in  1783,  and  was  chosen
the  first  mayor  of  the  corporation  under  the  new
charter,  derived  from  the  state  legislature,  serving
from  1784  to  1789.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1782-'5  and  in  1789-'90;  also  of  the
council,  and  of  the  convention  that  adopted  the
Federal  constitution  in  1788.  From  1789  to  1794
he  was  U.  S.  district  judge  for  New  York.

DUANE,  James  Chatham,  military  engineer,
b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  1844,  and  at  the  U.
S.  military  academy  in  1848.  From  1848  till  1854
he  served  with  the  engineer  corps,  and  as  assistant
instructor  at  West  Point.  He  was  then  employed
in  the  construction  of  fortifications  till  1850,  was
light-house  inspector  at  New  York  in  1850-'8,  com-
manded the  engineer  company  in  the  Utah  expe-
dition of  1858,  and  was  afterward  instructor  of  en-
gineering at  the  military  academy  till  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  He  was  stationed  at  Fort
Pickens,  Fla.,  in  1801.  During  the  winter  follow-
ing he  organized  engineer  equipage  for  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  went  to  Harper  s  Ferry  in  Febru-
ary, 1802,  to  bridge  the  Potomac,  commanded  the
engineer  battalion  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  con-
structed bridges  across  Chickahominy  and  White
Oak  swamps,  was  engaged  at  Gaines's  Mill  on  27
June,  1802,  and  in  the  subsequent  operations  of  the
Peninsular  campaign  made  roads,  field-works,  and
bridges,  notably  one  2,000  feet  long  across  the
Chickahominy.  In  the  Maryland  campaign  he
served  as  chief  engineer  of  <  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  was  engaged  at  S^l'h  Mountain  and  An-
tietam.  In  1803,  as  chief  &  ^-ifteer  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  he  took  'rart  in  the  attack  on
Fort  McAllister,  Ga.,  and  in  operations  against
Charleston.  From  15  July,  1803,  he  was  again  at-
tached to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  en-
gaged at  Manassas  Gap,  Rappahannock  Station,
the  Wilderness,  and  Cold  Harbor,  and  distinguished
himself  at  the  siege  of  Petersburg.  He  became
captain  of  engineers  on  0  Aug.,  1801,  major  on  3
March,  1803,  and  was  brevetted  colonel  on  0  July,
1804,  and  brigadier-general  at  the  close  of  the  war.
From  1805  to  1808  he  superintended  the  construc-
tion of  the  fort  at  Willet's  Point,  N.  Y.,  receiving
promotion  as  lieutenant-colonel  on  7  March,  1807.


He  served  subsequently  as  superintendent  of  forti-
fications on  the  coast* of  Maine  ami  New  Hamp-
shire, as  light-house  engineer  of  the  northeast  coast,
as  a  member  of  various  engineer  boards,  and  as
president  of  the  board  of  engineers  in  New  York
city.  He  was  promoted  colonel  on  10  Jan.,  1883,
and  in  the  autumn  of  1880  was  appointed  chief  of
engineers,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He
has  published  a  "  Manual  for  Engineer  Troops "
(New  York,  1809).

DUANE,  William,  journalist,  b.  near  Lake
Champlain,  N.  Y.,  in  1700;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  24
Nov.,  1835.  He  was  educated  in  Ireland,  learned  the
business  of  printing,  and  in  1784  went  to  India.
where  he  amassed  property  rapidly,  and  became
editor  of  a  journal  entitled  "  The  World."  Having
taken  sides  against  the  local  government  in  a  dis-
pute with  some  of  its  troops,  he  was  invited  by  the
governor,  Sir  John  Shaw,  to  breakfast,  and  while
on  the  way  to  meet  the  appointment  was  seized  by
Sepovs,  put  on  board  a  vessel,  carried  to  England,
and  his  large  fortune  confiscated.  After  vainly
petitioning  parliament  and  the  East  India  com-
pany for  redress,  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Gen-
eral Advertiser  "  (which  was  subsequently  merged
in  the  "  London  Times  ").  In  1795  he  returned  to
this  country  and  became  editor  of  the  Philadelphia
"Aurora,"  making  it  the  leading  organ  of  the
democratic  party.  Jefferson  attributed  his  elec-
tion to  the  presidency  to  its  vigorous  support,  and
appointed  Mr.  Duane  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  July,
1805. He  served  in  the  war  of  1812-'15  as  adjutant-

feneral,  his  commission  dating  in  March,  1813.
'he  change  of  the  seat  of  government  to  Washing-
ton diminished  the  political  importance  of  the  "  Au-
rora," and  Mr.  Duane  retired  from  its  editorship
in  1822,  travelled  through  the  republics  of  South
America,  and  on  his  return  he  published  "  A  Visit
to  Columbia  in  1822-'3  "  (Philadelphia,  1820).  He
was  appointed  prothonotary  of  the  supreme  court
of  Pennsylvania  for  the  eastern  district,  an  office
which  he  retained  until  his  death.  He  published
"  The  Mississippi  Question  "  (Philadelphia,  1803) ;
a  "  Military  Dictionary  "  (1810) ;  "  An  Epitome  of
the  Arts  and  Sciences"  (1811);  a  "Hand-Book  for
Riflemen"  (1813);  "Hand-Book  for  Infantrv"
(1813);  and  "American  Military  Library "  (1819).
— His  son,  William  John,  b.  in  Clonmel,  Ireland,
in  1780;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  27  Sept.,  1865,  was
originally  a  printer,  afterward  a  paper  dealer.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1815,  and
often  represented  Philadelphia  in  the  legislature.
He  became  a  distinguished  lawyer,  took  a  deep  in-
terest in  schools,  and  was  a  trustee  and  subse-
Siuently  a  director  in  Girard  college.  During  hie
ather's  editorship  of  the  "Aurora"  he  was  hia
assistant,  became  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  treasury  in
1838,  and  was  removed  by  President  Jackson  for
declining  to  order  the  removal  of  the  deposits  from
the  U.  S.  bank.  He  published  "The  Law  of  Na-
tions Investigated  "  (Philadelphia,  1809);  "  Letters
on  Internal  Improvements"  (1811);  and  "Narra-
tive and  Correspondence  concerning  the  Removal
of  the  Deposits"  (1838).— William,  son  of  William
John,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1807;  d.  4  Nov.,  1882,
published  "Christopher  Marshall's  Diary,"  edited
(1839) ;  "  A  View  of  the  Relation  of  Landlord  and
Tenant  in  Pennsylvania"  (1844);  "Coffee,  T<
Chocolate,"  translated  from  the  French
"  Law  of  Roads,  Highways,  Bridges,  and  Ferries  in
Pennsylvania"  (1848);  and  "Canada  and  the  Con-
tinental Congress"  (1850).

DUARTE,  Juan  Pablo  (du-ar'-te).  foui
the  Dominican  republic,  b.  in  Santo  Domin.
early  In  the  present  century;  d.  hi  Venezuela,  15


DUABTE  OOELHO


dcbois


Ml


July.  ISTfti He  si  utlitil  law  in  Spain,  when-  ho  was

admitted  to  th««  bar.  winic  hi  wii>  etadrmgithe
eastern  |wrt  of  the  inland  <>f  Santo  Doming..,
win.  h  had  beeome  iadapMMtonl  from  Spain,  was

tiered  by  the  republic  "f  Hayti,  which  occu-
pied tin-  western  part,  thus  making  the  island  into
ti  single  republic.  Thf  Haytians  ruled  with  an  iron
hand  on  tin-  conquered  part,  which  was  inhabited
ly  by  people  of  Spanish  descent.  I>uarte,
after  returning  to  hi* native city,  conceived the

i  of  freeing  his  country,  ami  founded  in  '
"I^i  Trinitaria."  a  secret  society,  which  soon  ex-
Imded  through  the  Spanish  section  of  the  island,
and  paved  the  way  for  national  indej>endeiice.  A
first  attempt  to  olitain  this,  made  in  March.  1848,
was  unsuccessful,  and  Duartc  was  coni|>ellcd  to
leave  the  country.  On  '21  Feb.,  1N44,  another  at-
tempt m  made,  this  time  a  successful  one.  A
coninii— ion  one  sent  to  Curacao,  where  Duarte  re-
sided, to  bring  him  to  Santo  Domingo,  to  take  part
in  the  provisional  government  of  the  new  republic,
ami  on  II  .June.  1844  he  was  nominated  in  Cibao
for  president  by  the  liberal  party,  in  oppodftfel  to
(Jen.  Santana.  appointed  to  the  same  office  in  San-
to Domingo  city  bv  the  reaction  tv  party.  Duarte
was  defeated  and  Imuished,  remained  in  oliscurity
for  many  years,  and  only  appeared  in  the  island
after  the  return  of  the  Dominican  republic  to
Spanish  rule  in  1861.  He  took  part  in  the  struggle
that  ended  in  1865,  in  the  re-establishment  of  the
republic,  went  on  a  mission  abroad,  and  died  in
Caracas.  In  1888  the  board  of  aldermen  of  Santo
Domingo  caused  a  life-size  portrait  of  Duarte  to
be  placed  in  the  municipal  hall,  and  in  1884  his
remains  were  brought  to  Santo  Domingo  with  ap-
propriate public  ceremonies.

M'ARTE  CUELHO.  Perelra  (doo-ar -te-co-
el  do).  Portuguese  nobleman,  d.  7  Aug.,  1554.
King  J oiio  III.,  of  Portugal,  bestowed  on  Duarte
one  of  the  first  hereditary  captainships  of  Brazil.
When  he  was  sailing  along  the  coast  of  Africa  ad-
verse winds  compelled  him  to  put  in  at  the  island
of  Itamaraca,  where  he  fought  the  French,  as-
cended the  river  Iguarasu,  and  compelled  the
Portiguare  Indians  to  leave  their  village,  which  he
made  the  seat  of  his  government.  On  10  April.
1  884  the  captain-hip  of  Pernambuco  was  added  to
his  royal  donations,  and  on  24  Oct.  his  dominion
was  extended  from  San  Francisco  river  to  that  of
Iguarasu.  In  1585  Duarte  founded  the  city  of
Olinda,  where  he  removed  with  his  wife  and  other
col.,ni-t-.  lb-  was  at  first  seriously  annoyed  by  the
warlike  tribe  of  Catrete  Indians,  who  declared  war
against  him,  and  afterward  by  revolts  of  the  colo-
nist -,  w  In  >  were  f<  >r  t  he  most  part  criminals  and  vaga-
bonds, sent  to  the  colony  by  the  Portuguese  gov-
ernment ;  but  he  soon  put  an  end  to  all  disturb-
ance's. The  captainship  of  Pernambuco  throve  so
well  that  in  154!>.  when  the  general  government
was  established  in  Brazil,  taking  away  the  special
privileges  of  grantees,  those  of  Duarte  were  ex-
cepted. After  conquering  and  fettling  more  than
.V i.i MX)  square  miles  of  land,  and  founding  several
towns  and  cities,  Duarte  died,  leaving  his  command
to  his  wife,  Brigidade  Albtirqucrqiic,  his  direct  heir
being  absent  in  Portugal.

1U  BBS.  Joseph  Henrv.  clergyman,  b.  in
North  Whitehall,  Pa..  ."»  Oct..  IKK  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Franklin  and  Marshall  QoUaga,  Lancaster,
Pa.,  in  1888,  and  at  Merecrsl.iirg  tl logical  semi-
nary in  I860.  After  holding  various  pastoral
the  German  Reformed  church,  he  l»ecatne  in  lH7."i
jrofessor  of  history  and  archa-ologv  in  Franklin
i  Marshall  college. He has discovered many

•uinents  relating  to  the  hietolj  Of  the  German


churches  in  Pennsylvania,  ami  published  •  review
article  on  "  Karly  German  Hvmnology  in  I'
vania";  and  a  volume  entitled  Manual

of  the  Reformed  Church"  (fane— far.  Pa.,  l

1H  HOIS.  Charles  Fdnard.  artist,  h  m  II  ...
In. ken,  N.  .1..  IQOot,  1H-I7;  d.  in  M.ntone.  Italy,  6
March,  1888. He  studied  in  Pan*  under  i
and  Francais.  and  afterward  painted  in  BWBM  and
the  east. At  the  Paris  salon  of  lfr  nibited

"Cottages  of  Hie  S-eland  "  and  ••Village  of  Au-
vernier";  to  that  of  1H7«I  he  sent  "  Mill  near  Dor-
drecht "  ;  in  1H?m,  ••  Morning  on  the  Pnur:
the  Philadelphia  exhibition,  "Willow*  at  Fast
Hampton  "  and  "The  Palisades  ol  the  Hudson'*;
to  the  Paris  eKpooftion  of  1*7*.  ••  Morning  in  Ven-
ice," ••  View  on  the  Hudson,"  and  "  Autumn  ";  to
the  exhibition  of  the  Bootstj  of  American  artiste
in  1M7H,  ••  Kveiiing  at  Fast  Hampton."

1)1'  BOIS,  Gual terns,  ch-rgvman.  b.  in  Streef-
kerk.  Holland,  in  16611;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
October.  1751.  He  was  the  son  of  K<\.  P.  t.r  Du
Mo  is.  a  clergyman  of  Amsterdam.  He  was  called
to  New  York  in  1609  as  a  colleague  of  HosViOM
Selvns,  whom  he  succeeded.  The  services  of  the
Reformed  church  at  that  time  were  conducted  en-
tirely in  the  Dutch  language,  Uev.  A.  I^aidlie
being  the  first  clergyman  that  preached  in  English.
Coiiteinporarv  with  Du  Hois  were  llenricus  Bool
[1718  -'54).  .Johannes  Kitzema  (1744-'!«5),  and  Ijun-
liertius  De  Ronde  (1751-'!»5i.  Du  Bois  was  a  man
of  a  quiet  and  peaceful  spirit,  prudent,  judicious,
and  consistent,  of  high  character,  and  greatlv  !*>-
loved.  He  was  so  universally  resisted  that  he  is
said  to  have  been  more  like  a  bishop  among  the
Dutch  churches  of  that  day  than  the  |»astor  of  a
single  organization.  His  corresjMindenee  with  the
dassis  of  Amsterdam  is  voluminous,  and  marked
by  a  spirit  of  moderation  and  kindness.  He  left
a  large  amount  of  manuscript,  including  commen-
taries on  different  l»<>oks  of  the  Bible.

DUBOIS,  Henry  Augustus,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  9  Aug.,  1808;  d.  in  New  Ha\eti.
Conn.,  18  Jan.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Co-
lumbia in  1827.  and  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1N80.  after  which  for  a  time  he
was  house  physician  to  the  New  York  hospital.
In  1H81  he  visited  Europe,  and  there  pursued  stud-
ies under  the  masters  in  surgery  and  medicine.
During  his  stay  in  Paris  he  became  ■  memberof  the
Polish  oommittee  there,  holding  weekly  meetings
at  the  residence  of  either  Lafayette  or  .1.  Feiiimorc
Cooper.  It  was  his  intention  to  join  the  Polish
May,  but  he  was  finally  dissuaded  from  that  pur-
pose. In  1884  he  was  one  of  the  few  Americans
w> ...  followed  the  body  of  Lafayette  t«>  the  grave,

and  was  Hinnaod  in  the  attack  made  by  the  "red
republicans  '  to  seize  the  body.  Be  returned  to
New  York  in  November  of  that  year,  and  entered
on  the  active  practice  of  his  MOMBBSML  boOOmmg

one  of  the  phvsicians  to  the  New  York  disjH-nsary.
In  1888  he  married  a  daughter  of  P.  t.r  A.  Jay,  of
th.  New  York  Iwr.  Impaired  health  soon
his  removal  to  Ohio,  when-  he  had  inherited  a
hwge  tract  of  land.  OB  which  h<-  laid  out  ami  in  a
Beat  measure  built  up  Newton  Falls.  While  re-
siding in  the  west  he  withdrew  from  active  prac-
tice, but  continued  to  act  in  consultation.  In  1853
he  returned  t<.  New  York  greatly  improved  in
health,  and  Itecamc  president  of  the  Virginia  can-
Mi  coal  OOmpaay,  and  later  of  the  PeWona  cannel
coal  company.  Two  vears  later  he  removed  to
N.w  Haven,  where  he  has  since  resided.  Dr.  Du-
i  memlterof  scientific  societies.  Although
he  has  published  no  contributions  to  medical  s,i-
ence.  he  has  largely  influenced  the  opinions  of  his


388


DUBOIS


DUBOSE


professional  brethren,  especially  in  reference  to
scarlet  fever.  He  contended  more  than  forty  years
ago  that  this  disease  is  an  asthenic  epidemic,  and
not  amenable  to  medicines  until  it  has  run  its
course.  In  1864  lie  received  from  Vale  the  degree
of  LL.  I),  for  his  reply  to  the  seven  English  essay-
ists, which  was  republished  in  London — His  son,
Augustas  Jay,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Newton  Falls,
Trumbull  co.,  Ohio,  25  April,  1849,  was  educated  at
the  Sheffield  scientific  school  ot  Yale,  where  he  re-
ceived the  degrees  of  Ph.  B.  in  1861),  C.  E.  in  1870,
and  Ph.  D.  in  1872,  after  which  he  devoted  two
years  to  special  study  in  mechanics  at  the  Frei-
burg. Saxony,  mining-school.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  was  made  professor  of  civil  and
mechanical  engineering  in  the  Lehigh  university,
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  holding  that  chair  from  1874  till
1876,  when  he  became  professor  of  mechanical  en-
gineering in  the  Sheffield  scientific  school,  succeed-
ing in  1884  to  the  chair  of  civil  engineering  in
that  institution,  made  vacant  by  the  death  of
Prof.  William  A.  Norton.  Prof.  DuBois  is  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  scientific  societies,  and  has  lec-
tured on  "  Science  and  Faith,"  "  Science  and  the
Supernatural,"  "Science  and  the  Spiritual,"  and
similar  subjects.  Besides  frequent  contributions
to  the  engineering  press  he  has  published  "  Ele-
ments of  Graphical  Statics"  (New  York,  1875);
Weyranch's  "  Calculations  of  Strength  and  Dimen-
sions of  Iron  and  Steel  Construction,"  edited  and
translated  (1877) ;  "  Hydraulics  and  Hydraulic
Motors"  (1877)  and  "theory  of  Steam  Engine"
(1878),  being  two  volumes  of  Weisbach's  "  Mechan-
ics," translated  and  edited ;  Rontgen's  "  Principles
of  Thermodynamics,"  translated  and  edited  (1880)
"The  Strains  in  Framed  Structures"  (1883);  and
"  Tables  for  Bridge  Engineers  "  (1885).

DUBOIS,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Paris,  24
Aug.,  1764:  d.  in  New  Y'ork,  20  Dec,  1842.  His
father  died  while  John  was  a  child,  and  he  received
his  early  education  from  his  mother.  He  after-
ward entered  the  College  of  Louis  le  Grand,  where
the  Abbe  Delille  was  one  of  his  professors,  and
Robespierre  and  Ca-
mille  Desmoulins
were  his  classmates.
He  studied  theolo-
gy in  the  Oratorian
seminary  of  St.  Ma-
gloire,  and  on  22
Sept.,  1787,  though
still  under  the  ca-
nonical age,  was  or-
dained by  special  dis-
pensation. He  was
then  appointed  as-
sistant rector  of  the
parish  of  St.  Sulpice
. j  and  chaplain  to  the

JCT&t  o£s£6/6*0-iS.  ins»ne  asylum  called
the  Hospice  des  pe-
tit s  maisons.  At  the
beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  was  forced  to  fly  from  Paris.  Ob-
taining a  passport  and  letters  of  introduction  from
Lafayette,  he  escaped  to  Havre  de  Grace  and
sailed  for  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he  arrived  in  Au-
gust, 1791.  He  was  warmly  received  by  Bishop
Carroll,  who  appointed  him  pastor  in  Norfolk  and
afterward  in  Richmond,  Va.  Father  Dubois  was
taught  English  by  Patrick  Henry,  and  lived  in
the  house  of  James  Monroe,  the  future  president.
He  also,  by  invitation,  used  the  state  capitol  in
Richmond,  for  some  time,  for  religious  services.
He  was  next  summoned  by  Archbishop  Carroll  to


Frederick,  Md.,  exercised  the  duties  of  pastor  in
\v«>tern  Man  html  and  Virginia,  ami  was  for  a  long
time  the  only  priest  between  Baltimore  and  St.
Look,  In  1805  he  began  the  building  of  a  college
and  church  at  Mount  St.  Man's,  Emmettsbuift
Md.,  and  the  former,  under  his  care,  was  developed
into  one  of  the  most  important  ecclesiastical  insti-
tutions of  the  country.  He  acted  as  president  of
Mount  St.  Mary's  until  1826,  when  ne  was  ap-
pointed bishop  of  New  York,  his  diocese  embrac-
ing also  a  part  of  New  Jersey.  He  was  involved,
soon  after  his  consecration,  in  difficulties  with  the
trustees  of  his  churches,  who  refused  to  pay  a
salary  except  to  such  priests  as  they  had  selected.
Although  hampered  by  their  opposition,  he  suc-
ceeded in  erecting  new  churches  in  Albany  and
Buffalo.  Finding  that  he  could  not  obtain  the
funds  necessary  for  his  projects,  he  visited  Eu-
rope  in  1829,  returned  with  some  French  priests,
and,  having  received  a  grant  of  money  from  the
Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith,  built
a  college  at  Nyack.  This  was  hardly  finished,
however,  when  it  was  burned  to  the  ground,  its
presence  in  the  neighborhood  having  excited  an
intense  feeling  of  religious  bigotry.  During  his
administration,  a  plan  to  destroy  St.  Patrick's
cathedral,  New  York,  was  also  frustrated.  After
an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  found  a  college  in
Brooklyn,  he  purchased  an  estate  in  Jefferson
county  and  built  St.  Vincent  de  Paul's  seminary
at  Lafargeville.  In  1838  his  failing  health  obliged
him  to  take  a  coadjutor.  When  The  entered  New
York  there  were  only  a  few  priests  in  the  state;
there  were  now  forty -three,  with  twenty -six
churches,  a  college,  two  academies,  five  asylums,
and  several  parochial  schools.  See  ''  Discourse  on
Bishop  Dubois,"  by  Rev.  John  McCaffrey,  D.  D.

DU  BOIS,  William  Etvintr,  numismatist,  b.  in
Doylestown,  Pa.,  15  Dec.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  14  July,  1881.  He  was  assistant  assaver  at
the  U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia  in  1836,  and  held
the  office  until  he  succeeded  his  chief,  Jacob  R.
Eckfeldt,  on  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1872.  The
extensive,  numismatic  collection  in  the  mint  at
Philadelphia  is  wholly  due  to  the  skill  and  indus-
try of  Mr.  Du  Bojs.  Besides  other  contributions
to  the  science  of  numismatics,  he  wrote  "  A  Manual
of  Gold  and  Silver  Coins  of  all  Nations  "  (1842-'51) ;
and  also  had  a  large  share  in  writing  "A  Descrip-
tion of  Ancient  and  Modern  Coins  "  (1860).

DUBOSE,  Catherine  Anne,  poet,  b.  in  Hook
Norton,  Oxfordshire,  England,  19  Sept.,  1826.
When  she  was  about  five  years  of  age  her  father,
the  Rev.  William  Richards,  a  Baptist  clergyman,
emigrated  to  the  United  States,  settling  first  at
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  and  subsequently  making  nis  home
in  Georgia.  Her  education  was  begun  in  New  York
city  and  completed  at  Midway,  Ga.  On  20  June,
1848,  she  married  Charles  W.  Dubose,  a  lawyer  of
Sparta,  Ga.  Her  contributions  to  literature  have
been  chiefly  in  the  form  of  tales  and  poems,  ap-
pearing in  journals  and  magazines,  usually  over
the  pen-name  of  "  Leila  Cameron."  Some  of  her
best  efforts  were  published  in  the  "  Southern  Lit-
erary Gazette  "  (Charleston,  S.  C),  of  which  her
brother,  the  Rev.  William  C.  Richards,  was  editor.
In  the  "Orion  Magazine,"  of  Georgia,  was  pub-
lished a  prize  poem  by  her,  entitled  "  Wachulla,"
after  the  fountain  of  that  name  at  Tallahassee,
Fla.  In  1858  she  published  "  The  Pastor's  House-
hold," a  prose  story  for  the  voung.  She  completed
a  second  story,  called  "The  Elliot  Family."  l»ut
the  manuscript  was  destroyed  in  a  fire  in  New
York.  She  is  a  sister  of  the  artist,  T.  Addison
Richards  of  that  city.


DU  BOSE


DUBOIS


MB


hi i.osk. Kiln lelter,  lawyer,  b.  in

Sh.li.v  .-..iiiitv. 'I'rtm.. -jn  <»<t.,  iv:j. II.  wasedu-

I  "at  tin-  University  of  Mississippi,  and  studied

and  practised  law. At  tin-  beginning  of  tin- civil

war  In-  entered  the  Oonjederaw  army  and  rose  to

rank  >>f  brigadier-general.  After  the  war  he
represented  Georgia  in  congress,  serving  from  4
March,  1871,  till  I  March,

1M  HOST.  Murlc  Louise,  mother  superior,  b.
in  Parte,  Pranoe,  in  I7tw. she  embraced  the  re-

Ugloili  life  at  tlie  aire  of  nineteen,  and  after  her
BOI  u  lat-  ai  ;i  Sitter  "f  Charity  was  sent  tu  an  asy-
lum for  foundlings  at  Versailles.  Sinee  that  time
she  has  worked  in  orphanages  and  hospitals  in
!.  Sin-  introduced  the  Sisters  of  Charity  into
Bnuil  in  1H4M,  and  has  since  made  fifty  voyages  to
France,  her  last  being  in  l*»*>«i.  She  is  visitor  of
the  SiM,-r>  of  Charity  of  Brazil.

I»l  liol  K<.  l.»ui*Giiilluiniie  Valentin.  It.C
bishop,  l>.  in  Cap  Francois,  Santo  Domingo,  in
1766;  d.  in  licsancon.  France,  1'J  Deo.,  1888.  He
went  to  the  seminary  of  St.  Suloice.  Paris,  and
was  attending  lectures  at  the  SofMOIM  when  the
Revolution  began,  and  he  had  to  take  shelter
with  his  family  at  Bordeaux.  Thence  he  esea|»ed
to  Spain,  and  embarked  for  the  United  States  in
lT'.'J  Ih-  entered  the  seminary  of  St.  Sulpice.
Baltimore,  on  his  arrival,  and  was  ordained  a  mem-
ber of  the  order  in  the  following  year.  He  was  ap-
pointed president  of  Georgetown  college  in  1790;
and  spent  the  next  three  years  in  extending  the
interests  of  thai  institution.  He  was  sent  to  Ha-
vana in  1798  with  the  object  of  founding  a  Sulpi-
tian  college  in  Culta.  He  was  not  successful  in  nis
immediate  purpose,  but  many  of  the  Inhabitants
Intrusted  him  with  the  education  of  their  children,
and  on  his  return  to  Baltimore  he  opened  a  college,
which  was  soon  crowded  with  students  from  the
West  Indies.  In  1803,  however,  the  Spanish  gov-
ernment sent  a  frigate  to  take  back  his  pupils.  !»•-
ing  alarmed  at  so  many  sons  of  Cub-in  planters
being  educated  under  republican  influences.  In
1800  he  succeeded  in  having  St.  Mary's  college.
which  he  had  founded,  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  uni-
versity by  the  Maryland  legislature.  Father  Du-
bourg  had  so  much  to  do  with  the  establishment
of  the  Sisters  of  Charity  in  America  that  he  is  in  a
certain  sense  their  founder.  He  persuaded  Mrs.
Seton  to  remain  in  the  United  States  when  she
was  about  to  join  a  religious  order  in  Furope,  in-
vited her  to  Baltimore,  assisted  her  in  founding  a
home  for  her  community,  and  was  appointed  ec-
e1e-instical  superior  of  the  Sisters  by  Archbishop
Carroll.  When  Mrs.  Seton  decided  on  removing
to  Fmmettsburg,  he  purchased  the  land  on  which
she  built  her  convent.  In  1812  he  was  appointed
administrator  apostolic  of  the  diocese  of  Sew  Or-
leans. His  efforts  to  animate  the  patriotism  of  Un-
people of  Louisiana  on  the  advance  of  the  British
troops  received  the  warm  commendation  of  Gen.
Jackson,  and  on  the  repulse  of  the  enemv  he  was
intrusted  with  the  task  of  reading  an  address  wel-
coming the  victor  to  the  city.  In  1815  he  went  to
Bnrope  in  order  to  lay  the  wants  of  his  mission  In-
fore  the  im)|m>.  and  on  his  arrival  in  Koine  was  con-
secrated bishop.  In  France  he  persuaded  several
students  and  priests  to  volunteer  for  the  American
Bjlsjfton,  and  took  a  leading  part  in  founding  the
Association  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith  at
I.\t.ns.  In  1S17  a  war-vessel  was  placed  at  his  dis-
posal by  Louis  XVII I.,  and  he  embarked  lor
America.  He  lauded  at  Annapolis,  and  went  to
St.  Louis,  which  he  made  his  episcopal  residence.
He  founded  a  college  and  an  ecclesiastical  seminary
at  the Barrens,  in Missouri,  which were confided


to  the  mm  Of  the  Lazarist  father*,  and  shortly
afterward  he  opened  it  OOlkgl  in  St  Lo
next  dircetcd  hi«  attention  to  the  Indians  ooonpy*
ing  the  southwestern  territory,  and  created  an
establishment  at  Florissant,  which  supplied  mi*-
siotiarn-s  for  the  Indians, lb-  rleited  Washington

:.  and proonrod the  transfer  of  th.
tribes  in  his  diocese  to  the  care  of  tie
taming  a  sum of  money  from  the  government  for

this piirj>OSC. Hi' follleleil se\er.ll schools for the

education  of  girls under  the  care  of  1 1
Loreto,  and  MM  introduced  the  Indies  of  the  sacred
heart from Paris,  for  whom  he  founded  convent*
and schools  in Florissant and  in  St.  I  ami
also  erected  a  new  cathedral  in  St.  I...  .
he  took up  his  residence in New  Orleans,  but  in
IBM  went to Furo|H-,  and never  returned,  MaMJ
transferred  to  the  diocese  of  Montaultati,  in  Frame.
In 1838  he  was  elevated  to  the  archl.|s|jopric  of
Besancon. Bishop  Dultourg  was  the  author  of  "The
Sons  of  Saint  Domiuick,"  and  of  a  volume  entitled
'•Saint  Marv's  .Seminary  and  the  Catholics  nt  large
Vindicated.1'  bfjidM  other  controversial  writings.

I»l  BKKIL.  Joseph  Panl,  clergyman,  \,.  in
St.-Ftieiine.  France,  in  1*14;  d.  in  Baft  i  more,  Md..
in  1*78.  He  was  educated  at  Monistro).  Alix.
and  Lyons,  entered  the  Sooioty  of  St.  Sulpice  bj
18510,  and  was  ordained  in  1K41.  He  was  the  pio-
neer of  his  order  in  the  Doited  States,  ami  filled  in
raooession  the  offices  of  master  of  novices,  rector,
consultor.  and  provincial.

1)1' HIT,  Joseph,  Canadian  iurist,  b.  in  St.
Martine,  Quebec,  M  Dec..  1K40.  He  was  graduated
as  B.  C.  L.  at  HofJUl  university  in  1*00.  went  to  Bed
river  in  June,  1H70.  and  was  for  a  year  a  correspon-
dent of  "  La  Minerve"  of  Montreal,  lie  was  one
of  the  two  commissioners  appointed  to  investigate
the  right  to  the  hay  privilege  claimed  by  the  set-
tlers on  Red  and  Assiniboine  rivers.  He  ha~
as  counsel  for  the  crown  at  criminal  assizes  MM
February,  1875,  was  president  of  the  St.  Jean  Bap-
tist sookty  of  Manitoba  for  1N7">.  and  president  of
the  Manitoba  colonization  society  for  1*77.  He  is
a  member  of  the  council  of  Manitoba  university,
established  in  1877.  He  was  appointed  superior
tendent  of  Roman  Catholic  schools,  and  secretary
of  the  Roman  Catholic  sect  ion  of  the  lx>anl  of  edu-
cation for  Manitoba  in  1S72.  a  meinU>r  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  for  the  northwest  territories  in
December,  1872.  and  a  legal  adviser  of  the  said
council  in  1*74.  He  was  a  memlier  of  the  .
tive  council  and  attorney-general,  in  Mr.  (iirard's
administration,  from  H  July  till  '2  Dec..  1*74,  when
the  government  resigned.  He  was  elected  speaker
of  the  Manitoba  legislature.  31  March,  1H7*>.  and
represented  Bale  St.  Paul  from  imto  ontil
when  he  was  elected  for  St.  Noboft,  which  seat  he
held  until  1H7M,  when  he  ItiSJgnofl  bring  SJQOtod  by
acclamation  to  the  Dominion  |>arliament.  He  was
appointed  I  judge  of  the  court  Of  queen's  bench  in
December,  1879.

1H  BITS.  Claude  Marie,  R,  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Pianos  in  1N17.  After  his  ordination  he  emigrated
to  Texas. and  was  stationed  at  Castmville  in  1M7.
Ibr"  he  lived  in  a  wretched  hut  until,  with  the  aid
Of  a  brathaY  missionary,  he  was  able  to  build  a
residence  and  a  school-house  with  his  own  hands.
In  L800  he  was  transferred  to  San  Antonio,  and
had  charge  of  the  church  of  San  Ferdinand.  Here
he  established  a  convent  and  school  of  the  I'rsu-
lincs.  In  is<(2  he  was  appointed  bishop  of  Oalves-
ton.  Bishop  Dubuis  was  so  successful  in  reorean-
izing  his  diooSM  after  the  civil  war  that  in  I
contained  .V>  churches,  88  priests,  and  al>out  100,000
CathoUoa, He  resigned  his  see  in  1880.


240


DUCACIIET


DU  CHAILLU


DUCACHET,  Henry  William,  clergyman,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  ('..  17  Feb.,  1790;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  13  Dec,  18<J5.  He  was  educated  in
Philadelphia,  and  after  studying  medicine  prad  bed
for  some  time  in  New  York  city.  In  1825  he  be-
came an  Episcopal  clergyman  and  had  charge  of  a
parish  in  Salem,  Mass.  Subsequently  he  resided
in  Norfolk,  Va.,  and  in  1834  lx?eame  rector  of  St.
Stephen's  church  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  He  represented  the  diocese
of  Pennsylvania  in  the  general  convention  on  sev-
eral occasions,  and  was  for  many  years  secretary  of
the  diocesan  convention.  He  likewise  filled  the
office  of  rector  of  the  Burd  orphan  asylum,  an  in-
stitution  which  owes  its  origin  to  his  exertions.

DUCALVET,  Pierre,  French-Canadian  i>oliti-
cal  agitator,  b.  in  Canada  about  1715 ;  lost  at  sea
in  January,  1786. By  trading  in  fur  he  had  ac-

Suired  great  wealth  before  the  British  conquered
anada,  and  remained  in  the  country  after  that
event.  Being  a  Huguenot,  he  did  not  suffer  from
the  disabilities  resulting  from  the  legal  changes  in-
troduced into  Canada  after  the  peace  of  Versailles
in  1703.  His  Roman  Catholic  compatriots,  how-
ever, did  so,  and  it  was  in  his  endeavors  to  relieve
them  of  these  grievances  that  Ducalvet  came
prominently  into  notice.  In  pursuance  of  this  ob-
ject he  declared  open  war  against  the  legislative
council,  and  Sir  Frederick  Haldimand,  the  gov-
ernor of  Canada ;  demanded  for  the  Canadians  the
same  rights  as  British  subjects,  and  drew  up  a  plan
of  a  constitution,  nearly  the  same  as  that  which
was  granted  in  1791.  He  also  prosecuted  Sir  Fred-
erick Haldimand  in  England,  and  the  latter  re-
taliated by  procuring  his  imprisonment  for  treason.
Ducalvet  published  in  London  a  "  Letter  to  the
Canadians  and  "Appeal  to  the  Justice  of  the
State,"  the  latter  addressed  to  the  king  and  the
Prince  of  Wales.  He  was  lost  at  sea  while  on  his
way  to  England  to  continue  the  prosecution  of
Haldimand.  Though  he  was  in  many  respects  a
captious  political  agitator,  his  motives  were  un-
doubtedly pure,  and  he  sacrificed  his  fortune  in  the
cause  of  what  he  regarded  as  justice.

DUCASSE,  Jean  Baptiste,  governor  of  Santo
Domingo,  b.  in  Beam,  r  ranee,  in  1650 ;  d.  in  Bour-
bon L'Archambault  in  July,  1715.  He  early  went
to  sea  and  soon  entered  the  service  of  the  Senegal
company,  by  whom,  in  1678,  he  was  sent  to  San
Domingo.  Later  he  commanded  the  Banniere,  en-
gaged by  this  company  in  transporting  negroes
from  Africa  to  the  West  Indies.  In  1691  he  was
appointed  governor  of  Santo  Domingo.  On  his  ar-
rival he  found  the  business  interests  of  the  island  in
a  wretched  state,  but  under  his  skilful  management
order  was  soon  established,  and  the  affairs  of  the
colony  became  prosperous.  Agriculture  flourished
and  the  native  products  were  largely  exported.  In
the  invasion  of  the  island  by  the  English  and
Spanish  fleets  he  defended  it,  and.  after  he  had  ex-

Eelled  the  enemy,  directed  the  attention  of  the  in-
abitants  to  the  cultivation  of  sugar  and  tobacco.
In  1700  he  was  sent  to  Spain  to  negotiate  a  treaty
between  that  country  and  France.  Two  years
later,  while  in  command  of  a  French  squadron,  he
defeated  an  English  fleet  much  larger  than  his  own,
under  the  command  of  Admiral  Benbow.  His  ser-
vices in  the  French  navy  gained  for  him  successive
promotions  till  he  became  lieutenant-general,  in
which  capacity  he  commanded  the  marine  force
during  the  siege  of  Barcelona.  Soon  afterward  he
resigned  his  command  on  account  of  failing  health.
DUCATEL,  Julius  Timoleon,  chemist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  6  June,  1796;  d.  there,  23  April,
1849. He  was  educated  at  St.  .Mary's  college,  and


then  l>ecame  associated  in  business  with  his  father,
long  the  principal  pharmacist  in  Baltimore.  His
experieuee  in  this  direction  developed  a  fondness
f<>r  the  study  of  the  natural  sciences,  and  he  turned
to  Paris,  where  for  several  years  he  was  occupied
in  this  pursuit.  Soon  after  his  return  to  Baltimore''
he  became  professor  of  natural  philosophy  in  the
Mechanics'  institute,  and  later  professor  of  chem-
ist ry  and  geology  in  the  University  of  Maryland.
His  ability  as  a  scientist  and  his  success  as  a  lec-
turer afterward  led  to  his  election  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  in  the  medical  department  of  the  uni-
versity. From  1832  till  1841  ne  held  appointments
in  connection  with  the  State  geological  survey,  at
first  in  the  preliminary  work,  and  then  as  geologist.
Meanwhile  ne  had  been  made  professor  of  chemis-
try, mineralogy,  and  geology  in  St.  John's  college,
Annapolis,  but  he  resigned  both  of  these  posts  in
1839  in  order  to  devote  more  time  to  his  speciality
of  geology.  In  1843  he  made  a  geological  explora-
tion of  the  upper  Mississippi  in  connection  with  an
expedition  sent  to  that  region,  and  in  1846  visited
the  Lake  Superior  district  for  persons  interested  in
the  industrial  development  of  that  country.  He
delivered  an  interesting  series  of  lectures  on  his  re-
turn, giving  an  account  of  his  experiences.  Prof.
Ducatel  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies  at
home  and  abroad,  and  regularly  contributed  scien-
tific articles  to  the  "  Baltimore  Times "  and  the
"American  Farmer."  His  principal  woik  was  a
"  Manual  of  Toxicology  "  (Baltimore,  1848).

DUCEY,  Thomas  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lis-
more,  Ireland,  4  Feb.,  1843.  When  five  years  old
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and,  after  spending
some  time  in  a  law  office,  was  adopted  in  1859  by
James  T.  Brady.  He  studied  at  the  college  of  St.
Francis  Xavier,  New  York,  and  then  entered  the
theological  seminary,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1864.  He  was
ordained  priest  in  1868,  and  attached  to  the  church
of  the  Nativity  in  1869.  While  here  the  tone  of
his  sermons  excited  the  animosity  of  members  of
the  Tweed  ring,  who  complained,  to  Archbishop
McCloskey,  and  endeavored  to  have  the  young
priest  sent  out  of  the  city.  He  was  supported,
however,  by  his  superiors  m  his  denunciation  of
civic  corruption.  He  was  transferred  to  St
Michael's  in  1872,  and  in  1873  began  the  work  of
organizing  societies  of  Roman  Catholic  young
men.  With  this  object  he  purchased  property,
and  for  three  years  maintained  the  work  to  which
he  had  devoted  himself  out  of  his  own  resources.
In  1880  he  founded  the  church  of  St.  Leo  at  a
cost  of  $200,000.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  warn
the  public  of  the  extent  of  municipal  corruption
in  New  York  in  1885,  declaring  it  worse  than  ever
before.  Father  Ducey  was  assistant  chaplain  to  the
Tombs  for  some  years,  having  volunteered  for  this
office  in  addition  to  his  other  duties.  He  is  now
(1887)  employed  in  founding  a  home  for  indigent
servant  women.

DU  CHAILLU,  Paul  Belloni  (du-sha -yu),
traveller,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  31  July,  1835.  He
early  went  to  live  in  the  French  settlement  at  the
mouth  of  the  Gaboon,  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,
where  his  father  held  a  consular  appointment,  and
was  at  the  same  time  engaged  in  commerce.  He
was  educated  in  one  of  the  Jesuit  institutions  in
that  country,  and  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  na-
tive languages,  learning  from  trading  expeditions
much  of  their  habits  and  mode  of  life.  In  1852
he  came  to  the  United  States  with  a  cargo  of  ebony,
and  soon  after  published  in  the  New  York  "  Trib-
une" a  series  of  articles  on  the  Gaboon  country,
which  elicited  much  attention.  After  becoming  a
citizen  of  the  United  States,  he  sailed  in  October,


DU  ciiaii.i.i


MVMI


241


JZZ&L&ZL^


York  for  Africa,  with  the  inten-
tion of  making  a  thorongh  exploration  of  the  n-
giou  on  ill"  wi-t  coast,  Ij in tr  between  latitad

Be -)•<  ni n.iirlv four  nan  in  tin-

task,  penetrating  to  abonl  Rrngitmifi  11°  18 F..

travelling  on foot, unaccompanied bv any white

until,  upward  of
HJHMl  mil,-..  Dur-
ing this  lime  M
>hot  unit  staffed
over  8,086  birds,  of

wllieh  m  were  pre-
viously unknown,
end  killedorer  1,000

<piadrti|>cds,among
wliich  were  several
gorillas,  never  U-
fore  shot  and  prob-
ably never baton

nan  brawbJtemaB,
inn!  Wot  her  apeoiei
of  animals  previ-
ously iinclassitied.

lleretlinieiltoNew

York  in  1  *.">!>.  bring-
ing a  large  collection  of  native  arms  and  im-
Elenients,  and  nuiiieroiis  specimen!  in  natural
istory.  which  were  publicly  exhibited,  and  many
of  which  were  afterward  purchased  by  the  Brit-
ish museum.  The  history  of  this  expedition  was
published  under  the  title  of  "  Fxnlorat  ions  and
Adventures  in  Bqaatodal  Africa"  (New  York  and
London,  1881 ;  new  e<l..  enlarged,  1871).  This  vol-
ume is  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  geography,
ethnology,  and  zoology  of  western  Africa,  but
many  of  its  statements  were  received  with  dis-
trust, boaanw  they  were  inconsistent  with  the  maps
Of  Henrich  Berth  and  August  Petermann.  A  bit-
ter controversy  arose  concerning  the  accuracy  of
Da  rhiiillu's  statements,  Prof.  John  F.  Gray,  of
the  British  museum,  attacking  his  veracity  with
much  aeperity.  while  1'rof.  Richard  Owen  and
Sir  Roderick  Murchison  defended  him.  As  I)u
<  'hail hi  had  made  his  observations  from  compass
bearings  only,  their  correctness  could  not  be  defi-
nitely proved,  and  he  resolved  to  vindicate  his  repu-
tation by  a  second  expedition.  For  this  he  pre-
pared himself  by  a  course  of  scientific  study,
learned  the  use  ol  astronomical  and  other  instru-
ments, and  acquired  the  art  of  practical  photog-
raphy. Meanwhile  his  accuracy  was  established
by  the  French  travellers  Serval  ami  Griffon  du
Bellay,  who,  in  charge  of  a  government  expedit  ton,
explored  the  Ogobel  river  and  the  neighboring
Country.  His  statements  concerning  the  canni-
balistic  habits  of  the  Fan  trihe  were  verified  by
tin-  English  traveller,  (apt.  Richard  F.  Burton.
Du  Chaillu,  notwithstanding  his  vindication,  deter-
mined to  prosecute  his  expedition,  for  which  he

had  made  thorough  preparation. He  freighted  ■

schooner  with  goods  for  presents  to  the  natives,
and  sailed  from  Finland  in  August,  1808.  Farly  in
October  he  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Ognltai.  and
there  met  with  a  severe  loss  by  the  swamping  of
t  In-  canoe  containing  his  scientific  and  photographic
apparatus.  He  was  obliged  to  rend  to  Fngland  for
a  new  supply,  and  he  occupied  his  time  in  hunting
lsions,  during  which  lie  again  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  studying  the habits  of  the  gorilla. In

September,  1884  hi-  Inafernmann  having  arrived,

\\ for  the  interior,  aooompanied  by  tea

OommJ  negroes. He  revisited  some  of  the  scenes

Of his  former  explorations,  took niaiiv accurate
observations, and penetrated among triln-s and
through  portions  of  country  previously  unknown.
VOL. II. — 16


in  Baptambat  of  the  following  year  ha w

to return to the aoaal li  ,.ik» of en

unfortunate conflict with the unlives,  in  which
he  lost  everything  but  hi*  journals. These  eon-
tam.d  all  of  his  satmnoniluaJ  obaervat
rerifled  his  previous  statement*,  nnd
to  the  geographical  knowledge  of  w.  -
He  published  an  account  of  this  expedition  under
the  title  of  ••  A  Journey  to  Ashangn  l^and'
don  and  New  York.  l^iTi. After  mnudll ..-
fain  in  the  I'nited  States,  where  hi  ap|«aredasa
j.ublic  lecturer. -he  visited  Sweden,  Norwsy,  Lap-
lan<l,  and  Finland,  in 1878  '■:.  returning  i
York  late  in  1N7H. Du  Chaillu  hits  publish.-.!  the
following:  -Stories  of  the  Gorilla  Countn
York.  1888);  -Wii.i  Lib  under the  banter"

••I.o-t  in  the  Jungle  -  (1888)i  "Mv  Apingi
Kingdom"  (1890);  "The  (  ountrv  of  the  Dwarfs"
(1*71):  ••The  Land  of  the  Midnight  Sun'
and  "The  Yiking  Age"  lb-;

DUCHB,  Jacob,  clergvuian.  b.  in  I'hilailelphia
in  I787j  d.  then-.  W  Jan.,  1788. He  was  the  son  of
a Huguenot  who  came  to America  with William
l'enii. He  was  graduated  from  the  Colli
Philadelphia  (now  rjnivenitj  of  Pennsylrania)  in

1757,  afterward  itttdied  in  Fngland  at th.
versity  of Cambridge,  and  was  licensed  in 1788
by  the bishop  of London  to  officiate  its  an
ant in the  churches  of  Philadelphia. In 1775  he
succeeded  to  the  rectorship  of  Christ church,  in

that  city,  on  the  resignation  of  Dr.  Patera.  At  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution  be  rwpnnsBd  the  oaoss
of  the  colonies,  and  was  invited  to  make  the  open-
ing prayer  on  the  assembling  of  the  1st  congress,
7  Sept.,  1??4. After  reading  a  Paalm  and  reran!

petitions  from  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  be
concluded  with  an  impromptu  invocation  so  patri-
otic in  spirit  and  so  reverent  in  tone  that  he  was
given  a  vote  of  thanks.  On  !»  July.  17711.  be  WM
chosen  chaplain,  and  served  three  months,  when  he

resigned.  He  devoted  his  stipend  of  ai.Vi  to  the
relief  of  the  families  of  I'einisv  lvanians  who  had
fallen  in  battle.  When  the  British  took  |>ossession
of  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Duche  named  to  nnepair  of

the  success  of  the  patriot  cause,  and  wrote  a  letter
to  Washington,  in  October,  1777.  urging  him  to
abandon  what  he  considered  a  forlorn  nope, end  to
"represent  to  congress  the  indispensable  t.<
Of  rescinding  the  hasty  and  ill-advised  Ikvlaration
of  Independence."  Washington  transmitted  the
letter  to  Oongreas,  ami  it  soon  found  its  way  into
the  newspapers.  In  oonosqoenee,  Dr.  Duche  left
this  country  and  went  to  Fngland,  when  ht  was
apjiointed  chaplain  to  the  LaniUtli  orphan  asy-
lum, and  soon  made  a  reputation  as  an  eloojaent
preacher.  In  the  mean  time  his  estate  had  la-en
confiscated,  and  be  him— W  declared  a  traitor. He

retnrned  to  Philadelphia  in  17W  in  feeble health.

Dr.  Duche  married  a  deter  of  Francis  Honklneon,
one  of  the  signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Indepen-
dence. He  was  the  master  of  a  polished  style,  and
wrote,  among  other  works.  "Ciispipina's  Fetters"
(Philadelphia.  1774;  Bath.  Fngland.  1777),  and
"  Discourses  on  VaitoW  Subje*  ts  "  (London,  1 7 71* •.
Of  the  latter  it  has  been  said :  "His  discourses
have  great  warmth  and  spirit,  ami  at  times  are  in
the  strain  of  our  old  divines."  The  prayer  which
he  wrote  and  used  during  tiis  term  M  chaplain  in
congress  is  a  model  of  that  style  of  i-omimsition.

DUCHESNE.  1'hillppa  Rone,  foundress  of  the
first  honnaof  the  Sooiery  of  the  Saorad  Heart  in

America,  b.  in France  in  17<K»;  d. in St.  Charles,

Ija..  in  I8B8. She  received  a  U-tter  education  than

most  French  ladies  of  her  time,  having  Ih-.ii  taught

nasi and higher mat  hematics with her


242


DUCK  IN  FIELD


DFDLEY


brothers.  She  wassentto  a  convent  of  the  Visitation
to  prepare  for  her  first  communion,  and,  her  con-
fessor being  an  old  missionary  who  had  spent  years
among  the  Indians  of  Louisiana,  her  thoughts  were
turned  to  religions  work  in  America.  In  17!)3  she
resided  at  Grenoble,  and  devoted  herself  to  caring
for  the  prisoners  and  educating  the  children  of  the
streets.  This  life  lasted  until  1801,  when  she  or-
ganized a  community  of  religious  women,  whose
sole  occupation  was  to  be  teaching.  This  com-
munity was  afterward  amalgamated  with  the  So-
ciety of  the  Sacred  Heart,  founded  by  Madame
Barat.  In  1818  she  sailed  for  the  United  States
with  four  companions,  and  landed  at  New  Orleans.
After  a  stay  or  two  months  she  went  to  St.  Louis,
where  she  opened  a  school  under  circumstances  of
great  difficulty.  She  next  removed  to  Florissant,
where  she  established  a  permanent  centre  of  her
order.  Madame  Duchesne  worked  a  great  refor-
mation in  the  habits  of  the  Creoles,  Indians,  and
colored  women  who  came  under  her  influence.  In
1820  she  founded  a  community  of  the  Sacred  Heart
congregation  in  Barreins,  on  the  Bois-Brule,  and
also  a  boarding-school,  and  free  schools  for  Indians
and  for  white  adult*.  She  next  founded  the  house
of  Grand-coteau,  principally  devoted  to  the  edu-
cation of  the  poor.  In  1824  a  hurricane  damaged
some  of  her  houses,  but  she  set  to  work  with  re-
newed energy,  and  in  1825  established  an  institu-
tion in  the  parish  of  St.  Michel  among  the  descend-
ants of  the  French  exiles  of  Acadia.  In  1827  the
E resent  house  of  the  order  was  founded  in  St.
iouis.  She  closed  her  ten  years'  work  as  a  relig-
ious pioneer  by  the  foundation  of  a  house  in  St.
Charles.  Madame  Duchesne  governed  all  her  scat-
tered houses  with  firmness  and  discretion  till  1840,
when  she  was  superseded  by  Madame  Galitzin,  and
became  a  simple  nun  again.  She  then  petitioned
to  be  allowed  to  fulfil  her  original  intention  of  go-
ing as  a  missionary  among  the  Indians.  With
three  companions  she  joined  a  Jesuit  mission
among  the  Pottawattamies.  She  was  well  received,
but  the  hardships  of  such  a  life  for  a  woman  over
seventy  were  considered  too  great,  and  she  was
forced  by  her  superiors  to  return  to  St.  Charles  at
the  end  of  a  year.  She  lived  to  see  her  order  flour-
ish in  all  the  great  cities  of  the  United  States.

DUCKINFIELD,  or  1H  h  I  \  I  1 1  l.l>.  Sir  Na-
thaniel, bart,  d.  in  England  in  1824.  He  was  a
member  of  the  council  of  North  Carolina,  where
he  owned  large  estates,  and  in  1772,  while  on  a
visit  to  England,  was  induced  to  purchase  a  com-
mission in  the  British  army.  When  the  war  began
he  refused  to  serve  against  the  Americans,  and  on
his  regiment  being  ordered  to  this  country  he  con-
trived to  remain  behind.  This  exhibition  of  pa-
triotism did  not  avail  him,  however,  as  in  1779  liis
estates  were  confiscated.  He  was  intimate  with
James  Iredell,  afterward  one  of  the  judges  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  state,  and  maintained  a  cor-
respondence with  him  until  the  close  of  1791.  In
1783  he  married  a  niece  of  Gen.  Warde,  on  whose
staff  he  was  serving  as  aide-de-camp.  In  1789  the
British  government  made  him  an  allowance  of
£3.000  for  his  losses  as  a  loyalist.  He  never  re-
turned to  this  country.

DU  COUDRAY,  Philippe  Charles  Jean  Bap-
tist e  Tronson,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Kheiins,
France,  8  Sept.,  1738:  d.  in  the  United  States,  11
Sept.,  1777.  He  was  educated  in  the  army  as  a
mining  engineer,  and  evinced  such  unusual  talent
that  he  was  promoted,  over  the  heads  of  180  senior
officers,  for  services  in  Corsica.  He  was  adjutant-
general  of  artillery,  and  ranked  as  one  of  the  best
military  engineers  in  France,  when,  in  1770,  he


offered  his  services  to  BQss  Deane  and  Benjamin
Franklin,  who  were  then  engaging  offioen  for  the
American  army.  An  arrangement  was  therefore
entered  into  by  which  Du  Coudray,  on  condition
of  his  furnishing  certain  supplies,  was  to  receive  a
commission  as  major-general  in  the  American  ser-
vice, with  the  command  of  the  artillery.  .On  his
arrival  in  this  country,  he  claimed  thai  the  right
to  command  the  engineers  was  included  in  this
arrangement,  (len.  Knox  (at  that  time  at  the
head  of  the  artillery),  Gen.  Sullivan,  (Jen.  (.
and  other  American  officers,  were  greatly  fHiMWlil
fled  with  the  negotiations  of  Franklin  and  Dean.-,
and  threatened  to  resign,  Du  Coudray  was  ap-
pointed inspector-general,  with  the  rank  of  major-
general,  11  Aug..  1777,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the
works  on  the  Delaware.  While  he  was  hastening
to  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine,  his  horse,  becoming
resti  ve  on  a  ferrv-boat  as  he  was  crossing  the  Schuyl-
kill, plunged  with  him  into  the  river,  and  he  was
drowned.  His  works  include  "  L'artillerie  nou-
velle"  (Paris,  1772);  "  Memoire  sur  le  salpetre"
(1774);  "  Nouvelles  experiences  sur  le  fer"  (1776).

DUCRUE,  Ben non  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Munich,  Bavaria,  in  1721 ;  d.  in  Bavaria  in  1779.
He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  was  sent  by  his  superiors  to
Mexico,  where  he  performed  missionary  duty  for
over  twenty  years.  He  returned  to  Europe  after
the  Jesuits  were  expelled  from  the  Spanish  colo-
nies. He  wrote  in  German  a  "  Relation  of  the  So-
ciety of  Jesus  of  the  Province  of  Mexico,  and  par-
ticularly of  California  in  1767,  with  other  docu-
ments worthy  of  being  known."  This  relation  is
found  in  vol.  xvi.  of  the  journal  of  Mur. Inde-

f>endently  of  what  concerns  the  Jesuits  in  Cali-
ornia,  it  contains  interesting  notices  on  the  ge-
ography and  production  of  that  peninsula.  Mur
added  notes  to  the  relation,  and  some  specimens  of
the  Californian  language,  which  were  communi-
cated to  him  by  Ducrue.

DUDLEY,  Benjamin  Winslow,  surgeon,  b.  in
Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  12  April,  1785 ;  d.  in  Lex-
ington, Kyi,  20  Jan.,  1870.  He  studied  at  Transyl-
vania university,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1806,  presenting  a  thesis  on  the  "  Medical  Topog-
raphy of  Lexington."  From  1810  till  1814  he
was  in  Europe,  where  he  studied  under  Sir  Astley
Cooper  and  John  Abernethy  in  London,  and  under
Paul  A.  Dubois  and  F.  II.  Larrey  in  Paris.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  he  settled  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  remaining  there  in  successful  practice
till  1854,  and  achieving  the  reputation  of  being  the
most  successful  surgeon  west  of  the  Alleghanies.
He  operated  for  stone  in  the  bladder  two  hundred
and  twenty-five  times,  losing  only  six  patients,  and
had  occasion  to  repeat  the  operation  in  but  one
instance.  He  performed  the  lateral  operation  ex-
clusively, and  almost  always  with  the  gorget,  an
instrument  now  becoming  obsolete.  His  success
was  so  great  that  in  England  he  was  declared  to  be
"  the  lithotomist  of  the  nineteenth  century."  Dr.
Dudley  published  several  medical  essays,  was  active
in  the  organization  in  1817  of  the  medical  depart-
ment of  Transylvania  university,  long  the  leading
school  in  the  west,  and  for  many  years  held  there
the  professorships  of  anatomv  and  surgery.

DUDLEY,  Charles  Benjamin,  chemist,  b,  in
Oxford,  N.  Y.,  14  July,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1871,  and  then  pursued  a  course  in  the
Sheffield  scientific  school,  receiving  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  in  1874.  In  September  of  the  same  year  he
f>ecame  instructor  of  physics  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  but  resigned  at  the  end  of  the
He  became  chemist  to  the  Pennsylvania  railroad


DUDLEY


di  di.ky


M


(iiiii|p.in>  in  Novcinlsr,  1*7">,  iiml  has  n-nuiitn-'l  in
(hut  capacity  ^iiicc  t tint  time.  Ills  work  lui-.  !«■«  n
iin|xirtaut  itnil  has  cx>n*»ist«  < I  of  <  In  mical  researches
into  tin-  quality  of  the  materials  used  bf  tin-
corporation.  His  invest igation  on  tin-  |)UMpuoltfc»ll
■ . -«-l  rails  i*  one  <»f  the  U-st  contributions  to  the
literature  of  tin-  subject.  Dr.  Dudley  is  a  incinl>cr
of  scientific  societies,  And  has  twice  been
president  of  tin-  American  institute  of  mining
engineers,  in  whose  transactions  he  has  published
pai»rs  of  technical  value.

DUDLEY,  <  harlcs  Kdnurd.  senator,  b.  in
Johnson  Hall.  Staffordshire.  Kngland. 88 May,  17X0;
.1.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  88  Jan..  1H41.  In  17!M  he
came  with  hi->  mother  to  Newport,  K.  I.,  where  hi-
father.  Charles Dudley,  who  had  died in London

in  1780,  had  bean  the  king's  collector  of  customs.

The  son  tlrst  became  a  clerk  in  a  counting-room,
but  soon  cntcre<l  into  trade,  and  went  to  the  Baal
Indies  as  supercargo.  Subsequently  he  removed
to  New  York,  and  then  to  Albany,  where  he  became
a  prominent  merchant.  Bo  was  a  member  of  the
state senate from 1X20 till 1X'J5,  and mavor  of

Albany  tram  1881  till  1888.  He  was  elected  to  the
I*.  S.  senate  m  a  democrat  in  1829  to  fill  the  va-
cancy caused  by  the  resignation  of  Martin  Van
Huren.  and  served  till  is;{:{.  He  was  particularly
fond  of  astronomical  science. — His  wife,  Blandina,
b.  in  New  York  in  17x;{;  d.  in  Albany  in  January,
1868,  waa  the  daughter  of  Rutgers  Rlcecker.  In
her  later  vcars  she  was  lavish  in  the  expeodit  ure  of
her  wealth,  and  contributed  largely  to  scientific  as
well  as  benevolent  and  religious  objects.  In  1880
she  gave  $75,000  toward  the  endowment  and  erec-
tion of  Dudley  observatory  in  Alhanv.  in  memory
of  her  husband.  At  the  time  of  her  death  she  bad
given  more  than  $  100,000  toward  its  completion.

Dl'DLEY,  Dean,  antiquarian,  b.  in  King-field.
Me..  2:{  May,  1888,  He  is  descended  from  Thomas
Dudley, one  of  the  first  colonial  governors  of  Mas-
sachusetts. He  studied  at  Waterville  lilieral  insti-
tute. Me.,  (ircciilcaf  school  in  Bradford,  Mass.. and
at  Atkinson  academy,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  but  was
mostly  self-taught  He  then  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  Suffolk  bar  in  1XT>4.  and  practised
for  several  years  in  Boston.  During  this  time  he
procured  the  enactment  of  several  important  state
laws.  He  afterward  abandoned  the  law,  on  account
of  failing  health,  and  devoted  his  attention  to  the
publication  of  city,  town,  and  county  directories,  of
which  he  has  compiled  one  hundred.  In  1X49  he
visited  Kngland.  and  spent  a  year  in  making
antiquarian  and  genealogical  researches.  During
tin-  time  he  wrote  for  the  Boston  newspapers
letters  afterward  published  with  the  title  "  Pictures
of  Life  in  Kngland  and  America  "  (Boston.  1851).
His  other  publications  are  "The  Dudley  (Jetiealo-
gies"  (Cambridge,  1X4X) ;  -Social  and  Political
Aspects  of  Kngland  and  the  Continent"  (1X02);
"History  of  the  First  Council  of  Nice "  (Boston,
I);  "Officers  of  our  Union  Army  and Navv  "

i Boston.  l*il'J);  and  "History  of'  the  Dudley
lily  "  (Wakefield,  Mass.,  1880).  He  compiled  a
"  History  and  Genealogy  of  the  Swift  Family."
which  has  not  been  printed.  From.  ImM  till  1*74
he  compiled  the  census  of  school-children  in  Bos-
ton, and  has  made  large  collections  of  historical
and  genealogical  subjects  in  Kngland  and  America,
which  are  still  in  manuscript.

DUDLEY,  Edward  Bishop,  governor  of  North
iina.b.  in  Onslow  county.  N.C.  16  Dee..  |
d.  in  Wilmington,  N.  c.  :{<>  Oct,  1858.  Be  was
the  son  of  a  wealthy  planter,  who  represented
Onslow  county  in  the  state  senate  for  several  years
Mr.  Dudley  grew  up  on  his  father's  estate  and  suc-


ceeded to  its  ownership. From 1*11  till

was  a member  of the North Carolina house  of

commons,  m,d  in  1*1  I  of  the  state  senate.

1818  till  1*17.  and again b

Wilmington in  the  legislature. He  was  .  I

member  Of  the  21st  congress  as  a  Jack-.,

erat.  wiring  from  7  1)  till  3  Mar.  i

but  dooHnoaars  sleotion. In  iH.tr,  i„.  was  the  first

governor  of the  State  elected by  the  people  under
the  amended  constitution of 1X35,  (hi
having  previously  besaj  ohoaai  bf  the  Ugfa
lie  was  also  the.  first president  of  the  Wiln
and  Raleigh  (now  Wilmington  and  I  Maw  an
way. He  was  one  of  the  most publie-spirited  and
benevolent  citizens  of  his  state.

Dl'DLEY,  Thomas,  colonial  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, b.  in  Northampton.  Kngland.  in  1
in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  31  July.  1888. Ha  was  an  offi-
cer in  the  Barrios  «»f  Holland  before  joining  the

Puritans,  and  afterward  retrieved  the  fortunes  ,,f
the  Karl  of  Lincoln  by  the  faithful  stewardship  of
his  estates.  In  l<'.::n  he  ceflM  to  IfseSBObasSttS  with
tin-  commission  of  deputy  governor.  w  biofi  o6V  S  be
held  from  1684  till  1840,  and  again  from  1648  fill
1050.  After  residing  in  Cambridge,  Ipswiefa,  and
Boston,  he  finally  settled  in  Roxbury.  where  bises-
tate  was  long  possessed  by  his  lifonondsnls  In
1044  he  was  appointed  major-general.  He  was  a
man  of  talent  and  integrity,  was  Is. Id  and  ener-
getic, but  Intolerant  and  narrow  in  his  religious
views,  and  was  even  more  unforls-aring  and  arro-
gant than  Winthrop,  with  whom  he  was  closely  as-
sociated.—  His  son,  Joseph,  colonial  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Roxbury.  Mass..  88  S-pt..  1M7  :
d.  there,  2  April,  1?20,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1868  and  studied  theology,  but.  preferring  a
political  career,  became  a  representative  In  tt
eral  court  ami  a  magistrate  in  his  native  town  in
1<>7:{.  From  1077  till  1681  he  was  one  of  the  com-
missioners for  the  united  colonies  of  New  England.
He  was  in  the  battle  with  the  Narrogansctts  in
lt!7o.  and  was  one  of  the  commissioners  that  nego-
tiated the  treaty  with  that  tril>e.  In  1688  hfl  Vfl  nt
to  England  as  agent  for  the  colony,  and.  l>eing  un-
able to  obtain  a  confirmation  of  the  old  charter,
served  himself,  and
became  a  candidate
for  the  chief  magis-
tracy. He  was  ap-
pointed president  of
New  Kngland  by
James  II.  in  10X5,
and  made  chief  jus-
tiee  of  the  supreme
court  in  111*7.  lb-
was  arrested  as  one
of  the  friends  of  An-
dros,  with  whom he

was  sent  to  Kng-
land, where  he  was
received  with  favor,
lie  was  chief  justice

of  New  York  from
1880  till  1688,  and
in  the  latter  vear
again  visited  Kng-
land. became  deputy

governor  of  the  ble
of  Wight,  and  was  elected  to  parliament  from
Newtown  in  1701.  In  the  following  vear  he  re-
turned to  this  country,  and  was  made  captain-
general  and  governor  of  Masaachnsrtta,  nil  lug
until  1715.  In  that  year  he  retired  to  hi*  rural
home  in  Roxbury,  Mass..  where  he  remained  till
his death. He carried the doctrine  of  submia-


244


DUDLKY


lU'KNAS


atonto  royal  and  ministerial  authority  to  extremes,
and  was  said  to  be  a  "  philosopher  and  a  scholar,
■  divine  and  a  lawver,  all  combined." — His  son,
Paul,  jurist.  I..  8  Sept.,  1675:  d.  in  Roxbury,  21
Jan..  1751,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1690.  and
studied  law  at  the  Temple  in  Loudon.  He  re-
turned to  Massachusetts  in  1700  with  a  commission
from  Queen  Anne  as  attorney-general  of  the  prov-
ince, which  he  held  until  his  promotion  to  the
bench  in  1718.  In  1745  he  became  chief  justice.
He  represented  Roxbury  for  several  years  in  the
legislature.  He  was  a  learned  naturalist,  a  fellow
of  the  Koval  society  of  London,  and  bequeathed
.£100  to  Harvard  for  the  support  of  an  annual
Lecture  to  be  delivered  on  one  of  the  four  subjects
treated  in  succession — natural  religion,  the  Chris-
tian religion,  the  errors  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and  one  to  explain  and  to  maintain  the
validity  of  the  ordination  of  ministers  according  to
the  ancient  custom  of  New  England.  He  published
essays  on  the  natural  history  of  America,  particu-
larly of  New  England,  in  the  "  Transactions  "  of
the  Royal  society  (1720-1735),  and  a  work  against
the  church  of  Rome.

DUDLEY,  Thomas  Underwood,  P.  E.  bishop,
I),  in  Richmond,  Va.,  26  Sept.,  1837.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1858,  and
soon  afterward  became  a  professor  in  that  institu-
tion. During  the  civil  war  he  held  a  commission
in  the  commissary  department  of  the  Confederate
army.  Having  studied  theology  in  the  Virginia
theological  seminary  at  Alexandria,  he  was  or-
dained deacon  by  Bishop  Johns,  28  June,  1867,
and  priest  by  Bishop  Whittle,  26  June,  1868.  While
in  deacon's  orders  he  was  in  charge  of  Harrison-
burg parish,  Pa.  In  January,  1869,  he  became  as-
sistant minister  of  Christ's  church,  Baltimore,  Md.,
and,  on  the  death  of  the  rector  in  1870,  was  elected
to  the  rectorship  of  the  parish.  This  place  he  oc-
cupied at  the  time  he  was  chosen  to  be  assistant
bisnop  of  Kentucky.  He  was  consecrated  in  Christ's
church,  Baltimore,  27  Jan.,  1875,  and,  on  the  death
of  Bishop  Smith.  81  May,  1884,  he  became  bishop
of  the  diocese.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
from  St.  Mary's  college  in  1874,  and  from  the  Uni-
versity of  the  South  in  1883.  He  has  published  "  A
Nice  Discrimination  the  Church's  Need"  (New
York,  1881),  being  the  "Bohlen  Lectures"  for
1881 ;  "  A  Sunday-School  Question-Book  "  (Balti-
more, 1872),  and  occasional  sermons  and  addresses.

DUDLEY,  William  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Roscrea,  Tipperary,  Ireland,  7  Oct.,  1811 ;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  9  Oct.,  1886.  He  received  a  clas-
sical education,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Royal
college  of  surgeons,  Dublin,  in  1833.  In  1834  he
sailed  for  Jamaica,  where  he  was  elected  a  fellow
of  King's  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  and
where  he  practised  his  profession  until  1841.  when
he  settled  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1842  he  received
a  diploma  from  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons of  New  York,  and  in  1851  was  elected  cura-
tor of  the  New  York  medical  college,  holding  the
office  for  several  years.  He  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  Long  Island  college  hospital,  the  first  of
its  kind  in  this  country,  with  which  institution  he
had  been  connected  from  its  incorporation  as  a
member  of  the  council.  He  also  acted  as  its  1  reas-
urer,  its  president,  and  as  a  member  of  the  board
of  regents.  In  fact,  but  for  his  untiring  labors,
his  counsel,  and  his  generous  pecuniary  support,  it
is  doubtful  whether  the  college  hospital  could  have
been  established  or  its  permanence  secured.  In
1848  Dr.  Dudley  was  elected  a  member  of  the  New
York  academy  of  medicine.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  Kings  county  medical  and  other  societies.


DUDLEY,  William  Loflund.  ehemist.  b.  in
Covington.  Ky..  Hi  April.  ls.V.f.  He  followed  a  fe-
cial coarse  In  chemistry  and  natural  edence  at  the
I'niversity  of  Cincinnati,  after  which  be  WSS  dsSS>
onstratoroi  chemistry  in  1879-'80,  and  professor-
ol  chemistry  and  toxicology  from  1NK0  till
Miami  medical  college,  Cincinnati.  In  1886  be  be-
came professor  of  chemistry  in  Vanderbilt  univer-
sity, Nashville.  Prof.  Dudley  was  commissioner  of
the  Cincinnati  industrial  exposition  from  1883  till
1885,  and  a  director  of  the  Ohio  mechanics'  in>ii-
tute  from  1884  till  1886.  He  is  a  member  of  sev-
eral scientific  societies,  and  received  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  in  1885  from  Miami  medical  col-
lege. He  has  made  a  reputation  through  his  suc-
cess in  producing  iridium.  In  conjunction  with
John  Holland,  of  Cincinnati,  he  devised  a  process
for  obtaining  this  metal,  and  in  consequence  its  ap-
plication in  the  arts  has  been  greatlv  extended.
The  electro-metallurgy  of  iridium  has  been  princi-

[>ally  developed  through  his  work.  He  has  pun-
ished scientific  papers  in  various  journals,  and
wrote  the  article  "  Iridium  "  in  "  Mineral  Resources
of  the  United  States,  1883-'4  "  (Washington).

DUDLEY,  William  Russell,  botanist,  b.  in
Guilford,  Conn.,  1  March,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  Cornell  in  1874,  and  subsequently  studied  natu-
ral history  under  Agassiz  on  Penikese  island  in
1875,  and  in  the  Harvard  summer  school  in  1876.
In  1873  he  became  instructor  of  botany  at  Cornell,
and  in  1884  assistant  professor  of  cryptogamic  bot-
any, and  also  professor  of  botany  in  the  Manila's
Vineyard  summer  institute  during  its  sessions  in
1878-'9.  Prof.  Dudlev  has  contributed  articles  to
botanicaliournals  and  cyclopaedias,  and  has  pub-
lished "  The  Cayuga  Flora,  Part  I. :  A  Catalogue
of  the  Phamogamia  growing  without  Cultivation
in  the  Cavuga  Lake  Basin  "  (Ithaca,  1886;.

DUELjL,  Robert  Holland,  lawver,  b.  in  War-
ren, Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec.,  1824.  He  was
educated  in  the  common  schools  of  New  York  and
at  Syracuse  academy.  He  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  began  to  practise  in
Cortland-  in  1848.  From  1850  till  1855  he  served
as  district  attorney  for  Cortland  county,  and  in
1855  was  made  judge  of  that  district,  which  office
he  held  until  1859,  when  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  republican.  He  was  re-elected  in  1870,
serving  until  1875,  and  in  that  year  was  made  com-
missioner of  patents,  which  office  he  held  one  year.
DUENAS,  Francisco  (du-ayn-yas),  president
of  Salvador,  b.  about  1830.  He  was  educated  for
the  bar,  and  figured  at  an  early  age  in  the  politics
of  his  country,  on  the  conservative  side,  but,  on
account  of  his  constant  opposition  to  the  liberal
government  of  the  president,  Gerardo  Barrios,  was
obliged  to  emigrate  to  Guatemala.  When,  early
in  1863,  Gen.  Rafael  Carrera,  president  of  Guate-
mala, suspecting  Barrios  of  favoring  a  re-establish-
ment of  the  Central  American  union,  with  himself
as  president,  declared  war  against  Salvador,  Duefias
joined  the  invading  army.  Although  Carrera  was
defeated  at  Coatepeque,  25  Feb.,  he  soon  raised  a
new  army,  and,  after  defeating  a  Salvadorian  army
under  Gen.  Santiago  Gonzalez  at  Santa  Ana,  30
July,  he  besieged  and  on  26  Oct.  occupied  the  capi-
tal, San  Salvador,  deposed  Gen.  Barrios,  and  in-
stalled Duefias  as  provisional  president.  In  1s'm
Duefias  was  elected  constitutional  president  for  the
term  extending  from  April,  1865,  to  1869,  and  in
the  same  year  a  revolution  in  favor  of  the
Barrios  broke  out,  San  Miguel  and  La  Union  de-
claring in  his  favor,  but  his  general.  Cabana
routed  near  La  Union,  29  Mav,  and  at  the  same  time
the  former,  preparing  to  sail  front  Realejo  to  join


1. 1  i;i;


MKK


Mfl


his  followers,  was  taken  prisoner  l>y  the  Nicarai;uan

authorities, Mllll delivered t<> tbfl government of

Salvador.  uiuliT  a  promise  that hi*  lift  should l»e

njwnii.  Notwithstanding  tin*  condition,  Dueflas
submitted  Barrios  to  a  court-martial  largely  soss*
posed  of  |M-r>oiutl  enemies,  and  In-  was  condemned
to  death,  ami  -hot  in  August  In  1881  Duenas
was  n-clected  for  a  new  term  of  four  years,  mid.
notwithstanding  his  conservative  affiliation,  fol-
lowed a  progressist  policy.  Daring  his  adminis-
tration the  tir-t  telegraph  line*  wore  established  in
the  republic,  the  national  palace  in  San  Salvador
built,  and  new  and  siilistantial  wharves  at  the  ports
of  La  Liliertad.  La  I'nion.  and  Aeajutla  wen-  SOB-
strmted.  In  February.  1871,  Honduras  declared
war  aptinst  President  Duenas,  and  at  the  same
time,  ami  probably  in  concert  with  Honduras,  a
n-volution  against  his  government  broke  out  at
•One,  bended  by  Gen.  Santiago  Gonzalez,  and  on
10  April, after  a  throe  days'  battle,  the  government
tnnips  wen-  defeated  at  Santa  Ana.  On  the  re-
ceipt of  this  news  at  San  Salvador,  the  populace
rose  and  sacked  Duefias's  house,  who  tied  to  the
American  eonsolats  for  protection,  but  on  the  en-
try of  the  victorious  army,  April  1">,  order  was
restored  and  Gonzalez  nominated  provisional  presi-
dent. Duenas,  who  had  been  deliven>d  to  the  au-
thorities, was  set  at  lilierty  in  June.  After  a  pro-
longed trial  by  the  supreme  court,  he  was  absolved.
4  July,  1H?2,  but  toward  the  end  of  that  month,
on  the  discovery  of  a  conspiracy  to  overthmw  the
governments  of  Guatemala  and  Salvador,  he  was
imprisoned  again,  and  in  August  expelled  from
the  republic  with  sixteen  capuchin  friars  who  were
implicated  with  him. They  went  to  Kurope.

HI 'Kit.  Edward  Louis,  physician,  b.  in  Cross-
wicks,  X.  J.,  lit  Jan.,  \KU\.  He  is  descended  from
an  old  Scottish  family  long  resident  in  the  United
States.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1857,  and  re-
ceived his  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  I860.  During  the  years  succeed-
ing his  graduation  he  practised  with  his  father.  Dr.
George  S.  Duer.  at  Cmsswicks.  In  1861  he  entered
the  P.  S.  army  as  surgeon  of  volunteers,  and
served  throughout  the  war.  He  was  resident  phy-
sician  of  Philadelphia  hospital  from  lHtM)  till  1MB,
surgeon  from  18(32  till  1865,  obstetrician  from
1881  till  1884.  gynecologist  of  Presbyterian  hospital
in  1880,  and  lecturer  on  disease!  of  women  and
children  in  Philadelphia  polyclinic  from  188:}  till
1885.  He  has  published  "  Post-Moitem  Discov-
eries" and  "Treatment  of  Diphtheria."

lM'Klt.  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Devonshire,
England,  18  March.  1747;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  7
Kay,  1 188.  He  was  the  third  son  of  John  Duer,  a
planter  of  Antigua,  who  had  a  villa  in  Devonshire.
His  mother  was  Frances  Fryc,  daughter  of  Sir
Frederick  Fryc.  who  held  a  command  in  the  West
Indies,  where  she  married  John  Duer.  After  U-ing
sent  to  Kton,  and  while  still  under  age.  he  WSJ  put
into  the  army  as  ensign,  and  accompanied  Lord
('live  as  aide-de-camp  >>n his return to Iml.

?;o\crnor-geiicral.  in  1788.  As  he  ■offered  severely
ton  the  climate.  Lord  ('live  sent  him  bOQB  to
England,  where  he  remained  live  years  until  his
father's  death.  Having  left  the  army,  he  went  to
Antigua,  and  thence  to  New  York,  for  the  tir-t
time  in  17<>N.  to  arrange  for  a  regular  and  constant

■apply of  lumber  for  the  plantations  in  Antigua

and  Dominica.  This  brought  him  into  coiii.ni
with  (Jen.  Schuyler,  by  whom  he  WM  induced  to
buy  a  lam  tract  of 'land  at  Fort  Miller,  on  the
up|icr Hudson, including  the (alls, ami hen- be

masted  large  saw-mills. He  was  appointed  ookmal

of  militia,  judge  of  the  county  court-,  member  of


the  \.«  York  pmvincial  ■OnffML  and  mem  I

tin-  committee  of  mf«tv. In  l  .  ,,  u,

Kngland,  and  obtained  a  contract to  -

Boyal  nary  with  timiier  for  naatsand  span..' n.-

was  one of the ( BlittSS that drafted the

constitution  of  New York in  the  convention  of
1777. In  I777-'H he  was  n  delegate  to  the  <  onti-
nental  congn-s*,  and  in  17h«  ■errrUn  of  the  trw-
ury lH.ard. until the  organization  ,,f  t|1(. finance
department under  the National  convention. He
was  a  BSmber  of  the  state  legislature,  mid  amist-
ant  secretary  (kf  the  treasury under Gov.  Hamil-
ton. Mr.  Dm-r's  failure  in  17M  prodnosd  the  flmt
linaiicial panic caused by  ■Mentation that Xew
Vork  had  ever  witnessed. The  Iosh  was  climated
at f:i.(KM».(i(K), and impoverished main in all
Classes. On  27  July.  177!".  he  marril .  {  atheriiie,
MOOnd daughter of
Geo, William Alex-
ander, the claimant
of  the  Boottish  earl-
dom of  St  Lriing. The
marriage took  place
at his country seat.
••  The Buildings,
mar Ihtskingridgc.
X.  J.,  which  was  de-
signed to imitate
the  residence  of  an
English nobleman,
with  all  the  appoint*
incuts  of  an Lnglish
country seat. She
was  descended  from
James  Alexander,  the
De  Peysters,  Living-
stons, and  Schuyleis,
and  occupied  a  brill-
iant place  in  the  so-
ciety of  the  period. —
His  eldest  son.  William  Alexander,  jurist.  l>.  in
Rhinebsck,  X.  Y..  8  Sept,  1780;  d.  in  New  York.
:{<>  May.  1858,  studied  law  in  Philadelphia,  and  with
Xathaniel Pendleton  in Xew  York. During  the
quasi  war  with  France  in  17SW  he  obtained  the  aj»-
pointment  of  midshipman  In  the  navy,  and  served
under  Decatur. On  the  adjustment  of  the  French
question,  he  resumed  bis  stodiea  with  Pendleton,
and  wss  admitted  to  the  bar  in  lso"..'. He  engaged
in  business  with  Edward  Livingston,  who  was  than
district  attorney  ami  mayor  of  New  York,  and,  after
his  removal  to  New  Orleans,  formed  a  professional
partnership  with  his  brother-in-law,  Beverley  Bob-
mson. About  this  tinie  he  contributed  to  a  parti*
-an  weekly  paper  called  the  M Corrector,"  conduct-
ed by  Dr.  Peter  Irving  in  support  of  Aanui  Burr.
Mr.  Duer  shortly  afterward  Joined  Livingston  at
New  Orleans,  and  studied  Fhrwnffh  civil  law. Hs

was  successful,  but.  owing  to  the  climate  and  to
his  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  William  Den-
ning, a  prominent  whig  of  New  York,  he  SJSS  in-
duced to  resume  prBOtke  in  the  latter  city.  Hen-
he  contributed  literary  article*  to  the  ■  Morning
Chronicle."  the  nSWSnanst  of  his  friend  Peter  Irv-
ing. He  next  openso  an  office  in  Khinebeck,  and
in  1814  was  elected  to  the  state  assembly,  when*  he
was  appiinted  chairman  of  a  committee  OB  SOS-
;.|  academies,  and  succeeded  in  paSSinga
bill,  which  is  the  original  of  the  existing'  law  on
the  subject  of  the  c>  imiuoll-school  income.  He
was  also  chairman  of  the  committee  that  arranged
,-titutioiiaiity  of  the  state  law  lasting  the
righl  of  navigation  in  Livingston  and  Fulton,  and
throughout  hi-  lervies  bOrS  a  prominent  |>a.-t  in
promoting  canal  legislation, lie  was  judge  of  the


up  a  fsb-  ><£)*


is^r-


246


DUEKINK


DUFP


supremo  court  from  1822  till  1829,  when  he  was
il.clrd  president  of  Colombia  college,  when  he  re-
mained until  failing  health  compelled  him  to  re-
sign in  1848.  During  his  administ ration  he  deliv-
ered to  the  senior  class  a  course  of  tectum  00  tli«'
constitutional  jurisprudence  of  the  United  States
(published  in  1833;  revised  ed.,  1856).  He  deliv-
ered a  eulogy  on  President  Monroe  from  the  por-
tico  of  the  city  hall.  After  his  retirement  he  re-
sided in  Monistown.  N.  J.,  where  he  wrote  the  life
of  his  grandfather,  Lord  Stirling  (published  by
the  Historical  society  of  New  Jersey).  In  1847  he
delivered  an  address  in  the  college  chapel  before
the  literary  societies  of  Columbia,  and  in  1848  an
historical  address  before  the  St.  Nicholas  society,
which  gives  early  reminiscences  of  New  York,
and  describes  the  scenes  connected  with  the  in-
auguration of  President  Washington,  both  of
which  were  published.  He  was  the  author  of  two
pamphlets  addressed  to  Cadwallader  I).  Colden  on
the  "Steam  boat  Controversy,"  and  the  "Life  of  Will-
iam Alexander,  Earl  of  Stirling  "  (New  York,  1847).
— Another  son,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  7
Oct.,  1782;  d.  on  Staten  Island,  8  Aug.,  1858,  en-
tered the  army  in  his  sixteenth  year,  but  after  two
years  left  the  service  for  the  study  of  law.  He  be-
gan practice  in  Orange  county,  N.  Y.,  and  removed
to  New  York  city  about  1820,  where  he  acquired
reputation  as  an  insurance  lawyer.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1821,  and  in  1825  was  appointed  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  revise  the  statutes  law  of  the  state,
and  afforded  valuable  assistance  in  the  preparation
of  the  first  half  of  the  work.  He  was  elected  an
associate  judge  of  the  superior  court,  and,  on  the
death  of  Judge  Oakley  in  1857,  became  chief  jus-
tice. He  has  published  "  A  Lecture  on  the  Law
of  Representations  in  Marine  Insurance,  with
Notes  and  Illustrations"  (New  York.  1844);  "A
Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Marine  Insur-
ance," which  has  become  a  standard  authority  in
the  United  States  (2  vols.,  1845-'6) ;  "  A  Discourse
on  the  Life,  Character,  and  Public  Services  of
James  Kent,  Chancellor  of  the  State  of  New  York,"
delivered  by  request  before  the  judiciary  and  bar
of  the  city  and  county  of  New  York  (12  April,
1848) ;  "  Three  of  the  Revised  Statutes  of  the  State,"
in  connection  with  Benjamin  P.  Butler  and  John
C.  Spencer;  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  edit-
ing Duer's  reports  of  the  decisions  of  the  superior
court,  the  sixth  volume  of  which  he  left  incomplete.
— William,  son  of  William  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  25  May.  1805,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1824,  studied  law,  and  removed  to
Oswego  in  1828.  In  1832  he  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  the  legislature,  and  in  that  year  re-
turned to  New  York,  and  went  thence  to  New  Or-
leans. In  1835  he  again  resided  in  Oswego,  and
was  a  member  of  the  New  York  legislature  in  1840,
and  district  attorney  for  Oswego  county  from  1845
till  1847.  He  was  twice  elected  to  congress  as  a
whig,  serving  from  1847  till  1851.

IM  I  KINK.  John  Baptist,  missionary,  b.  in
St.  Giles,  near  Lermonde,  Belgium,  in  1809 ;  d.  in
Kansas  in  1857.  He  was  educated  in  the  Episcopal
seminary  of  Ghent,  and,  having  long  desired  to  de-
vote himself  to  the  conversion  of  the  savages  of
North  America,  he  embarked  for  the  United  States
in  1833.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  Mis-
souri, beginning  his  novitiate  at  St.  Stanislaus,  near
Florissant,  in  1834.  afterward  teaching  for  several
years,  and  serving  as  treasurer  of  the  colleges  of
Cincinnati,  St.  Louis,  and  Bardstown.  He  WSJ  HI
accomplished  botanist,  and  traversed  a  great  por-
tion of  Illinois  and  Ohio  in  search  of  rare  plants


and  flowers,  discovering  several  new  varieties,  one
of  which  is  known  as  the  primus  Duerinkimm.
In  1849  he  was  sent  among  the  Indians.  The
mission  of  the  Pottawattamies,  which  he  conducted.
owed  its  great  success  to  him.  These  savages  had%
already  been  converted,  but  he  civilized  them,  and
induced  them  to  prefer  agriculture  to  the  chase.
He  established  schools  for  the  youth  of  the  tribe,
and  succeeded  in  interesting  the  national  govern-
ment in  his  work.  Many  of  his  letters  to  the  au-
thorities were  published  in  the  documents  that
accompany  the  annual  message  of  the  president
(is.")2-  7).  Father  Duerink  was  drowned  while  de-
scending the  Missouri  river  in  a  small  boat.

DUFF,  John,  actor,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in
1787;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  April,  1881.  Be-
fore coming  to  the  United  States  he  was  prominent
as  an  actor  at  the  Theatre  Royal  in  his  native  city.
He  made  his  first  appearance  in  this  country  at
the  Federal  street  theatre,  Boston,  8  Nov.,  18l6,  as
George  Gossamer  in  "  Laugh  when  You  Can.''  1 1  is
first  appearance  in  New  York  was  at  the  Park
theatre,  14  Jan.,  1814.  as  Octavian  in  "  The  Mount-
aineers," and  the  "  Three  Singles."  Mr.  Duff  was
for  many  years  the  most  popular  actor  in  the  old
Philadelphia  company,  wnere  he  was  engaged  in
1811  as  a  "stock  star,"  and  attracted  far  better
houses  than  many  who  claimed  the  highest  honors.
His  versatility  seems  to  have  been  unbounded.  He
could  act  Richard  or  Jeremy  Diddler,  sing  a  comic
song  or  take  a  part  in  an  opera,  with  equal  accepta-
bility. In  1823,  when  he  introduced  Mrs.  Duff  to
the  New  York  public,  the  brilliancy  of  her  acting
scarcely  allowed  a  thought  of  him,  and  soon  after-
ward he  suffered  greatly  from  violent  attacks  of
gout;  yet  he  frequently  played  at  the  old  Chatham,
Bowery,  and  Lafayette  theatres,  where  he  appeared
for  the  last  time. — His  wife,  Mary  Ann,  actress,  b.
in  London,  England,  in  1795;  d.  in  New  York,  5
Sept.,  1857,  was  the  daughter  of  an  Englishman
named  Dyke,  who  had  held  an  office  in  the  service
of  the  East  India  company,  arid  died,  leaving  her
and  her  sisters  with  small  support.  They  received
instruction  in  dancing  from  the  ballet-master
D'Egville,  and  made  their  first  appearance  as  pro-
fessional dancers  at  the  Dublin  theatre.  \\  hile
playing  with  a  party  of  amateurs  at  Kilkenny,
Mary  attracted  the  attention  of  Thomas  Moore,
who  acted  the  part  of  Robin  Roughead  in  "  Fort-
une's Frolic,"  but,  receiving  no  encouragement,  he
transferred  his  affections  to  her  sister,  Elizabeth,
whom  he  soon  married.  After  her  marriage  Mrs.
Duff  came  to  Boston  with  her  husband,  in  1810,
where  she  made  her  first  appearance  on  the  Ameri-
can stage  as  "  Juliet,"  but  without  success.  Sub-
sequently she  appeared  in  characters  of  minor  im-
portance, and  also  in  serious  pantomimes.  In  1817
she  began  to  develop  great  ability.  In  lb'Jo  she
visited  New  York  for  the  first  time,  and  appeared
in  the  Park  theatre  as  Hermionein  the  "  Distressed
Mother,"  adapted  from  Racine's  "Andromache."
This  was  the  character  in  which  her  talents  were
first  asserted  and  in  which  she  first  became  known.
About  this  time  she  played  leading  Shakespearean
parts  with  Edmund  Kean,  who  considered  her  the
equal  of  the  foremost  British  actresses  of  that  day.
She  visited  England  in  1828,  and  made  her  first
appearance  in  London  as  Isabella  in  the  "  Fatal
Marriage."  Her  beauty  and  talent  made  bet  a
great  favorite  throughout  the  United  States.
While  she  was  travelling  from  Cincinnati  to  New
Orleans  upon  the  Mississippi  river  the  Asiatic
cholera  broke  out  among  ner  fellow-passengers.
Fearless  for  her  own  life,  she  administered  to  the
sick  and  dying,  and  upon  her  arri^ml  in  New  <>r-


I»l  II'


DUT1K


Ml


i  vote  «if  thanks  frmn tin-  Mirvi\..r>.
She  in.i'l' her  last ■ppentSJett in New  Orleans  m
- for  the  benefit df  the  orphan  boys'  asylum.
r  t  he  (lent  h  df  .Mr.  Dull  she  married  Mr.s
a  lawyer  in  thai  city,  and  retired  from  the  su.

hi  II.  Peter,  educator,  b,  in  the  province  of
New  Brunswick,  Canada,  hi  Feb..  i*<>-':  d.  In  Pitta-
bur.  Sept*  1H(J1».  His  parents  emigrated
from  Scotland  in  1802,  and  settled  on  a  large  farm
in  New  Brunswick. Pilled  with  the  desire  for  an

active  Ufa,  be  left  the  farm  without  the  knowledge
of  his  family  and  went  to  Edinburgh,  where  he
was  educated  His  intention  wu  to  beoOUM  a
physician,  luit  lie  finally  decided  to  hi  a  men  hunt,

and  returned  to  New  Brunswick,  settling  in  st.

Johns,  here  he  soon  became  prominent,  owning
many  ships  and  extensive  warehouses.  Owing  to  a
large  lire  in  1888, he  liecanic  bankrupt  and  went  to
Pittsburg.  Pa.,  where,  in  1840,  he  founded  "  DulT's
mercantile  college."  one  of  the  first  institutions  of
the  kind  in  the  country,  which  was  very  successful,
■Jed  was  carried  on  by  his  sons  after  Ids  death.
Be  published  the  "North  American  Accountant"
(1847;  enlarged  cd..  1887;  80th  .•<!.,  16

IH'FFKK,  Mary  (•union,  author.  l>.  in  Ala-
bama about  1840.  She  lives  on  a  lonely  mountain
in  Blount  county,  Ala.,  dresses  in  ancient  and  ec-
centric style,  and  writes  under  the  pseudonym  of
•  Hart  I >i» fT  (iordon."  In  May,  1874,  she  delivered
the  address  of  welcome  to  the  visiting  Press  asso-
ciation of  New  York  to  Alabama.  She  has  writ-
ten a  series  of  papers  in  aid  of  the  development
of  southern  industries,  and  numerous  poems,
among  which  "Cleopatra"  is  the  best  known.
Miss  JMilTee  is  a  member  of  the  American  histori-
cal and  biographical  society,  of  the  North  Ameri-
can geographical  society,  and  the  New  Orleans
academy  of  sciences,  and  is  also  the  author  of  a
"History  of  Alabama."  "  Guide  to  the  Mammoth
Cave,  Kentucky,"  guide-books  to  Blount  Springs,
Ala.,  and  to  various  interesting  places  along  the
southern  railways.

IH'FFKKIN;  Frederick  Temple  Hamilton
Blackwood,  Karl  of,  British  statesman,  b.  in
Florence,  Italy,  24  June,  1826.  His  father  was
Price,  fourth  Huron  DufTerin  and  Clandelxiye.
and  his  mother.  Helen  Belina,  a  granddaughter  of

Richard  Brine-
ley  Sheridan,  was
well  known  as  a
writer  of  proH
and  verse.  He
was  educated  at
Eton,  and  at
Christ  Church.
Oxford,  but  left
the  university
without  taking
a degree. He

■nooseded  to  his

father's title in

1841 1 and  was  for

some  years  sub-
sequent lord-in-
.^  waiting to the

j/\  1  #  mean. In  \S5a

/  /  ) £  z^sf*.^ - y  '"'  wm  attached

/ ** — <r/ ^"*-  r  ^^ to the mitrirrn

undertaken  by
Lord  John  Russell  to  Vienna,  and  in  1898  made  it
yacht  roTBgetO  belaud,  a  narrative  of  which  be
"published  (Boston.  lvV.»>.  He  was  sent  by  I .. .i .  1
Palinerston  in  1880  as  ■  British  ooramissioncf  to
Svria  to  make  inquiries  into  the  massacre  of  the
Christians  there,  and on his return was  made  a


K.  ('.  B. He  was  under  ecewtanr  of  etate  for  India
fr-.m  Isiij  (,.  ,.arly  in  |sw,  „,„|  fr,.,,,  t|,e  J*,..
wan  for  a  few months  under-Mcretary for  war.
When  Mr.  Gladstone  came  into  |«iw«-r'in I
Int.  1888,  he  was  appointed  chancellor  of  the  I
of  Lancaster,  in 1*7 1 be wu  created \
ClaudelMiye  and  Karl  of  DufTerin.  and in 1 872  he
governor-general  of  Canada. The  duties

devolving  npon  tins  ofhoerare.  mi  w.

almost  eutir.lv  limited  to  the  opening  and  dimolu-

Hon  of  parliament;  but  then

social  than  poiUioal  in  their  character,  *h

regarded  its  scan-civ  le«-  ,,„  •umhent  on  the  .

While  acting  in  this  dual  capacity  the  Karl  of  DulT-
.•nii  -.cured  a  decree  of  |xi|iiilaritv  never  gained
by  any  of  his  predecessors.  In  education  and  all
other  matters  of  public  concern  he  displayed  tM
greatest  interest,  and  he  whs  soon  known'  as  the
■Meal  OratOt  la  Canada.  In  the  summer  i
Karl  DufTerin.  accoui|>anicd  by  Lady  DufTerin.
made  a  tour  through  British  Columbia,  where  I
great  degree  of  discontent  prevailed,  in  OOnoequenOI
of  a  belief  that  the  terms  BJMN1  which  that  remote

proTince  had  Joined  the  Dominion  dad  aoi  been

complied  with.  Karl  DufTerin's  vjsjt.  and  (,,,  ,„|.
vocacy  of  the  union  and  the  proapeotive  l>cncfits
likely  toaccrueto  British  Columbia  fnun  it. allayed
the  prevalent  discontent,  and  did  much  to  n
the  friendship  between  the  people  of  the  Padfk
coast  and  their  eastern  compatriots.  He  held  the
office  of  governor-general  of  Canada  till  October.
1H?H,  when he  was  succeeded by the Manpiis  of

Iconic.  On  the  eve  of  bis  leaving  Canada  be  was
presented  with  an  address  signed  by  seventy-four
mayors,  wardens,  reeves,  and  councillors  represent*
ing  inunicitMilities  in  Ontario.  In  May.  l878i  hi
was  elected  president  of  the  Royal  geographioal

society,  and  in  June  following  he  attended  the
Harvard  commencement,  when  the  degree  of
LL.D.  was  conferred  upon  him.  To  I/ird  DufT-
erin may  l>e  attributed  the  credit  of  first
ing  the  purchase  of  the  grounds  adjacent  to  Niag-
ara Kails  as  an International  jwirk. In  Fehru

18?9,  he  was  appointed  aml>a»sador  at  St.  Patera-
burg,  was  transferred  to  Constantinople  in  May,
1881.  and  in  October,  1888,  proceeded  to  Cairo,
Egypt, to  settle  questions  between  Kngland  and
that  country  arising  out  of  the  rebellion  of  Arabi
Paaha.  He  left  Egypt  in  April,  1888,  and  was  a|>-
pointed  viceroy  of  India  in  1884,  an  office  thai  he

now  holds  (188?i. Re  is  the  author  of  "  Narrative

of  a  Journey  from  Oxford  toSkibereen  during  the
Year  of  the  Irish  Famine "  (London,  isis  I;  "Let-
ters  from  Sigh  Latitudes " (London,  1880);  "Con-
tributions to  an  Inquiry  Into  the  state  of  Ireland"
(1886);  "Irish  Emigration  and  the  Tenure  oi  Land

in  Ireland"  (1887);  and  "Mr.  Mill's  Plan  for  the
Pacification  of  Ireland  examined  "  (l*i',N.  A  col-
lection of  his  ••  sim-c.  lies  „iid  Addresses  was  pub-
lished  in  1888,  edited  by  Henry  Milton,  A  •■  i;
tory  of  the  Administnition  of  the  Karl  of  DufTerin
in  Canada"  «;i^  published  by  William  I^eggo
(Montreal.  1878}

1M  FFIF,  Alfred  Nsttle.  soldi,  r.  b.  in  Pa.
Prance,  1  May.  1888;  d.  in  Cadi/.  S|miiii.  1  N
I860.  He  studied  at  several  military  academies  in
Paris,  and  was  graduated  at  the  military  college  of
r  in  Is">t  M  8d  lieutenant.  He  ■orved  in
Algiers  and  Senegal,  and  in  the  Crimea  during  the
war  with  Rueeia,  where  hi  was  promoted  to  1st
lieutenant  of  cavalry.  He  afterward  took  |>art  in
the  campaign  against  Austria,  and  gained  several
medals  of  honor. He  oameto  the  United  Statee  in

Im'iO.  accepted  a  captaincy  in  the  1st  New  Jersey
cavalry  at  the  In-ginning  of the  (  nil  war,  and  was


MS


d  n-' field


DUFPIELD


promoted  major  of  the  Harris  light  cavalry  of  New
York.  In  July,  1862,  he  became  colonel  of  the  1st
Rhode  Island  cavalry,  and  on  23  June,  1863,  was
promotc<l  to  hri^adicr-general of  volunteers.  After
the  war  (Jen.  Dullie  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  in
Cadiz,  where  he  served  until  liis  death,  a  period  of
ten  year-.

DUFFIELD,  George,  clergyman,!),  in  Lancas-
ter countv,  Pa.,  7  Oct.,  1732;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  2  Feb.,  1790,  About  1782  his  father,  George
Puffield,  emigrated  from  Ireland  to  Pennsylvania,
where  he  bought  extensive  lands.  The  son  was
partly  educated  at  Newark,  Del.,  and  subsequently
entered  Princeton,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1752.  He  studied  theology  under  Dr.  Robert
Smith,  of  Pequea,  and,  after  officiating  for  two
years  as  tutor  in  Princeton,  was  ordained  in  Sep-
tember, 1761,  and  took  charge  of  the  united
Presbyterian  churches  in  the  frontier  towns  of
Carlisle,  Big  Spring,  and  Monaghan,  Pa.  In  1766
Mr.  Duffield  made  a  missionary  tour  through  the
valleys  of  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,
the  object  of  which  was  to  administer  the  offices
of  religion  to  families  scattered  throughout  that
region,  and  to  establish  churches.  lie  warmly
espoused  the  sentiments  of  the  "  New  Lights  "  in
opposition  to  the  "  Old  Side  "  party,  and  encount-
ered much  opposition,  which  was  continued  after
his  removal  in  1771  to  the  3d  Presbyterian
church  in  Philadelphia,  and  increased  by  the  fact
that  he  was  a  zealous  whig.  On  one  occasion  his
church  was  barred  against  him,  and  there  was  such
a  disturbance  that  a  magistrate  was  called  to  read
the  riot  act,  but  he  was  finally  allowed  to  govern
his  charge  unmolested.  During  the  Revolution  he
served  as  chaplain  and  fearlessly  shared  the  dan-
gers and  privations  to  which  the  army  was  exposed,
being  so  hated  by  the  enemy  that  a  reward  was
offered  for  his  head.  He  was  also  associate  chap-
lain with  Bishop  William  White  of  the  1st  Con-
tinental congress.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
organization  of  the  Presbyterian  church  after  the
Revolution,  and  was  chosen  the  first  stated  clerk  of
the  general  assembly,  which  place  he  held  till  his
death.  The  degree  of  I).  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  by  Yale  in  1785.  His  only  published  works
are  "  An  Account  of  a  Missionary  Tour  through
Western  Pennsylvania  in  1766,"  by  order  of  the
synod,  and  a  "  Thanksgiving  Sermon  on  Peace,"
delivered  11  Dec,  1783. — His  son,  George,  b.  28
July,  1767,  was  a  merchant  in  Philadelphia,  and
was  register  and  comptroller  of  the  state  of  Penn-
sylvania for  many  years. — He  was  the  father  of
George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Strasburg.  Lancaster  co.,
Pa.,  4  July,  1794;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  26  June,
1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1811,  studied  theology  in  New
York  city  under  Dr.  John  M.  Mason,  and  was
licensed  "to  preach  in  1815,  when  he  accepted  a
call  to  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,
where  his  grandfather  had  been  pastor.  He  after-
ward held  pastorates  in  Philadelphia.  New  York
city,  and  Detroit,  Mich.,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  Dr.  Duffield  was  a  careful  student  of
science,  as  well  as  a  distinguished  linguist.  Dur-
ing his  residence  in  Michigan  he  identified  himself
with  all  educational  and  religions  interests,  and
was  twice  regent  of  the  State  university.  In  the
civil  war  he  was  conspicuous  for  his  patriotism,
st  riving  to  increase  the  number  of  troops  sent  from
Michigan  and  helping  to  provide  for  wounded  sol-
diers and  their  families.  His  works  are  •' Regen-
eration" (New  York,  1888);  '•Claims  of  Episcopal
Bishops  Examined  (New  York,  1842);  "Travels
in  the  Holy  Land";  and  various  discourses  and


addresses. — His  wife,  Isabella  Graham  Belli  line,
was  a  sister  of  Dr.  Qeorgs  Bethuna,  and  grand-
daughter of  Isabella  Craham,  the  philanthropist,
— Their  eldest  son.  Geortre,  b.  in  Carlisle,  l'a..  12
Sept.,  1816;  d.  in  Bloomfield.  N.  J..  <i  July,  1888,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1837,  studied  at  Union
theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  and  was  or-
dained 27  Dec,  1840.  He  held  important  pastor-
ates in  Brooklyn,  Philadelphia,  and  in  Michigan,
where  he  resided  after  1861.  His  reputation  de-
pended chiefly  upon  the  hymns  that  he  wrote  and
published. — Another  son,  Divie  Itetliune,  law-
yer, b.  in  Carlisle,  Cumberland  eo..  I'a.,  88  Aua%
1821,  after  studying  at  Dickinson,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1840,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1842.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  in
1843,  and  has  since  practised  his  profession  in
that  city.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  board
of  education  of  Detroit  for  thirteen  years,  and  is
active  in  all  educational  interests  throughout  the
state.  He  has  delivered  various  public  addresses,
and  has  contributed  to  current  literature  both  in
prose  and  in  poetry.  He  possesses  a  large  and
valuable  library.— Another  son,  William  Ward,
soldier,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  19  Nov.,  1823,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1842.  He  served  in
the  Mexican  war,  was  wounded  at  Cerro  Gordo,  18
April,  1847,  and  also  at  Contreras,  20  Aug.,  1847,
while  acting  adjutant  of  the  2d  Tennessee  infantry
and  on  Gen.  Gideon  J.  Pillow's  staff.  After  the
close  of  the  war  he  became  a  civil  engineer.  He
was  resident  engineer  of  the  Hudson  river  rail-
road in  1851,  chfef  engineer  of  the  Oakland  and
Ottawa  railroad,  Michigan,  and  located  that  line
from  Pontiac  to  Grand  Haven ;  chief  engineer  of
the  Central  military  tract  railroad,  111.,  in  1854
(now  part  of  the  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy
railroad),  and  built  that  line;  division  engineer
of  the  Grand  trunk  railroad,  and  built  the  line
from  Detroit  to  Port  Huron.  He  served  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  4th  Michigan  infant rv  in
1861,  and  was  in  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run.
On  10  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  91  h  Michigan  infantry.  He  joined  Gen.  Sher-
man at  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  was  sent  by  him  to
occupy  and  fortify  the  pass  through  Muldraugh
Hill,  West  Point,  'Ky.,  22  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  H]>-
pointed  by  Gen.  Buell  commander  of  the  2:5d  lui-
grade,  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  22  April,  1862,  and
brigadier-general  and  president  of  the  examining
board  under  the  act  of  congress  to  test  the  effi-
ciency of  volunteer  officers,  2  May,  1862.  He  over-
took the  Confederate  forces  under  Col.  John  Mor-
gan at  Lebanon,  and  captured  the  place  after  a
sharp  fight.  He  was  assigned  by  Gen.  Buell  to  com-
mand all  the  forces  in  Kentucky,  8  May,  1862,  and
was  relieved  of  this  post  on  10  Sept.  He  rejoined
the  14th  corps.  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  under
Gen.  Thomas,  and  served  with  it  until  the  bat-
tle of  Murfreesboro,  where  he  was  disabled  by  two
severe  wounds  and  captured.  Unable  to  take  the
field  at  the  time  required  by  the  act  of  eongr
resigned,  and  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the
Hudson  river  railroad.  He  was  employed  in  l*o!)
to  survey  lands  in  Colorado,  in  1871-'2  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Kentucky  union  railroad,  and  lo-
cated that  line  from  Paris  to  Hazard.  He  WM
elected  to  the  Michigan  state  senate  in  1880.  and
in  1882  was  employed  in  surveying  government
land  m  Dakota.  In  1885  he  was  re-appointed  chief
engineer  of  the  Kentucky  union  railroad. He  has

f  published  "  School  of  Brigade  and  Kvolut  ions  of  1  be
one  "(Philadelphia,  1868). — Another  son,  Samuel
Pearee,  physician,  h.  in  Carlisle.  Pa.,  84  1  ><c.
1833,  was  graduated  at  the  Universify  of  Michigan


DtlTIKLD


DUGAfl


MO


in  1854,  and  remained  then  *t inlying  snsasjsjfy
Hinl  anatomy  till  tin-  following  ><i«r.  when  he
went  to  tin'  liiivcr>ity  ..f  Pennsj  ivauia  ami
studied  medicine. Hi  w«-nt to  Berlin  iii :

ited  fi»r  failing  eyesight,  and  after  "MflfnHg
relief  studied  physics  and  clnnii-irv  there  ami  in
Liebigs  laboratory  in  Munich,  tin.-dh  reoeiving  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  lit  the  I'niversity  of  ii

\8  In-  began  to  practise  medicine  al  Detroit,
Mill  continuing  his  chemical  in  vest  igat  ions  ami
giving  special  attention  to  toxicology  ami  incilical
jurisprudence.  He  nkhi  became  known  as  an
analytical  chemist,  ami  has  been  frequently  Balled
upon  to  testify  in  the  courts  its  an  cx|M-rt.  For
three  uiontlis  he  worked  with  his  friend  I'rof.
George  Dugundorfl  in  the  laboratory  Of  the  Im-

perial  university  of  Russia,  at  Dotpat,  and  is  now
kged  in  writing  a  work  describing  his
investigations  then'.  Dr.  Doffleld  arranged  the
clieinical  laboratory  for  the  Detroit  medical  college,
and  delivered  the  owning  address  there  in  lVi -
He  read  a  |mi|ht  at  the  Detroit  meeting  of  the  I
American pharmaceutical association, on the

"Relation  Of  HjpOfleniiO  Injections  to  Toxi-
cology," and  is  the  author  of  numerous  medical
papen,  Including  "  Ventilation  of  Sewers  "  ;  "  Con-
tamination of  Drinking  Water";  "Analysis  of
Malt  by  I'olarizat ion  *';  and  "  Aconite  Poisoning."
He  has  also  delivered  an  address  upon  the  "Re-
ligion of  Christ  versus  the  Religion  of  the  Scien-
tist-," before  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  I
in  Detroit,  Mich.— Another  son,  Henry  Martin.
lawyer,  !>.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  10  Ma  v.  lMJ-„>.  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1861,  and  enlisted  in
that  year  in  the  !)th  Michigan  infantry.  He  was
promoted  to  be  adjutant  of  his  regiment  and
tant  adjutant  of  U.  S.  troops  in  Kentucky  in
1888. In 1N«M he was made p>st -adjutant of

Chattanooga,  and  was  wounded  in  the  i>attle  of  |
Chickamauga  while  serving  on  the  staff  of  (Jen.
Thomas. Prom  that  date until the  close  of  the
war  he  was  assistant  provost-marshal-general  of  the  i
Army  of  the  Cumberland  on  Gen.  Thomas's  stntT.
He  was  the  orator  on  the  occasion  of  the  unveil-  |
tag  of  the  Garfield  statue  in  Washington,  in  May,
1887. He  was  an unsuccessful Republican  candi-
date forcongress  in  1870,  and  has  been  corporation  I
Counsel for  Detroit sines 1878, Hs  is  also  presi-
dent of the state military t>nard of Michigan.
— Samuel YYilloiighby.  clergyman,  son  of  the
fourth  George,  b.  bo  Brooklyn,  FT.  V..  in  Ih-W:  d.  in
Hloomtield.  N.  .1..  12  May.  lss?.  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1888,  and  in  1866  entered  the  Presbyterian
ministry. At  his  death  he  held  a  charge  in  Bloom-
field.  N.  .1. He  eontribnted  to  "The  EvangelisJ  "
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Anselmus." His  publica-
'ioiis  are  "Tie-  Heavenly  Land,"  in  English  vets,-,
from  tlie-De  Contemptu  Mundi"of  Bernard  de  .
Morlaix (New York. 1868); "Warp  and Woof"
(1870);  "English  Hymns,  their  Authors  and  His-
tory" (1886);  and  "Latin  Hymn-Writers"  (1887).
lM'PFlKlil),  John  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
McConnellsburg,  I 'a..  If  Feb..  1888, Hs  is  s  de-
scendant  of  George  Duffteld,  an  early  settler  of
Pennsylvania. He  was  graduated  at Princeton  in

1841.  and  assumed  charge  Of  the  mathematical  de-
partment. Union  academy.  Philadelphia.  He  af-
terward studied  in  the  Tbeologioal  seminary  at
Princeton,  was  appointed  tutor  of  Greek  in  Prince-
ton eollege,  and  served  as  adjunct  professor  of
mat  hematics  from  1H47  till  \x'A).  He  was  licet
to  preach  in  1848,  and  In  the  following  year  was
elected  stated  supply  of  the  8d  Presbyterian  church
of  Princeton,  and  was  ordained  by  the  Presbytery
. miswnk  m  1851. During  the  two


had  charge  of  that  church,  in
with  his  duties  incollcgr,  he  published  tl
toii  Pulpit,"  ii  volume  containing  a  BOTDjSSJ  breach

of the I'resliVtel  lltffl then ICSldfllg III

i'rincetou. He  Mtis pfcnsanf  of  mathematics  in
Princeton  from  I  WW)  till  IH?|,and  alw>  :
mechanics from 1863  till 1871. II- «
moderator  of  the  New  JeTSSJ  Ijmod  in  1805. The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  anon  him  by  Prince-
ton in  lsT'j. His  pnhlioatioM  Includes
the  M  Second  Advent"  "History  of  the

Bsoond  Pnabyterian  Church  of  Princeton  ";  and
review  articles  on  "The  Rhiloaopbj  of  Mathe-
matics "  (IkiW!)  and  ••  Involution  as  it  RrgpecU  Man
and  the  Ril.le  "  <1n7H).

DUGAJTNB,  August  hie  Joseph  Hlekey.  au-
thor, h.  in  Roston.  Mass.,  in  IN'2.1;  d.  in  New  York,
'JIM  lit.,  IKM-4.  While  quite  young  he  wrote  patri-
otic songs  and  |hniiis,  which  were  published  m
newspajiers  and  became  popular.  These  were  col-
lected and  published  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Hand
Poems  "  (Boston,  1*44),  which  had  a  large  side.  Be
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ainernan  or
"know-nothing"  jiarty.  During  the  civil  war  In-
joined  the  176ta  regiment  <«f  New  York  roiantseta,
and  was  commissi, ,ne<|  colonel.  He  was  eaptiind
l>y  the  Confederates  and  confined  in  a  southern
prison.  After  the  war  he  resumed  editorial  and
literary  work,  and  became  oonnectod  with  the
"New  York  Tribune."  He  delivered  an  oration
00  the  heroic  succession  at  the  Cooper  institute
(5  April,  1867)  on  the  second  anniversary  of  tin-
death  of  Abraham  Lincoln  (New  York.  18671  His
publications  are  "A  Comprehensive  Summary  of
General  Philosophy"  (1845);  "The  Iron  Harp"
(Philadelphia,  1847) ;  "The  Lydiaa  Queen," a  trag-
edv,  produced  at  the  Walnut  street  theatre,  Phila-
delphia (1848) ;  "MDCCCXLYHI.  or  the  Year  of
the  People"  (1849) ;  "Parnassus  in  Pillory,  a  Sat-
in, by  Motley  Manners,  Esq."  (New  York.  1881);
"The  Mission  of  Intellect,"  a  |hk-iii  read  in  New
York  (1868);  "Art's  True  Mission  in  America"
(New  York,  1K<)7):  "The  Gospel  ol  Labor,"  ■  poem
read  in  New  7otk(1864);  "  Poetical  Works  "(Rhila-
delphia,  1M.V>);  "A  Class-Rook  of  Government  and
Civil  Society"  (New  York.  1K.">«I);  ••  History  of  Gov-
ernmente"  (1861);  "The  Ring  of  Dsatiny^or  the
Astrologer's  Plot,  a  Tale  of  Ancient  Days"  B
lsiil);  "Utterances"  (New  York.  1H<»4>;  "Camps
and  Prisons;  Twenty  Months  in  the  Department
of  the  Gulf  "(New  York,  1888);  "  Pighting  Quakers
a  True  Story  of  the  War  for  (»ur  I'nioii
York.  1866);  '"  Revised  leaves,"  a  series  of  critiques
on  oon temporary  authors,  published  in  "SartainV
Maya/inc."  and  papen  upon  a  variety  of  Mihjects.
under  various  |K-n-names,  in  maga/.im ■  and  jour-
nals. His  last  production  was  a  satin  on  Roin-rt
(».  Ingersoll,  entitled  "  Injure  SouL"

DCGA8,  Louis  Alexander,  physician,  b.  in
Washington,  (in.,  :t  Jan..  I^m;. His bjsJBJbI
of French  ancestry,  and emigrated from Santo
Domingo,  W.  I. Be  was  sdaoand  at  home,  studied

medicine with Dr.  John I>ent.  and  in 1881  was

graduated  at  the  im-dica!  department  of  the  l"ni-
versitv  of  Maryland.  After  attendini:  lectures  in
Italtii'nore  and '  Philadelphia,  and  sending  several

nan  in  study  in  Inrope,  as  ssttficj  in  Augusta,
c,a..  in  I8BL In  1881  be  united  with  In  others  m

founding  the  Medical  college  of  Georgia,  in  which
he  still  holds  the  professorship  of  surgery.  In
1888  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  oonJorved  apon  him

by  the  I'niversity  of  QecndBi  y»r  immy  yean  he
was  president  of  the  Medical  society  of  Augusta,
and In  president  of  the  Medical  associa-

tion of  Georgia. During  the  civil  war  he  was  vol-


250


DUG DALE


DUHAMEL


imtonr  and  consulting  surgeon  of  military  In »pi-
tals.  From  1*51  till  1858  he  was  editor  of  the
"Southern  Medical  and  SlUgiea]  .lournal."  Hi-
Boat  important  contributions  to  the  literature  of
his  profession  are  those  on  "Rheumatism,"  "  Oph-
thalmia." •■  Colica  Pictonum,"  "Convulsions,""  Sur-
gical Operations  during  Mesmeric  Insensibility,"
"  Use  of  Quinine  in  Fevers,"  "  Diagnosis  of  Shoul-
der Dislocations,"  "Fractures  of  the  Scapula,"
"  Transactions  of  the  Medical  Association  of
Georgia"  (1874-'6),  and  "Pathological  Peculiar-
ities of  Negroes."

KIlillAI.K.  Richard  L.,  political  economist,  b.
in  Paris,  France,  in  1841 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  28
July,  1H83.  His  father  was  engaged  in  business  in
France,  but,  owing  to  pecuniary  losses,  returned  to
England  in  1848.  Here  the  son  developed  artistic
talent,  which  led  to  his  being  placed  m  the  gov-
ernment drawing-school  at  Somerset  House.  In
1851  his  family  came  to  New  York.  At  the  age  of
fourteen  he  was  employed  by  a  sculptor  to  do  some
artistic  work,  which  he  accomplished  with  much
credit.  For  a  time  he  resided  in  Indiana,  but  re-
turned to  New  York,  where  he  entered  into  mer-
cantile business  and  attended  the  night-schools  at
Cooper  Union,  distinguishing  himself  in  the  debat-
ing clubs.  He  was  secretary  of  the  section  on
sociology  of  the  New  York  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science  and  the  arts,  of  the  New  York
social  science  society,  of  the  New  York  sociology
club,  and  of  the  Civil  service  reform  association ;
treasurer  of  the  New  York  liberal  club,  and  vice-
president  of  the  Society  for  the  prevention  of  cru-
elty to  animals.  He  became  a  member  of  the  New
York  prison  association  in  1868,  to  whose  work  he
gave  his  first  attention.  His  aim  was  to  improve
prison  discipline  and  the  treatment  of  convicts,
and  to  obtain  practical  aid  for  them  after  their  re-
lease. He  visited  many  prisons,  learned  the  his-
tories of  criminals,  and  published  "The  Jukes,
Hereditary  Crime"  (New  York,  1877),  which  at-
tracted much  attention  both  in  this  country  and  in
Europe.  In  "Further  Studies  of  Criminals"  he
briefly  draws  the  lessons  learned  from  his  investi-
gations. He  also  published  essays  on  sociological
subjects  in  various  periodicals.

DUGGAN,  James,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  the  county
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1825.  He  came  to  the  United
States  when  very  young,  studied  for  the  ministry
in  St.  Louis,  was  ordained  in  1847,  and  was  imme-
diately afterward  appointed  rector  of  the  ecclesias-
tical seminary  of  the  diocese.  In  1850  he  was  made
assistant  pastor  of  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Louis,  and
in  1854  created  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  and
pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Immaculate  Concep-
tion. He  was  consecrated  coadjutor  archbishop  in
1857,  with  the  title  of  Bishop  of  Antigone,  and  was
afterward  nominated  bishop  of  Chicago,  but  failing
health  soon  compelled  him  to  travel  abroad.  His
administration  had  given  great  dissatisfaction,  and
several  priests  complained  of  it  to  the  court  of
Rome,  on  learning  which  he  hastened  home  and
removed  those  who  had  accused  him.  But  it  soon
Iwcame  evident  that  his  mind  was  giving  way,  and
in  186!)  his  symptoms  developed  into  insanity  and
he  was  removed  to  an  asylum  in  Missouri.  He
has  never  recovered.

DUGGAN,  Peter  Paul,  artist,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1H10;  d.  in  Paris,  15  Oct..  18W.  He  came
to  the  United  States  at  an  early  age.  and  qualified
himself  for  an  art  professorship,  which  he  obtained
in  the  New  York  free  academy  soon  after  its  open-
ing. He  devoted  himself  principally  to  crayon-
drawing,  and  occasionally  paintetl  in  oils.  His
crayon  portraits  were  delicate  and  truthful. One


of  his  best  was  his  picture  of  the  poet  Bryant.  He
was  compelled  to  resign  his  office  and  to  abandon
all  work  on  account  of  his  delicate  health,  and  went
to  England,  residing  in  London  until  he  removed
to  Paris  in  1861.

W  i.o  M  M  I  I  l.\  Jean  Francois  Coquillc.  toW
dier.  b.  in  Guadnloupc.  West  Indies,  in  1786 :  d.  at
San  Sebastian.  Spain,  in  1794.  He  entered  the
army  when  scarcely  sixteen  years  old,  served  on  the
continent,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major;  but.  hav-
ing been  placed  on  half-pay,  he  retired  to  Martin-
ique, where  he  had  inherited  a  large  estate,  on
which  he  lived  for  nearly  twenty-five  years.  II.'
supported  the  doctrines  of  the  French  revolu-
tion, and  was  elected  commander  of  the  national
guard  of  the  island,  which  office  he  held  for  three
years;  but  being  placed  between  the  white  colo-
nists, who  were  almost  unanimously  opposed  to  tin-
new  ideas,  and  the  excited  negroes,  who  were  impa-
tient to  revenge  their  sufferings  upon  their  former
masters,  he  was  forced  to  resign,  and  sailed  in  1792
for  France  as  deputy  to  the  National  convention  for
Martinique.  But  he  soon  resigned  his  seat  and  re-
entered  the  army,  was  commissioned  general  of  bri-
gade, and  soon  rose  to  the  rank  of  division-general
in  the  army  of  Italy.  In  1793  he  directed  the  riegt.
of  Toulon,  where  he  was  conspicuous  for  his  ability
and  courage,  as  also  for  his  humanity  after  the  sur-
render. During  the  siege  a  young  artillery  officer,
Bonaparte,  laid  before  the  general  a  plan  to  expel
the  British  fleet  from  the  bay,  which  would  lead  to
the  capture,of  the  city,  and  "Dugommier,  recogniz-
ing the  genius  of  the  young  officer,  approved  the
plan  with  the  warmest  praise.  Dugommier  com-
manded afterward  the  trench  army  of  the  eastern
Pyrenees,  repeatedly  defeated  the  Spanish  armies,
and  recaptured  from  them  Fort  St.  Elmo,  Collio-
ure,  Port-Vendres,  and  Bellegarde.  He  Anally
crossed  the  Pyrenees,  and  during  the  siege  of  San
Sebastian  ,was  killed  by  the  bursting  of  a  shell.

DUGUE,  Charles  Oscar,  poet,  b.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  1  May,  1821.  His  parents  were  Ameri-
cans of  French  descent.  lie  was  educated  in
Auvergne,  and  at  the  college  of  St.  Louis,  in
Paris,  and  while  a  student  wrote  verses  that  ( 'ha-
teaubriand  commended  for  their  "noble  and  natu-
ral expression,  without  affectation  or  extravagant -e."
In  1852  he  became  editor  of  a  daily  paper  in  New
Orleans.  "  L'Orleanais,"  and  afterward  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  bar.  He  has  published  "Essais  poet-
iques  "  (1847),  consisting  of  descriptions  of  south-
ern scenery,  and  occasional  poems ;  two  dramatic
works  on  subjects  drawn  from  the  romantic  legendl
of  Louisiana,  "Mila  ou  La  Mort  de  La  Salle"
and  "Le  Cygne,  ou  Mingo";  an  Indian  plot,  in
which  Tecumseh  is  one  of  the  characters  (1852);
and  "  Philosophie  morale,"  which  was  published
in  French  and  English.

DUHAMEL,  Joseph,  Canadian  lawyer.  1>.  in
Montreal,  20  Jan.,  1836.  He  was  educated  at  the
colleges  of  St.  Therese  and  St.  Hyacinthe.  and  at
the  Jesuit  college  in  Montreal,  where  he  completed
his  classical  education.  He  then  studied  law  in
Montreal,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  in  April.  188$
He  first  formed  a  partnership  with  the  late  Cyrille
Archambault,  then  with  Gustave  Drolet,  and.  after
his  retirement,  he  became  head  of  the  legal  firms
of  Duhamel,  Rainville,  Rinfret  &  Rainville  (now
Duhamel,  Rainville  &  Marceau).  Mr.  Duhamel  is
a  liberal  in  politics,  and  was  unanimously  i
president  of  the  Reform  association  of  the  province
of  Quebec  in  April.  1882.  His  high  reputation,
fluency  of  speech,  knowledge  <>f  law,  and  devotion
to  his  profession,  have  secured  for  him  one  of  the
largesl  practices  of  the  Montreal  bar.


Kin  \mi:i.


DUKE8


m


£ £fC+-,,*m* «g(«X<Ml<^


l>l  II  V Mil.,  Joseph  Thomas.  Canadian  R.  C.

archbishop,  i>.  in  Contmanr, inty  <<t  Vercberes,

Canada  >tl. Bi  -t m<  1 1.1 1  at  the  College

of  Ottawa,  prepared  for  the  priesthood  under  the

ii  nf  the  <  >l>Iut  •*  Father-,  was  ordaifM  <l  [  >rn — t
in  1868,  niul  was  immediately  appointed  OSfi  <>f
Buckingham.  Here  his  luliiiimstrat iv«-  qnalMej  at-
tracted tin-  mi-
t i € -•  -  of  his  supe-
ri<»rs,  and  as  the
pariah  <>f  St.  Ku-
gMM  wa.i  in  need
Of  h  church  he
was  sent  to  build
one  In  1800  be
accompanied  his
bishop  to  the
Vatican  council
in  the  capacity  of
theologian.  In
1874  he  was  aoo-
secriited  hishop
of  Ottawa.  He
devoted  himself
specially  to  the
advancement  of  education  in  his  diocese,  developing
and  improving  the  College  of  Ottawa,  invited  the
Jesuits  to  open  establishments,  unci  bonded  several
christian  Mothers' schools.  In  1878  he  made  his
first  visit  to  Koine  us  bishop,  and  in  1882  revisited
it  to  make  arrangements  for  the  division  of  his
diocese.  In  18H<1  Hishop  Duhamel  was  created  fir-t
archbishop  of  Ottawa.  In  IHH2  he  was  const  it  uted
a  count  of  the  Holy  Koimin  empire,  and  he  is  also
assistant  at  the  pontifical  throne,  a  knight  grand
cross  of  the  order  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  and  an
advocate  of  St.  Peter's.

IM  HAMKI,,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  IN'27;  d.  in  Washington.  I).  ('.,  15  Aug.,
1883. He  was  educated  at St. Mary's.  Md..  was

fraduated  at  Maryland  university  of  medicine  in
849,  and  practised  near  Washington,  I),  ft,  for
nil  years  in  partnership  with  Dr.  Iiayne.  In
1888  he  whs  appointed  adjunct  professor  of  surgery
in  Georgetown  medical  college.  Dr.  Duhamel  was
called  to  attend  the  president  of  the  United  State-
in  1800,  and  continued  to  visit  all  the  occupant- of
the  White  House  during  three  presidential  terms.
He  also  served  as  chief  physician  lor  ten  Veen  to
the  l'.  S.  prisons  in  tin- District  of  Columbia,  end
was  a  member  of  several  learned  societies,  in  which
he  occupied  important  offices.  He  contributed  val-
uable urticles  on  the  use  of  chloroform  and  other
professional  subjects  to  the  "Stethoscope."  of  Vir-
ginia, and  to  the  "New  ferae?  Medical  Journal,"
and  wrote  a  t nut ise  <>n  the  "National  Hotel  Dis-
ease" (at  Washington),

IH'HRINti.  Louis  Adnlphus.  ph\M.  ian,  b.  in
Philadelphia, 88  Dec..  1845.  Hi-  Esther  emigrated
from  Germany  in  1818.  and  became  a  sticce-sful
merchant.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1*<>7.  and  became  one  of  the  resident  physicians
to  the  Philadelphia  hospital.  He  made  it  special
study  of  cutaneous  diseases,  sailing  at  the  end  of
fifteen  month-  for  Europe,  where  he  s|H-nt  two
years  in  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  dermatology
m  the  hospitals  nf  Pari-.  London,  and  Vienna
He  returned  to  this  country  in  1*7(1,  and  opened
in  Philadelphia  h  di-pcii-ary  for  skin  diets.
He  was also,  in 1*71-'-.  one  of the  editor-  of the

••  Photographic  Review  of  Medicine  and  Surgi

In 1*71 he  was  chosen clinical lecturer  upon his

specialty  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and

in !*?»; professor  of diseases  of the skin. In  |


1*7*  hg  m  gloated  *— hiH  .gist  to  the  Phil*.
delphia  hospRaL Ms  m  <••!  aa  phv*iri«n
dispensary  until  l**o.  and  ha*  since  hern  tin
suiting physician, lb- published "An At.
Skin  Diseases"  <1*7»;,:  •■  \ Practical  Tn
Diseases  of the  Skin."  the  hitter tnmetatod  into
French.  Italian,  and  Russian  (ltfi  '  Kpito-

me  of  Skin Diseases M  (1885).-  II  Jul  la.

author,  D.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  01  Ml  \KUi.  was
educated  partly  in  her  native  citv  and  jwrtlv  in
Kuro|M-,  and  has  travelled  extensively  in  the  Unit*

ed  Btateo,  Europe,  Asia,  ami  Africa. Mis*  Duh-

ring  hits  published  two  volumes  (,f  ,-Hf n-nl  eassys
"ii  SOOsal  life,  and  has  prepared  a  third,  which  is
soon  to  In-  loaned.  The  titles  of  the  \ i ,1  ii mes  that
have  0 heady  apt>eHrcd  an-  •Philosophers  and
Pools"  (Philadelphia,  1*741.  and  M Gentlefolks  and

others  "(Philadelphia,  1071

IM'KK,  William,  clergyman,  b.  on  Patapwo
Neck.  Md..  10  Sept,  1707;  d.  in  Klkton.  Md.  in
1840.  He  was  licensed  as  an  ezhottet  when  only
sixteen  years  of  age.  and  fflffitJnned  preaching  un-
til the  spring  of  17*0,  when,  his  health  failing,  he
devoted  the  following  summer  to  study,  taking
lessons  in  Ijatin  and  Greek.  Up  to  17M  the
If cthodists  had  been  regarded  as  a  branch  of  the
Kpiscopal  church,  and  Mr.  Duke  had  always  con-
sidered himself  an  Episcopalian.  When,  then-
fore,  at  Christmas  of  that  year,  the  Mcthodi-t  oon-
ferenos  constituted  itself  o  separata  church.  Mr.
Duke  at  once  severed  his  connection  with  it.  In
17*">  he  was  admitted  to  holy  orders  by  Hishop
Seabury.  Htnl  in  17*7  was  called  to  preside  over  St.
Paul's  parish  in  Prime  George  county,  Md.  Ih-
salary  being  small,  and  not  easily  collected  onder
the  new  voluntary  system.  Mr.  Duke  was  again
compelled  to  resort  to  teaching. He  labored  sul>-

scqucntly  in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  near  Baltimore;
North  Klk  parish,  at  the  head  of  Chesapeake  I
St.  Margaret's.  Westminster.  Anne  Arundel  00.;
and  St.  Ann's  church.  AnnapOUS.  He  also  taught
at  Klkton.  Md.,  was  professor  of  langoaf
John's  college.  Annapolis,  in  1*03- '4,  was  principal
of  Charlotte  Hall  school  ill  1*12-'14,  and  in  1*1*
returned  to  the  academy  at  Klkton.  He  left  a
valuable  library,  which  was  presented  by  his  daugh-
ter to  St.  James's  college.  He  was  the  sutbor  of
-A  Clew  to  Religious  Truth"  (17S»*>>.  written  at
a  time  when  French  infidelity  was  thought  \>>  bo
making  inroads  among  the  gentry  of  Maryland,
and  in  HMO-TO  was  a  contributor  to  the  "Theolog-
ical Repertory,"  his  principal  sJtkdee being** Let-
ters to  Candidates  for  Holy  Order-."  the  "Thirty-
nine  Articles  Collated  with  Texts  of  Script  u:
and  "The  Study  of  Hebrew."

DI'KKS.  Joseph,  missionary,  b.  in  what  is  now
the  state  of  Mississippi  in  1811.  His  |wreiits  were
half-breed  Choctaw  Indian-,  and  Joseph  was  horn
in  the  Choctaw  nation. At  the  age  of  tan  he  was

tl  d  in  one  of  the  large  mission  OOhoolo  at  May-
WW, After  the  -ale  of  the  Choctaw  land- to  the

United  states,  Mr.  Duke-  remained  several  years
in  Mississippi,  assisting  Bar.  Cyras  IMagtooi  in

the  preparation  of  a  grammar  ami  hwflMrl  Of  'he
Choctaw  language.  lie  afterward  removed  to  the
new  country  went  of  Arkansas,  continuing  t"  |fV0
hi*  servioes  liatuhonsiy  as  an  interpreter,  was
ehoeen  an  elder  in  one  of  the  churches,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  pnabytary  n  ihm. He

WM  an  excellent  preacher  in  the  Choctaw  language,
and  wa-  highly  esteemed  bv  the  missionaries.  He
also  a  iptam.  or  "  head  man  "  of  the  tril>e.

tnmslated  the  Choctaw  jai  M  time  judge

of  the  supreme  court,  repeatedly  chosen  a  member
of  the  general  council,  and  acted for  five  years  as


2.V2


DULANY


DU LIHT


a  trustee  of  the  public  schools.  While  employed
by  the  Rev.  A.  Wright  as  assistant  translator,  he
made  the  first  draft  of  most  of  the  nine  Kpistles,  the

I k  of  Revelation,  and  the  Old  Testament  as  far

as  the  Psalms,  besides  aiding  generally  in  the  work
of  revision  and  correction.

DULANY,  Daniel,  statesman,  b.  in  Maryland  in
July,  1721 :  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  19 March,  1797.  1  It-
was  a  lawyer  of  Annapolis,  Md.,  and  served  many
years  as  commissioner-general,  secretary  of  state,  at-
torney-general, and  councillor  of  Maryland,  before
the  Revolution.  Few  details  regarding  his  career
lia\e  Ween  preserved,  but  he  ranked  high  in  his
profession,  and  was  considered  one  of  the  mod  dis-
tinguished men  of  his  time.  Although  a  loyalist,
in  which  character  he  engaged  in  a  warm  news-
paper discussion  with  Charles  Carroll,  he  was
earnestly  opposed  to  the  stamp-act,  being  credited
with  the  following  sentiment:  "There  may  be  a
time  when  redress  may  be  obtained.  Till  then  1
shall  recommend  a  legal,  orderly,  and  prudent  re-
sentment to  be  expressed  in  a  zealous  and  vigorous
industry.  A  garment  of  linsey-woolsey,  when
made  the  distinction  of  patriotism,  is  more  honor-
able than  the  plumes  and  the  diadem  of  an  em-
peror without  it.  Let  the  manufacture  of  Amer-
ica be  the  symbol  of  dignity  and  the  badge  of  vir-
tue, and  it  will  soon  break  the  fetters  of  distress.*'
Josiah  Quincy,  of  Massachusetts,  while  on  a  journey
to  the  southern  states  in  1773,  speaks  of  having
spent  "three  hours  with  the  celebrated  Daniel
Delany."  He  was  the  author  of  "Considerations
on  the  Propriety  of  Imposing  Taxes  on  the  British
Colonies,"  etc.  (London,  17<><>).

DULANY,  Lloyd,  loyalist,  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1782.  He  was  a  resident  of  Annapolis,
Md.  In  May,  1774,  the  Whigs  of  that  city  passed
resolutions  calling  upon  the  lawyers  to  bring  no
suits  for  the  recovery  of  debts  due  from  residents
to  citizens  of  Great  Britain  till  the  Boston  port
bill  should  be  repealed.  Three  days  later  Mr.
Dulany's  name  appeared  at  the  head  of  a  protest,
in  which  the  opinion  was  expressed  that  the  reso-
lution was  "founded  in  treachery  and  rashness.''
and  that  "  our  credit  as  a  commercial  people  will
expire  under  the  wound."  He  was  killed  in  a  duel
with  the  "  Rev."  Bennet  Allen,  in  Hyde  park.

DULANY,  William,  officer  of  marines,  d.  in
Beltsville,  Md.,  4  July,  1868.  He  was  appointed
from  Virginia  as  2d  lieutenant,  10  June,  1817,  be-
came 1st  lieutenant,  19  June,  1819,  and  captain,  1
July,  1834.  He  was  promoted  to  a  brevet  major-
ship,  for  meritorious  conduct  in  the  Florida  war,  3
March,  1843,  and  made  full  major,  17  Nov.,  1847.
He  served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  succeeded  to
the  command  of  a  battalion  on  the  death  of  Mai.
Twiggs.  He  was  made  brevet  lieutenant-colonel,
14  Sept.,  1847,  for  "gallantry  at  Chapultepec,  the
capture  of  the  Belen  gate  and  the  city  of  Mexico,"
and  colonel,  96  July,  1861.

DULCE  Y  G  ARA  Y,  Domingo  (dool'-thay).  Mar-
quis of  Castel  Florite,  governor-general  of  Cuba,
I),  in  Rioja,  Spain,  in  1808:  d.  in  Madrid,  23  Nov.,
1869.  lie  entered  the  army  in  1823,  took  part  in
the  first  Carlist  war,  where  he  distinguished  himself
by  his  bravery,  and  in  1841,  when  a  captain,  be-
came famous  for  his  gallant  defence  of  the  queen's
palace  with  48  men  against  1.000  insurgents  under
Diego  Leon.  Isabella  made  him  brigadier-general
in  1847,  and  in  1849  he  was  promoted  to  field-
marshal.  In  1855,  while  commanding  the  cavalry
in  Madrid,  he  took  part  with  Marshal  O'Donnell
in  the  Vicalvaro  insurrection,  and  was  afterward
made  a  lieutenant-general.  In  lNii'2  Serrano  made
him  governor-general  of  Cuba,  where  he  became


popular.  He  took  stringent  measures  against  the
■tare  traffic,  founded  free  high-schools,  and  intro-
duced useful  reforms  in  every  department,  dur-
ing his  administration  occurred  the  famous  extra-
dition case  of  Col.  Argtlelles.  who,  having  sold  as
slaves  141  African  negroes  who  were  entitled  to
their  freedom  by  the  luw,  fled  to  the  United  States
to  avoid  punishment.  The  Spanish  government
asked  for  nis  extradition,  and, although  then-  was
no  treaty  between  the  two  countries  at  that  time.
Sec.  Seward,  after  a  long  diplomatic  correspond-
ence, ordered  Argtlelles  to  be  surrendered  to  the
governor-general  of  Cuba.  In  1866,  after  the  fall
of  the  liberal  government.  Gen.  Dulce  returned  to
Spain  and  made  a  report,  in  which  he  suggested
a  measure  whereby  all  children  born  thenceforth
of  slave  mothers  should  be  declared  free  from
birth.  He  was  shortly  afterward  arrested  on  sus-
picion of  being  engaged  in  a  conspiracy  to  depose
the  queen,  but  was  soon  released.  The  Revolution
of  1868  restored  him  to  influence,  and  in  January,
1869,  he  was  again  appointed  governor  of  Cuba,
under  very  trying  circumstances.  A  great  part  of
the  island  was  in  open  revolt,  and  Gen.  Dulce  tried
to  bring  about  peace  by  sending  a  special  commis-
sion to  the  insurgents,  but  faded.  After  a  short
though  eventful  administration,  Gen.  Dulce  was
compelled  to  resign  by  the  Spanish  volunteers  at
Havana,  on  account  of  his  desire  to  deal  merci-
fully with  captured  insurgents.  He  returned  to
Spain  in  June,  1869,  in  broken  health,  and  died
during  the  same  year.

DU  LHUT,  or  DULUTH,  Daniel  Greysolon,
explorer,  b.  in  Lyons,  France ;  d.  near  Lake  Supe-
rior in  1709.  He  belonged  to  the  numerous  class
of  lesser  French  nobles,  many  of  whom  found
themselves  in  Canada  without  incomes  from  their
estates,  and  yet  were  prevented  by  pride  from  en-
gaging in  trade.  It  was  these  men  and  their  sons
that  composed  the  "  coureurs  de  bois."  They  were
really  forest  outlaws,  and  many  were  the  royal
edicts  launched  against  them,  but  without  effect.
At  several  periods  of  colonial  history  they  com-
prised the  entire  male  population  under  middle
age,  wives,  children,  ana  farms  being  abandoned
for  the  free,  fascinating  life  of  the  woods.  Du
Lhut  is  said  to  have  induced,  on  one  occasion,  all
the  young  men  to  enlist  under  his  leadership  for
the  period  of  four  years,  and  at  one  time  800  men,
out  of  a  total  population  of  10,000,  mysteriously
disappeared.  The  profit  to  be  derived  from  the
trade  in  furs,  with  the  freedom  from  all  priestly
or  secular  control  enjoyed  in  the  wilderness,  were
the  chief  causes  of  this  exodus.  Du  Lhut's  traffic
was  carried  on  under  the  protection  of  Count
Frontenac,  and  with  the  assistance  of  certain  mer-
chants, of  whom  his  uncle,  Patron,  was  one.  He
spent  his  time  in  the  trackless  forests,  in  the  In-
dian towns,  or  in  remote  posts  which  he  himself
had  planted,  trading,  fighting,  ruling  lawless  sav-
ages and  scarcely  less  ungovernable  whites,  and
from  time  to  time  going  to  France  to  hold  inter-
views with  Seignelay,  the  colonial  minister.  He
built  a  trading  post  on  the  north  side  of  Ijake  Su-

Kerior,  at  the  mouth  of  a  river  entering  Thunder
ay,  where  Fort  William  now  stands.  Du  Unit
left  Quebec  in  September,  1678,  to  explore  the
upper  Mississippi,  visited  three  large  Sioux  towns
in  the  summer  of  1679,  held  a  council  near  Lake
Superior  to  reconcile  the  Assiniboines  with  the
neighboring  tribes,  and  in  June,  1680,  started  with
four  Frenchmen,  an  Indian,  and  two  car
continue  his  explorations.  On  reaching  the  St.
Croix  lie  learned  that  there  were  three  European
on  the  main  river  below. They*  proved to  be


DULLES


dim  \.N


M


bar  Ileum  pin  iiimI  hi-*  companion-,  with  whom
h«-  joitx-il  foTOSS,  and  t<>  whom In-  \n ji-  of  gn .

sistance. In  1084  I aused  two  Indians,  who  had

murdered  several  French  men  OB  Luke  Superior,  to
•  dot.  undaunted  by  t  in-  orowd  <>f  excited  MYim

(hut  surrounded  him  and  his  small  band  of  while
limn.  In  1488  !»•  n«'ii\  illi-  ordered  him  t<>  f. >rt if \
tin-  "ili-troit."  i>r  strait,  between Lokag  F.rie  MM

Boron.  He  wool  then  with  fifty  men  sad  I >n i it  a
polietde  fi>rt,  which  he  occupied  fur  B0SJS  time.

Pin'  war  following,  With  Ti'iitv  iiinl  Durantave.  In

Joined Dononville  in  his  campaign  against  the

BbBJSOSS, bringing  With him ■ body Of Indians

from  the  nppsf  lakes.  During  the  panic  anions
the  colonists  that  followed  the  Iroquois  invasion  of
Montreal  in  1888,  Du  Mint,  with  twenty-eight  Ge>
■Odione,  attoohed  twentj-two  Iroquois  in  canoes,
received  their  fire  without  returning  it.  ami  I m •  r< ■
down  UDOO  ami  killed  eighteen  of  them.  capturing
three  ami  allowing  hut  one  to  escape.  In  1<!!»"»  he
was  in  <'otnmaml  of  Fort  Frontcnac,  ami  in  1889
sun tied  to  the  command  of  a  company  of  infan-
try. For  twenty-the  years  Du  Lhut  was  a  martyr
to  the  gout,  although  he  thought  himself  cured  at
one  time  by  the  intervention  of  an  Itoqoois  saint.
1'arkman  says  that  "while  an  habitual  breaker  of
the  royal  ordinances  regarding  the  fur  trade,  yet
his  services  were  great  to  the  colony  and  crown,
and  his  name  deserves  a  place  of  honor  among  the
pioneers  of  American  civilization."

DULLES,  Ml  Welsh,  editor.  I.,  in  Philadel-
phia. Fa..  4  Nov..  ls-.>:?:  d.  there.  18  April.  1**:.
He  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  1844.  and  at  Union
theological  seminary.  New  York  city,  in  1848,  after
spsodmg  two  years  in  the  study  of  medicine.  He
was  a  missionary  in  southern  India  in  lK4!)-".">:{.  and
in  the  latter  year  took  charge  of  the  missionary
work  of  the  American  Sunday-school  union. He

became  secretary  of  the  publication  committ >f

the  Presbyterian  general  assembly  in  lNofi.  and.  on
the  union  of  the  two  branches  of  the  church  in
1*70.  was  chosen  editorial  secretary  of  the  united
board  of  publication,  editing  the  tracts,  books, and
periodicals  issued  by  that  body.  Princeton  gave
him  the  degree  of  I).  I),  in  1871.  Dr.  Dulles  vis-
ited Europe  in  1N74,  travelled  in  Egypt,  Syria.
Amu  Minor,  and  (ireece  in  1878-V,  and  journeyed
through  Spain  and  Algeria  in  1884  He  was  a
nephew  of  .John  Welsh,  late  minister  to  England.
He  was  the  author  of  "The  Soldier's  Friend"  <  Phila-
delphia, ISol).  the  first  religious  manual  prepared
for  the  army  during  the  war  for  the  Union,  and
■Oheeqoently  wrote  "  Life  in  India"  (Philadelphia.
1M.V»  and  "The  Hide  Through  Palestine"  (1881).

IU'LON,  Rudolf,  educator,  b.  in  Stendal.  Pms-

80  April.  ISO?;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  V..  18  April.

1888. He  studied  theology  and  philosophy  in  the

University  of  Halle,  and  became  rector  of  a  school

at WerU'n in 1881. He  accepted pastorates at

Ploasao,  near  Oatesbstw.  in  1888,  ami  Magdeburg

in  1848,  and  soon  gained  a  reputation  as  ■  pulpit
orator  and  a  fearless  expounder  of  liberal  Christian-
ity. In  1^1^  In- received  a  call  to  the  Liehfraukirche
in  Bremen,  and  while  there  entered  enthusiastically
into  the  |M.litical  agitation  of  that  time,  strenuous-
ly opposing  the  illiberal  measures  of  the  Eichhorn
ministry.  In  1850  he  established  the  Bremen
"  Daily  Chronicle."  a  social-democratic  sheet,  which
i| .pressed  in  1N.">1.  and  "The  Alarmist."  a  re-
ligious weekly.  In  1852  the  Bremen  senate  n
him  from  his  charge  ;  l>ut  sixteen  years  later  this
judgment  \\  bv  the  appellate  court  of  the

free  i  it  v  of  Lubec.  As  Prussia  had  demanded  his
extradition.  Dr.  DoJofl  Med.  in  1888,  first  to  Helgo-
land.  and,  in November  following,  to  the United


lb  besoms  the  ptotet  of  an  independent

.•at i.»n  in  New York  citr,  and  al the  aame

IBS  " in the
interest--  of  free  religion. II

him-eif  to  tin-  oauseof  -  location,  and  iwtiml  in
the  city  of  New  York  tin  tint  Q«^»on-Amsi1lOSI
school  established  in tin  State-,  which  the

civil  war  finally  BOmpolisd  him to  slwndon. In
July.  1WMI.  he  was  chosen  director  of  i
man-American  "  Realschule  "  in  I

where  he remained until his  death. I

BIgsL  siso a  Prnssleii.  teoghl  in  Dr.  Dulon'

York  school,  and  SBhsSaOOOtif  married  dM  of  hi-

dougbtersi  Dr.  Dulon  -  works  Include  MD
tungder  Ih'kenntnissvhriften  in  d.r  nformirtcn
Kirche  "  (Magdeburg.  1847) j  "  Yoin  Kampf  urn
Yolkerfreiheit  "  (1H4<»);  "Her  Tag  i«t  SOjohul
chen."  the  sale  of  which  was  forbidden  bj  the
authorities  (1888);  andwA0S  Aiu.nU."  a  review
of  educational  work  in  this  oountrv  I  i
DUHABBSQCB,  Philip,  loyalist Be  was  a

merchant  of  Boston,  and  was  married  to  a  daughter

of  Dr.  Sylvester  Oordiner, Ha  was  of  Ehoss

who  presented  an  address  to  (iovs.  Hutchinson  and
Cage  in  1774 and  177~>.  In  I778heweul  to  Halifax
with  his  family,  and  in  177*  WOS  proscribed  and
banished.  He  was  appointed  by  the  British  govern-
ment collector  of  customs  at  New  Pp. Mil.
Nas«au.  residing  there  until  his  death.

DUMAS,  Alexandre  Davy  (de  la  Pailleterie).b.
in  Jeremie,  llayti.2.-)  March.  1782;  d.  in  Yillers-C.t-
tereta,  mar  Paris.  Ji;  rYI...  1808,  JJ(.  W|LS  the  KM  of
the  Marquis  de  la  PaiUeterie,  s  wealthy  ereols,  and
an  African  woman.  TieniMtte  Dumas,  whose  sur-
name the  Imiv  adopted  when  he  enlisted  in  177»>  in
the  queen's  dragoons.  In  1?!W  be  had  risen  to  the
rank  of  general  of  division,  and  as  soch  oommanded
for  some  time  the  Army  of  the  Eastern  Pyre*
served  in  the  Army  of  the  Alps,  and  took  posses-
sion of  the  Great  Saint-Bernard  and  Moot-Cenia.
In  17841  he  was  commander-in-chief  <>f  the  Army  of
the  West.  Assigned  to  service  under  Itona|>artc  in
17!Ml.  he  assist, (1  at  the  siege  of  Mantua,  and  at  the
battle  of  Brixen  in  1788  he  alone  defended  a  bridge
against  a  small  force  of  cavalry  till  the  French
COUld  come  to  the  rescue.  For  this  deed  lloiia-
parte  presented  him  to  the  directory  as  the  "  llora-
tius  Cocles  of  the  Tyrol."  Qon.  Dumas  aeoom-
panied  Bonaparte  to  Egypt  in  May.  1788,  and  in
August  suppress,,!  a  military  insurrection  at  Cairo.
( Mi  account  of  the  climate  and  a  disagreement  with
lien.  Berthier,  he  applied  for  a  furlough,  and  saiie«i
for  Prance  in  l ?!»!».  A  storm  obliged  the  rssssl  to
put  into  Taranto.  and  he  was  arrested  bj  the  Nea-
politan  government  and  detained  for  twenty-eight
months  as  a  prisoner.  After  his  release  the  tirst
consul  declined  t<>  give  him  an  appointment  <>n  ac-
count of  his  republican  principles.  fJen.  Dumas
was  the  father  of  the  well-known  French  novelist,
Alexander  Dumas,  the  elder.

IM'MAS.  Muthieii.  Count,  Frcm-h  cm-nil,  bt
in  MontiM'llier.  88  Nov.,  17.^1:  d.  in  Pan-.  l«;  1 1
1*:17.  He  entered  the  army  in  177:1.  and  served  as
aide-de-camp  to  RfrfthamhsaS  in  America  in  17*0-11.
He  was  a  member  of  tin-  legislative  assembly  in
17'.M.  ami  was  condemned  to  death  in  1 7U.'t.  but
fled  to  Switzerland,  entered  the  military  service  ..f
Napoleon,  and  was  a  general  in  1815.  He  was  ac-
tive in  the  Revolution  of  1888.  He  OTOta  "  Precis
de*  im  inineiits  militaires,  de  179U  A  I  *- 1  i  "  i  Paria,
1818-<86,  18  vols,  and  atlas).  It  i-  said  al-.  that
he  is  author  of  the  narrative,
printed  in  London  (1788).  Hi-  "Souvenirs  de
limn  temps,  ds  177<>  i  1888,"  VON  published  by  his
son  (Paris,  1840,  :i  volsA


254


Dl'MMER


DU MOT AY


Dl'MMER,  William,  lieutenant-governor  <>f
Massachusetts,  li.  in  Boston  in  1077:  d.  there,  10  ;
Oct.,  1701.  When  Samuel  Shute  was  appointed
governor  of  the  colony  in  1716,  Duinmcr  was  com-
missioned lieutenant-governor,  and  after  Shute  left.
1  Jan..  1723,  lie  acted  as  governor  and  commander-
in-chief  till  the  arrival  of  Gov.  Burnet  in  172H.  He
conducted  the  war  with  the  Indians  with  skill,  and  i
was  respected  for  his  ability  and  zealous  regard  for  \
the  public  good.  After  the  death  of  Gov.  Burnet
he  was  commander-in-chief  again  till  the  arrival  of
Belcher.  After  1730  he  lived  in  retirement.  When
he  died  he  left  his  valuable  farm  and  the  mansion-
house,  which  is  still  standing,  to  endow  Duinmer
academy  in  Byfield  parish,  in  the  town  of  New-
bury, the  earliest  academy  in  New  England,  which
was  opened  on  27  Feb.,  1763,  with  twenty-eight
pupils. — His  brother,  Jeremiah,  scholar,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  about  1680;  d.  in  1'laistow,  England.  19
May,  1739,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1  <!!»!».
where  he  was  noted  for  brilliancy.  He  studied
theology,  and  afterward  spent  several  years  at  the
University  of  Utrecht,  where  he  obtained  his  doc-
tor's degree.  Soon  after  his  return  to  America  he
was  sent  to  England  in  1710  as  agent  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  remained  in  London  in  that  capacity
till  1721.  He  was  a  benefactor  of  Yale  college,  to
which  he  presented  800  volumes.  He  was  intimate
with  Bolingbroke,  and  adopted  some  of  his  views.
He  published  theological  and  philosophical  disqui-
sitions in  Latin  while  at  Utrecht,  and  a  "  Defence
of  the  New  England  Charters"  (London,  1728;  re-

Erinted,  1765),  in  which  he  argued  that  the  New
Ingland  colonists  held  their  charters  by  compact,
in  consideration  for  redeeming  the  wilderness  and
annexing  it  to  the  British  dominions,  and  that
their  land-titles  were  not  derived  from  the  crown,
which  only  possessed  political  rights  over  the  coun-
try, but  were  based  on  purchases  from  the  natives
and  on  occupation  and  their  own  courage  and  en-
terprise. The  proposal  of  the  Board  of  trade  to
unite  the  colonies  under  a  single  viceroy  and  one
assembly  would  produce,  in  his  opinion,  the  result
that  it  was  chiefly  intended  to  avert,  that  of  en-
couraging the  colonies  to  throw  off  their  allegiance
and  constitute  themselves  a  free  state.

DUMONCHEL,  John  Baptist,  Canadian  mer-
chant, b.  in  Sandwich,  Ontario,  in  1784;  d.  in
Saint-Benoit,  Canada,  in  1844. He  came  in  his

Jrouth  to  Lower  Canada,  and  studied  in  the  Col-
ege  of  Montreal.  After  serving  some  time  as  a
clerk,  he  opened  a  commercial  establishment  in
Saint-Benoit  in  1810.  Although  he  filled  several
public  offices,  he  took  the  part  of  the  people  in
their  conflict  with  the  British  authorities,  and,  in
consequence  of  having  presided  over  some  public
meetings,  was  dismissed  from  the  magistracy  and
deprived  of  his  commission  as  major  of  militia.
He  took  part  in  the  insurrection  of  1837,  and  fled
after  the  defeat  of  the  Canadians  at  Saint-Eus-
tache,  but  was  betrayed  and  given  up  to  the  sol-
diers of  Gen.  Colborne.  He  was  brought  to  Mon-
treal and  imprisoned,  being  shortly  after  joined  by
his  two  sons,  who  had  also  been  taken  prisoners.
He  was  treated  with  great  severity,  and  when  Lord
Durham  offered  to  liberate  him  and  ihis  compan-
ions if  he  consented  1o  sign  a  document  acknowl-
edging that  they  had  been  guilty  of  high  treason,
he  consented  to  do  so.  He  was  set  at  liberty,  how-
ever, without  the  exaction  of  this  penalty.

1)1" MONT,  Julia  Louisa,  author,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  Ohio,  in  October,  1794;  d.  in  Vevay,  Ind.,  2
Jan.,  1857.  She  was  the  daughter  of  El)enezer  and
Martha  Carey,  who  were  among  the  earliest  settlers
of  Marietta,  Ohio. Her  mother  was  herself  an  au-


thor, having  published  a  book  entitled  "The  Moun-
tain Mourner."  While  Julia  was  an  infant,  her
parents  returned  to  their  native  state,  Rhode  Ibl-
and,  and  after  her  Gather*!  deal h  she  accompanied
her  mother  to  Greenfield,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.  Shi
attended  the  Milton  academy,  taught  school  in
1811— '2,  and  in  the  latter  year  married  John  Du-
mont,  afterward  a  well-known  citizen  of  Indiana.
She  went  with  him  to  Ohio,  and  in  1814  to  Vevay.
Ind.,  where  she  spent  the  rest  of  her  life,  becoming
eminent  as  a  teacher.  Mrs.  Dumont  was  the  earliest
woman  of  the  west  whose  writings  have  been  pre-
served. She  contributed  largely  to  western  peri-
odicals, both  in  prose  and  verse,  and  published  1
collection  of  her  writings,  entitled  "  Life  Sketches
from  Common  Paths"  (New  York,  1856). — Her  son,
Ebenezer,  soldier,  b.  in  Vevay,  Ind.,  23  Nov.,
1814;  d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  16  April,  1871,  was
educated  at  Indiana  university,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, and,  after  studying  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice  in  his  native  town.  He
was  chosen  to  the  legislature  in  1838,  where  he  was
speaker  of  the  house,  was  treasurer  of  Vevay  county
in  1839-'45,  and  was  for  many  years  president  of
the  state  bank.  He  fought  in  the  Mexican  war  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  Indiana  volunteers,
distinguishing  himself  at  the  battle  of  Huamantla.
He  was  an  elector  on  the  democratic  ticket  in  1852,
and  again  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1850  and
1853.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  became
colonel  of  the  7th  Indiana  regiment,  and  served
with  distinction  in  1861  at  Laurel  Hill,  Rich  Moun-
tain, and  Carrick's  Ford.  He  then  reorganized  the
regiment  for  three  years'  service,  and  commanded
it  in  the  action  of  Greenbrier  river  on  3  Oct.  under
Gen.  Reynolds.  He  was  made  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  3  Sept.,  1861,  was  engaged  at  Cheat
Mountain  on  12  Sept.,  and  commanded  the  17th
brigade  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  in  January,  1862.
He  attacked  and  routed  John  Morgan  at  Lebanon,
Ky.,  on  5  May,  1862,  and  in  October  of  that  year
commanded  the  12th  division  Of  Gen.  BueU'sarmy.
On  28  Feb.,  1863,  he  resigned  his  commission  on
account  of  failing  health,  and  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  unionist,  serving  from  1863  till  1867.
Gen.  Dumont  was  appointed  governor  of  Idaho  a
short  time  before  his  death.

DU  MOTAY,  Cyprien  TessiS,  chemist,  l>.  in
France  in  1819;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  June,  188a
He  was  of  an  old  Breton  family,  received  his  edu-
cation at  Nantes,  and  then  removed  to  Paris,  where
he  devoted  himself  to  literature.  His  poems  gained
him  admission  to  the  salon  of  Madam  Recaraier,
and  he  became  intimate  with  the  foremost  writers
of  the  day,  including  De  Musset,  Chateaubriand,
Victor  Hugo,  and  Dumas.  Financial  troubles
drove  him  to  Germany,  where,  turning  his  atten-
tion to  chemistry  and  metallurgy,  he  secured  sev-
eral patents,  one  of  which,  for  bleaching  and  dye-
ing fabrics,  was  bought  by  an  English  manufac-
turer for  60,000  francs.  He  then  returned  to  Paris
and  became  consulting  chemist  in  a  large  labora-
tory, but  was  exiled  lor  opposing  the  second  em-
pire, and  saved  himself  from  poverty  by  selling  a
process  for  bleaching  wax  to  a  London  apothecary
for  £2,000.  Napoleon  III.  recalled  him  to  Paris
in  181K),  and  he  applied  himself  from  that  time  to
industrial  chemistry,  receiving  medals  at  the  ex-
hibit ions  of  1865  and  1878  for  his  invention.  Dur-
ing the  siege  of  Paris  he  directed  the  ambulance
service.  Among  his  many  important  inventions
in  Europe  were  a  process  for  etching  glass,  im-
provements in  electric  light  carbons,  a  method  for
the  preparation  of  oxygen  on  a  large  scale,  and  I
method  of  illumination  by  its  use^known  us  the


DI'NBAK


DIN


MB


Moxy-carhuntcd light."  which  has

fully used for lighting miiK  _'c public

tliu  M  Htm fork  earlj  In

onsulting  engineer  and  chemi
Municipal  ga>  company  till  his  death. While
in  this  country  hi  patented  MMll  rOton  iihitms.
improvement-  in  -I'um  oondanssis  (187V),  and  a
matbod  of  artificial  mfrigerstton  (1880), He
lift  in  manuscript  s  philosophical  drama,  " The

•mil  of  Faust."

I»l  NBAR,  Duncan, clergyman, b.  in  the  north-
ern highlands  of  Hoot  land  aoool  1791 ;  d.  in

Y..rk  <it>.  88  July,  l*M.  When  about  twenty
vears  old  be  removed  t<>  Abatdaaii  and  engaged  in
buMiiese,  occasionally  preaching  as  a  layman.  I  f •  -
settled  in  the  province  of  New  Brunswick  in  1*17.
Whan  be  beoama  a  Baptist,  ami  VM  immersed  in
the  harbor  of  St.  John,  81  Oct.,  ISIS.  U*  was  soon
afterward ordained,  removed  to  t  he  I  sited  BtOtOl

in  December,  1888,  and  held  pastorates  in  Phikv
delphia  and  elsewhere.  Most  of  Ins  ministry  «a>
■MOl  in  the  McDotigal  stnet  Baptist  church  in
New  York  city,  lie  was  for  twenty  years  a  nictn-
Imt  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  American  and
foreign Bible  society. See his life hv  his  soli-in-

law,  Bar.  Jeremiah  Chaplin  (New  York,  is?s).

1UNHAK,  .Hoses,  soldier,  b>  in  Plymouth.
Conn.:  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  1!)  Murch,  1777.  He
was  a  resident  of  Bristol  (or,  as  some  my,  <>f  Water-
bury),  and  was  convicte<|  by  the  superior  court  in
January.  1777,  of  holding  a  captain's  commission
under  Sir  William  Howe,  and  of  enlisting  men  for
the  British  army.  While,  under  sentence  of  death
he  knocked  down  the  sentries  and  escaped,  hut  was
apprehended,  and  on  the  day  appointed,  after  listen-
ing to  a  sermon  at  the  jail,  from  Kev.  Abraham
•larvis,  of  Middletown,  was  banged  in  presence  of
"a  prodigious  concourse  of  people."  It  is  charged
by  Thomas  Jones,  in  his  "  History  of  New  York,"
that  then'  was  no  existing  law  in  the  colony  mak-
ing Dunbar's  offence  punishable  with  death,  and
that  he  was  condemned  under  an  ex-poat-facto
law.  His  young  wife  is  said  to  have  bean  treated
inhumanly,  being  compelled  to  ride  in  the  cart
with  her  husband  to  his  execution,  and  afterward
expelled  from  Middletown,  where  she  had  taken
relume  in  a  loyalist  family.  Four  expresses  were
si-nt  to  Howe  by  Dunltar's  friends  urging  hmi  to
stop  the  execution  by  threatening  retaliation,  but
he  was  indifferent  to  their  ap|H>a]s.

IM'MIAK,  Thomas,  British  soldier,  d.  in  1767.
He  beeaiM  colonel  of  the  4St|,  foot.  --".I  April,  1752.
was  stationed  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  joined  Brad-
d<n-k's  expedition  against  Fort  Duquesne.  Brad-
dock. by Washington's advice, pressed on with

i.joo  chosen  men  on  19  June,  17.M,  leaving  Don-
bar  behind  with  the  residue  of  the  army.  After
the  defeat  of  !»  July,  Dunbar  destroyed  his  remain-
ing artillery,  burned  stores  and  baggage  worth
£100,000,  pretending  that  it  was  done  by  Braddock's
orders,  and  (gnonttnioaalj  retreated. Dunbar  was

made lieutenant-governor of Gibraltar in 1766,

and  promoted  to  lieutenant-general,  18  Dee.,  17(H).

DUNBAJL  Sir  William,  pioneer,  b.  in  Soot-

land, about  1740;  d.  in  Natchez.  Mi>-.,  in  lsio.  lie
was  educated  at  Glasgow  and  London,  when-  his
love  for  mathematics  and  aetronotnj  gained  him
the  friendship  of  Sir  William  HerscheL  He  came
t<>  Philadelphia  for  his  health  and  in  charge  of  a
mercantile  v.  nture  in  1771.  afterward  went  to
Pittsburg;  and  in  177:1  formed  a  partnership  with
John  l(o^>.  a  Scottish  merchant  of  Philadelphia,
for  the  pnrpOSS  of  opening  a  plantation  in  the
British  province  of  Weal  Florida.  Be  settled  near
ii  Bottge,  \m..  and,  after  many  fluctuations  of


fortune,  finally  removed  to  Natch.-/.,  where  he  cul-
ttvatad  a  plantation  called  the  "  Poro*
Important  tru>t«  under  the  Federal  „■

irrsspondant  of  Thomas  Jaflarson,  ilersohal,

and  Kittciihouse.  and  contributed  numcrou*  \alu-
able  |m|M-r«  to  the  transaction  of  the  American

philo-Miphical  moiatj  Of Philadelphia,  of  which he

was  a  mombsr.

DUNCAN,  James,  soldier,  b,  m  OonrvaO,  N.
Y..  in  September,  1mio;  d.  in  Mobile.  Abu,  H
1H4U. He  OOS  graduated at tl  ilitary

■sodomy  in  lHIt-l,  ami  l>ecame  2d  lieutenant  in  the
'M  artillery.  After  scning  a  year  on  garn^.n  dutv
in  Savannah,  (ia.,  he  liecame  assistant  professor  of
mathematics  at  the  military  academy.  This  office
he  relinquished  to  engage  in  the  Florida  war.  and
was  wounded  at  Ouithlacoochie.  lb
lieutenant  in  NovcuiU-r.  \x\i\,  and  then-after  served
on  frontier  and  garrison  duty  till  1H4.V  In  April.
1846,  he  was  made  captain,  and  lofasaQOSBtrf  |»r-
ticipatcd  in  the  battles  of  Polo  Alto.  nSOMOSM  la
Palma,  Monterey,  Cerro  (iordo.  Churubusco.  mid
Molino  del  Key;  the  assault  of  Chapultc|N-c.  and
the  capture  of  Mexico.  rODSiVUg  the  btOfOOl  Of
major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  eolonoL  Fn-m  1K4U
till  his  death  he  was  inspector-general,  with  the
rank  of  OOlonoL

Dl'NC'AN,  James  Armstrong,  clergyman,  b.
in  Norfolk.  Ya..  14  April,  1880:  d.  in  Ashland,
Ya.,  88  Sept..  1H77.  His  father.  David  Duncan,
was  a  graduate  of  the  University  of  Glasgow,  emi-
grated to  the  United  States,  and  for  forty  years
was  professor  of  ancient  languages  in  ltamlolph-

Macon  college,  Ya..  and  at  ( >xford,  S.  ( '.  JaOsSJ  OSS
graduated  ut  Kandolph-Macon  in  lK4tt.  and  iofnod
the  Virginia  conference  of  the  Methodist  church.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  pastor  of  the  Broad
street  church  in  Richmond,  \  a.,  ami  throughout
this  period  preserved  a  conservative  attitude,  never
permitting  jM.litics  t<>  enter  into  his  religion*  dis-
cussions, and  endeavoring  in  every  way.  after  the
struggle,  to  promote  good  feeling  between  I
tions.  From  180X  until  his  death  he  was  president
of  Unndolph-Macon  college.  Dr.  DnnCBB  was  a
leader  in  the  councils  of  his  church.  For  many
years  he  was  editor  of  "The  EUohmohd  Christian
Advocate.  "—His  brother,  William  Wallace.  •  ler-
gvman.  b.  in  Ashland,  Ya..  80  Dec,  lKKl,  was  grad-
uated at  Kandolph-Macon  college  in  1868, Joined
the  Virginia  conference  the  in  \t  \.ar,  ami  held
■even]  important  charges.  During  the  civil  »«r
he  was  a  chaplain  in  the  Confederate  army.  In
1878  Mr.  Duncan  was  transferred  to  the  Booth

Carolina  conference,  and  elected  professor  Of  men-
tal and  moral  philosophy  in  Wottord  college. He

wass  memhorof  the  general  conferences  of  1^78.

tad  a  delegate  to  the  u-cuiueiiical

council  in  London  in  iwi. The  degree  of  D.  D.

was  conferred  on  him  in  1882  by  Kmory  college,
(la.,  and bv  Central  college. Mo. In Hay, lv"<>.

Im  was  elected  bishop  of  the  MothotUol  Bphcooai

church  south. He  rmkUs  in  Siiartaiiburgh.  B.  <  .

IH'NCAN.  James  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Haver-
hill, Ma-.. ■*» I'-... 17!M:  d.  there.  8 Feb..
Be  was  graduated  at  Phillips  Exeter  academy  and
at Harvard in 1818. After studying law with

Leverctl  BaHoootaU  in  Balam,  be  was,  in  iv

mitt.d  to  the  BhWl  l«tr.  and  U«gan  to  practiM-  in
Haverhill.  He  wasa  meinluT  of  the  MaOsOSJOsOstOl
state legislature in Is.  «d In  186%

ami  of  the  governor's  council  in l88S-,'4tk Prom
ls-J.s  till  1S;{1  he  was  a  state  OMsOtor,  and  thl
elected  as  a  Whig  to  congress,  serving  from

ill  u  March,  1868. Wm  sOtoj  years  he  was
chairman  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  Aiueri-


966


DUNCAN


DUNCAN


can  Baptist  missionary  union,  a  trustee  of  Newton
theological  seminary,  anil  from  1886  till  hi* death
a  fellow  of  BroWO  university,  whieh  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1861.  lie  was  actively  con-
nected with  the  state  militia,  attaining  the  rank  of
colonel,  and  was  also  a  commissioner  of  bankruptcy
in  1841. — His  son,  Samuel  White,  clergyman,  b.
in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  19  Dec.,  1838,  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1800,  and  at  Rochester  theological
seminary  in  1800.  In  the  interval  l>etween  his  col-
lege and  theological  courses  he  spent  a  year  in
foreign  travel,  and  some  time  in  the  Union  army
as  captain  of  the  50th  Massachusetts  regiment.  In
1807  lie  was  ordained  as  pastor  of  the  Erie  street
Baptist  church,  Cleveland,  Ohio.  In  1875  he  ac-
cepted a  call  to  the  Ninth  street  church,  Cincinnati,
and  remained  there  till  1885,  when  he  became  pas-
tor of  the  2d  Baptist  church  in  Rochester,  N.  V.
In  1885  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  Vassar
college,  but  declined,  continuing  his  pastorate  in
Rochester.  The  University  of  Chicago  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1878.

DUNCAN,  John  M.,  clergyman,  b.  in  1790;  d.
in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  3  Oct.,  1825.  He  was  a
Scottish  clergyman  who  travelled  extensively  in
the  United  States,  and  published  several  books,
among  which  are  "Creeds  and  Confessions  of  Faith,"
"  Mmal  Government  of  God,"  and  "  Sabbath  among
the  Tuscaroras."  He  dedicated  to  Prof.  Benjamin
Silliman  "  Travels  in  the  United  States  and  Canada
in  1818-'19"  (New  York,  1823).

DUNCAN,  Johnson  Kelly,  soldier,  b.  in  York,
Pa.,  19  March,  1827;  d.  in  Knoxville,  Ky.,  18  Dec,
1802.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1849,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d
artillery,  serving  in  the  Florida  hostilities  against
the  Seminole  Indians.  From  1850  till  1853  he  was
attached  to  Forts  Sullivan  and  Preble  in  Maine,
on  garrison  duty,  and  was  then  assistant  on  the
Northern  Pacific  railroad  exploration  till  Decem-
ber, 1854.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in  January,
1855,  and  became  superintendent  of  repairs  in  New
Orleans,  in  charge  of  the  branch  mint,  marine  hos-
pital, quarantine  warehouse,  and  Pas  a  l'Outre
boarding  station.  From  1859  till  1800  he  was  pro-
fessionally occupied  as  civil  engineer,  surveyor,  and
architect  in  New  Orleans,  becoming  also,  in  1800,
chief  engineer  of  the  board  of  public  works  of  the
state  of  Louisiana.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  colonel,  but
soon  was  appointed  brigadier-general  from  Louisi-
ana. He  commanded  Forts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip
at  the  time  of  their  capture  by  Admiral  Farragut,
on  25  April,  1802,  and  became  a  prisoner  of  war.

DUNCAN,  Joseph,  governor,  b.  in  Paris,  Ky.,
22  Feb.,  1789;  d.  in  Jacksonville,  111.,  15  Jan..  1844.
He  received  an  excellent  education  and  studied
law.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  served  as  lieuten-
ant in  the  U.  S.  infantry,  and  distinguished  himself
especially  in  the  defence  of  Fort  Stephenson  under
Maj.  George  Croghan,  receiving  the  testimonial  of  a
sword  from  congress.  Subsequently  he  settled  in
Kaskaskia,  where  he  practised  his  profession,  and
was  made  major-general  of  Illinois  militia.  In
1824  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and,  while
holding  that  office,  originated  the  law  which  first
established  common  schools  in  the  state.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat,  and
served  for  four  successive  terms,  from  3  Dec,  1827,
till  November,  1834,  when  he  was  elected  governor
of  Illinois,  holding  that  office  till  1886.  He  tin  n
retired  to  his  home  in  Jacksonville,  whither  he  had
removed  in  1829.  and  continued  there  till  his  death.

DUNCAN,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Kaskaskia,
111.,  14  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7  Jan.,


1887. He  earl v  became  a  soldier,  and  MTVed  as  |
private  in  the  Illinois  mounted  rolunteen  in  188%

during  the  Black  Hawk  war.  Mioscquently  he  was
connected  for  some  years  with  military  expedition!,
and  in  1840  was  appointed  from  lllinm-
lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  mounted  rifles,  now  the  3d
cavalry.  He  served  during  the  war  with  IfexfoOL
and  was  engaged  in  the  siege  and  surrender  of
Vera  Cruz.  Later  he  was  on  recruiting  duty,  was
promoted  captain  in  March,  1M48,  and  was  00  gar-
rison duty  at  various  |>osts  till  INotj.  He  «
tioned  with  his  regiment  in  New  Mexico  til
had  command  of  Fort  Burgwin,  Fort  Massaehu-
setts,  Fort  Garland,  and  Fort  Union,  participated
in  the  Navajo  expedition  of  1858,  defeated  the
Comanche  Indians  in  the  action  at  Hatch's  Ban  h
in  May,  1801,  and  became  major  of  his  regimenl  in
June,  1801.  During  the  civil  war  he  had  command
of  Fort  Craig  in  New  Mexico,  was  in  charge  of  the
cavalry  forces  at  the  battle  of  Valverde,  N.  M.,
and  of  his  regiment  in  the  action  in  Albuquerque,
N.  M.,  where  a  portion  of  his  skull  was  carried
away  by  a  cannon-ball.  He  was  assistant  provost-
marshal  of  Iowa  in  18G3-'0,  became  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  5th  U.  S.  cavalry  in  .luly,  180l>.  and
commanded  the  district  of  Nashville  till  Septem-
ber, 1808.  He  then  was  ordered  to  the  Depart  incut
of  the  Platte,  was  stationed  successively  at  Fori
McPherson  am)  Fort  D.  A.  Russell,  and  was  after-
ward in  charge  of  the  construction  of  Sidney  bar-
racks, till  November,  1871.  Failing  health  coot*
'pelled  him  to  obtain  sick  leave  till  January,  1873,
when  he  was  retired  from  active  service.  Col.  Dun-
can received  several  brevets,  including  that  of  bri-
gadier-general, for  his  services  during  the  civil  war.
DUNCAN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Adams  coun-
ty, Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1772;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  16
Feb.,  1864. In  early  youth  he  settled  in  Philadel-

Ehia,  where  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,
•uring  the  war  of  1812  he  was  superintendent  of
U.  S.  military  stores,  and  was  stationed  at  the  arse-
nal in  Philadelphia,  holding  the  office  of  adjutant-
general  during  1813-'4.  Later  he  was  one  of  Gov.
Simon  Synder's  special  aides,  and  commanded  a
brigade  at  Camp  Dupont,  near  Wilmington.  Del.,
when  Philadelphia  was  threatened  by  the  British,
before  their  defeat  at  Baltimore.  For  many  years
he  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature.
In  1829  he  became  surveyor  of  customs  of  Phila-
delphia, and  held  that  office  for  two  terms.  He
was  a  brigadier-general  of  the  Pennsylvania  volun-
teers, ana  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Jefferson
medical  college,  Philadelphia.

DUNCAN,  William  Cecil,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  24  Jan.,  1824;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  1  May,  1864.  His  father  was  a  native  of  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  and  emigrated  to  this  country  in
early  life.  During  the  childhood  of  his  son  he  re-
moved to  Grenada,  Miss.  William  Cecil  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1843,  studied  dh  inity  at  I  lainil-
ton  theological  seminary,  and  returned  to  the  south
in  1847.  There  he  established,  at  New  Orleans,
the  "Southwestern  Baptist  Chronicle,"  a  religious
weekly,  which  he  conducted  with  vigor  and  ability.
He  was  ordained  in  1848,  but,  although  preaching.
constantly,  accepted  no  pastoral  charge,  devoting
his  entire  time  to  his  paper.  In  1851,  his  health
entirely  failing  him,  he  sailed  for  Europe,  and
spent  nearly  a  vear  in  Italy.  On  his  return  to  New
Orleans,  convalescent,  he  was  elected  to  the  pro-
fessorship of  Greek  and  Latin  in  the  University  of
Louisiana.  Three  vears  later  he  became  pastor  of
the  Coliseum  place  Baptist  church  in  New  <  >rleans,
where  he  continued  for  six  years,  although  twice
compelled  to  visit  Texas  for  his  health. In 1881


I'l v


DUNHAM


m


hlM  outspoken  loyalty  to  tin-  national  government

alienated tin* fiwlinfl  "f hi'  (hi. pic,  atitl he  WW

■  the  ii<»rlh,  l«milg t » i  — ^  family. In

rammer  ol  L868,  after  the  oooupatioa  of  the
v  thu  Union  forces.  I>r.  Duncan  returned  to

New  Orleans  and  engaged  in  secular  occupations,
endeavnriiii;.  t«>  1 1 » « -  atmosl  ol  his  ability,  to  pro-
mote the  return  of  Louisiana  to  tin-  Union.  Though
Buffering  from  consumption,  which  resulted  fatally,
he  latared,  with  pen  and  voice,  fur  this  result,  and
before  In-  death  had  the  satisfaction  <>f  seeing  its

rnplishment  Columbia  gave  him  the  degree
uf  1>.  I>.  in  1*">?.  Among  liis  works  are  ••  Life  of
John  the  Baptist,"  baaed  on  a  monograph  by  Von
Rohden  (New  York.  1858);  "History  ol  the  Bap-
tor  the  Fir-t  Two  Centuries  of  the  Christian
.  i;  and  "The  Tears  of  Jesus "  (lb
IM 'NT  IN.  William  Stevens,  physician.  l>.  In
Brownsville,  Payette  <•<).,  1'a.,  24  May,  1m:{4.  II.
Studied  al  Mount  Union  college,  Ohio,  was  gradu-
ated at  tin- medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  lxX,  and  settled  in  Browns-
ville. He  tarred  as  a  volunteer  aargeon  in  the  na-
tional army  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  and  was
captured,  but  soon  escaped.  I>r.  Duncan  has  ac-
complished numerous  ditlicult  surgical  operations,
including  herniotomy  nine  times  and  trephining
seven  times.  Besides  contributions  to  Journals,
he  has  published  "  Medical  Delusions  "  (186D)  and
••  Physiology  of  Death"  (1876).

Dt'NDAS,  Francis,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land  about  1180;  d.  in  January,  1824.  He  entered
the  British  army  as  ensign  in  the  1st  guards  in
April,  ITT"),  and  served  through  the  Revolutionary
war.  In  .Ian nary.  1778,  he  became  captain,  and
participated  in  the  battles  of  Brandywine,  Oer-
mantown,  Monmouth,  and  the  reduction  of  the
forts  on  the  Delaware.  He  joined  Lord  Cornwallis
in  1780  and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel.  At  Guil-
ford and  Yorktown  he  commanded  the  advance
guard.  He  served  in  Martinique  in  1794,  and  was
governor  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1796-180;!.
In  1812  he  was  made  a  general  in  the  army.

Dt'NDAS,  James,  luuiker,  b.  in  Alexandria,
Ya..  in  17**:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  July,  I860.
He  early  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  became
a  banker,  and  was  president  of  the  Pennsylvania
bank.  Mr.  Dundas  was  prominent  in  many  local
cnterpri-ses,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  presi-
dent of  the  Pennsylvania  horticultural  society.

I»l  SGUSON,  Robley,  physician,  b.  in' Kes-
wick, England, 4  Jan.,  17!»*:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1
April,  low.  He  received  the  degree  of  M.  I),  in  Lon-
don in  IN  19,  and  from  the  University  of  Erlangen  in

t,  eettled  in  London,  and  began  the  practice  of
his  profession,  and  also  edited  the  London  ■  Medi-
cal Kc|>ository  "  and  the  "  Medical  Intelligencer";
but  in  1N-.M,  at  the  invitation  of  Thomas  Jefferson,
he  oame  to  the  United  States,  and  from  that  year
till  ]X'Xi  was  professor  of  medicine  in  the  University
of  Virginia.  He  then  accepted  the  professorship
of  materia  medica  and  thetmpeotioa  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Maryland,  and  in  lK{(i  that  of  the  institutes
of  medicine  in  Jefferson  medical  college.  Phila-
delphia, where  he  remained  for  more  than  thirty-
years,  during  a  large  portion  of  which  time  he
was  dean  of  the  faculty;  and  the  extraordinary
success  of  this  institution  was  largely  due  to  the

raetire  course  of  lectures,  and  to  the  remarkable
tact  and  practical  sagacity  with  which  In- admin-
istered its  affairs. He  was  a  eloea  atndent  ol  phi-
lologj  and  general  literature,  ami  enjoyed  a  high
11 for lienevoletire. which Was CSpcciall V

••■  SSSd  in  giving  time  and  service-  to  the  Phila-
liia  institution  for  the  blind. Much  of  his  at-
TOL. II. — 17


tention  was  directed  in  Inter  years  to
and  ha  *as  run  luesssaful  in  promoting  th-
ine of  honk*  in  raised  letter-  for  tie
blind. Dr.  Dunglison  »«<  president  of  the  Musical
fund  sodetj  of  Philadelphia,

l'<tmsyl\ania  institution  for  the  blind  and  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  and  n  men
many  literary  and  scientific  sncicti
DSivad  the  degree  Ol  LL.  D.  from  Vale.  lb  trans-
lated and  edited  a  large  Dumber  of  foreign  work*.
including  IfagendJei  "  Formulary."  the  "Cyclopav
diaof  Practical  Medicine"  of  Dr*'.  1'orbea.Tweadle,
and  Oonolly,  and  also  e.iited  many  originally  pub-
lished in  the  I'nited  States.  His  publish^!  work*,
which  have  *>ld  very  largely,  comprise  "Commen-
taries ,,n  DisSSSSSOI  the  Stomach  and  Bowel*  in
Children"  (London,  1K»4):  "IlllllwIattUiaj  t..  the
Study  of  Grecian  and  BOBUM  Qeogiuphy,"  the
(Jrccian  by  QsorgS  Lon^,  Bao^,  the  Roman  by
himself (Charlottcsvii;.  •  Human PhjaV

ologl  "  (Philadelphia,  1888);  "  Dictionary  of  Medi-
cal Science  and  Literature"  (Boston,  lkd;  l.'ith
ed.,  I80K);  "Kleinents  of  llvgiene "  (Philadelphia.
l*o.->;  LM  ed.,  entitled  ••Human  Health,"  1*441:
"General  Theraptutiee  "  (\w>:  8th  ed-  1897);
"The  Medical  Student,  or  Aids  to  the  Studv  of
Medicine"  (Philadelphia.  1X<7):  "New  Ben
(1K{!»); and "The Practice of Medicine"

— His  son.  Richard  James,  physician,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, McL,  bi  Nov..  ikm,  was  sraduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1808,  and  at  .Jeffer-
son medical  college  in  lKr>«,  settled  in  Philadelphia,
and  entered  on  an  extensive  practice.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  I".
S.  army,  and  on  duty  in  various  militarv  hospitals
in  Philadelphia.  He  was  at  one  time  physician  to
the  Albion  society,  and  attending  physician  to  the
Pennsylvania  institution  for  the  instruction  ol  the
blind,  as  also  to  the  Burd  orphan  asylum.  He  M  a
member  of  many  medical  societies  m  the  United
States  and  Europe,  and  has  contributed  valuable
pspen  to  the  "North  American  Medico-Chirur-
gical  Review,"  among  which  may  !*•  mentioned
" Observations  on  the  Deaf  and  Dumb"  (1888)
and  "Statistics  of  Insanity  in  the  United  States"
(1N60).  l»oth  of  which  appeared  in  |>amphlet-form.
He  wrote  "  Reflections  on  Exant  hematic  Tvphus"
in  1861,  a  series  of  articles  on  the  "  Public  Medical
Libraries  of  Philadelphia"  for  the  Philadelphia
"  Medical  Times  "  in  is?-.',  and  "  Letters  OB  Medical
Centennial  Affairs"  for  the  "  New  York  Medical
Record  "  in  1ST*!.  He  has  edited  his  father's  "  Bis>
toryof  Medicine  "(1878);  the  "Medical  Dictionary"
(1*74);  and  translated  from  the  French  Guersaut's
"Surgical  Disease- of  Children  "  (l*7:t>.

DUNHAM,  Carroll,  physician,  b.  in  New  York
citv.  88  Oct..  1888;  d.  in  Irvington-on-Hudson,
N.  Y..  1*  I'd'..  1877.  He  eras  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1847,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
SUajeOOS.  New  York,  in 1880;  and in l*."i2  began

practice  in  Brooklyn. In  18S8  be  removed  I

burgh,  and  in  lHtt  to  [rvington.  He  was  president
of  the  American  institute  of  BOtMSOUathv,  and  for
nianv  vears  dean  of  the  New  York  homni>|iatliic
medical  nollnfS Pat  a  vear  prior  SO  the  world's

aosnnjonsthhi  eonventionneld  m  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
he  was  actively  engaged  in  its  In-half,  and  subse-
quently compiled  the  proceeding!  for  publication.
Be  baa  contributed  to  periodicala,  and  published
••  Homoeopathy  the  Science  of  Thcrapei
and  ••  Lectures  on  Materia  Medica"  1 1

DUNHAM.  Hill  lam  Russell,  phvsieian.  b.  in
Chesterfield,  Cheshire  CO..  N.  II.,  IS  1 '•
studied  at  Berkshire  medical  college,Maasachusctts
and  at  Harvard  university,  being  graduated  at  the


858


DUNK  IN


I  >  IX LAP


latter  in  1865.  He  first  practised  at  Westmoreland,
X.  II.,  Imt  removed  to  Keeiie.  in  tin-  sjuiM-  state,  in
1H7<>.  He  was  examining  surgeon  for  pensions  00
the  board  from  April,  1HN2,  to  .lune,  iss"),  and  is
now  (1H87)  medical  director  of  the  Granite  state
mutual  aid  association.  He  has  been  a  member  of
the  Connecticut  river  valley  medical  society,  and
also  its  president.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Theory  of
Medical  Science:  The  Doctrine  of  an  Inherent
Power  in  Medicine  a  Fallacy,"  which  claims  that  a
revolution  in  medical  philosophy  is  imperative  in
order  to  harmonize  with  the  correct  theory  of  vital
force.  He  is  skilled  in  the  science  of  astronomy,
and  has  invented  an  ingenious  contrivance  ex-
planatory of  some  of  its  problems.

DUNK  IN,  Christopher,  Canadian  statesman,
t>.  1 1  Sept..  1811 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  6  Jan.,  1880.  He
was  educated  at  the  universities  of  London  and
Glasgow,  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and  be-
came a  teacher  of  Greek  at  Harvard  in  1834  In
1833  he  gave  up  his  tutorship  and  removed  to
Canada,  lie  edited  the  Montreal  "  Morning  Chroni-
cle "  from  May,  1837,  until  the  following  summer,
and  on  the  consummation  of  the  union  of  Upper
and  Lower  Canada  he  received  an  appointment  un-
der the  government,  which  he  retained  until  May,
1847.  He  also  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1846.  In  1857  he  was
elected  to  parliament  for  Drummond  and  Artha-
baska,  which  he  represented  until  1861,  when  he
was  defeated.  In  1862  he  was  elected  for  Brome,
and  was  re-elected  by  acclamation  at  the  general
election  in  1808.  In  1867  he  became  provincial
treasurer  of  Quebec,  and  in  1869  entered  the  Do-
minion cabinet  as  minister  of  agriculture  and  sta-
tistics, holding  this  portfolio  until  1871,  when  he
was  appointed  puisne  judge  of  the  superior  court
of  Quebec.  He  was  a  member  of  the  council  of
public  instruction  from  1856  till  1859,  and  was  also
a  lioutcnant-colonel  in  the  Montreal  light  infantry.
During  his  parliamentary  career  he  was  the  means
of  securing  much  beneficial  legislation,  but  the
measure  with  which  he  was  most  intimately  con-
nected bears  his  name,  and  is  known  as  the  "  Dunkin
Temperance  Act  of  1864."

DUNLAP,  Alexander,  physician,  b.  in  Brown
county,  Ohio,  12  Jan.,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at
Miami  university  in  1836,  and  at  Cincinnati  medi-
cal college  in  1839,  and  practised  in  Greenfield,
Ripley,  and  Springfield,  Ohio.  He  was  one  of  the
first  surgeons  in  the  country  to  perform  the  diffi-
cult operation  of  ovariotomy,  and  since  1843  has
performed  it  over  100  times,  successfully  in  seventy-
five  per  cent,  of  his  cases.  He  was  a  member  of  the
International  medical  congress  in  Philadelphia  in
1870,  vice-president  of  the  American  medical  asso-
ciation in  1877,  and  has  contributed  to  the  litera-
ture of  his  profession.

DUNLAP,  Andrew,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
in  1794;  d.  there  in  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1813,  studied  law  in  Salem,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  there,  becoming  distinguished  in
his  profession.  He  removed  to  Boston  in  1820,  and
was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Massachusetts  from
1829  till  just  before  his  death.  He  published  two
fourth-of-.July  orations  (1819  and  1822),  his  speech
in  defence  of  Abner  Kneeland  (Boston,  1834),  and
"Admiralty  Practice  in  Civil  Cases  of  Maritime
Jurisdiction"  (Philadelphia,  1836;  2d  ed.,  New
York,  1850),  which  was  "  pronounced  by  competent
judges  to  be  learned,  accurate,  and  well  digested."
—  His  son.  Samuel  Fales,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1825,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1845,
and  has  published  "  Origin  of  Ancient  Names "
(Cambridge,  1856)  and  "  Vestiges  of the  Spirit-


History  of  Man"  (New  York,  1858);  and  edited,
with  notes,  his  father's  "  Admiralty  Practice."

DUNLAP,  George  Washington,  congressman^
b.  near  Lexington,  Ky..  'J-,'  Felt..  1818;  d.  in  Lan-
caster, Ky.,  6  June,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at
Transylvania  university  in  1884,  and  at  the  laW-
school  in  1837.  He  began  practice  at  Lai
Ky.,  in  1838,  and  was  master  commissioner  of  the
circuit  court  from  1843  till  1*74,  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1853,  and  of  the  famous  Frank-
fort border-state  convention  of  May.  1861,  where
he  used  his  influence  to  avert  the  civil  war.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Unionist,  and  served
one  term,  in  1801-'3,  voting  men  and  money  for
the  support  of  the  government.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  1864.

DUNLAP,  James,  educator,  1).  in  Chester  coun-
ty, Pa.,  in  1744 ;  d.  in  Abington,  near  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  22  Nov.,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1773,  and  was  a  tutor  there  in  1775-'7,  at  the
same  time  studying  theology.  He  was  ordained
by  Newcastle  presbytery  on  21  Aug..  1781,  went  to
western  Pennsylvania,  and,  after  holding  several
pastorates,  became  in  1803  president  of  Jefferson
college,  Cannonsburg,  Pa.,  holding  also  the  chairs
of  languages  and  moral  philosophy.  He  resigned
in  1812,  and  in  1813— '16  had  charge  of  the  academy
(now  Madison  college)  at  Uniontown,  Pa.  He  was
a  thorough  and  accurate  classical  scholar,  and  much
respected  by  his  pupils,  who  "called  him  Neptune,
because  his  presence  quelled  the  waves  of  noisy
merriment  among  them."

DUNLAP,  John,  printer,  b.  in  Strabane,  Ire-
land, in  1747;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  Nov.,
1812.  While  a  boy  he  went  to  live  with  an  uncle,
William  Dunlap,  a  printer  and  publisher  in  Phila-
delphia, at  the  age  of  eighteen  entered  the  busi-
ness, and  in  November,  1771.  began  the  publication
of  the  Pennsylvania  "  Packet."  This  paper  was
changed  into  a  daily  in  1784,  the  first  in  the  United
States,  and  afterward  became  the  "  North  Ameri-
can and  United  States  Gazette."  Mr.  Dunlap  was
appointed  printer  to  congress,  and  first  printed  the
"  Declaration  of  Independence."  He  was  an  offi-
cer in  the  first  troop  of  Philadelphia  cavalry,
which  became  the  body-guard  of  Washington  at
Trenton  and  Princeton.  In  1780  he  gave  £4,000
to  supply  provisions  to  the  Revolutionary  arm  v.

DUNLAP,  John  A.,  author,  b.  about  1793 ;  d.
in  New  York  city  about  1858.  He  was  little  known,
except  as  an  accurate  and  painstaking  legal  com-
piler, somewhat  given  to  intemperance,  which  in-
creased in  his  later  years,  and  ultimately  caused  his
death.  He  published  a  digest  of  the  laws  relating
to  justices  of  the  peace  in  New  York,  an  "Abridg-
ment of  the  12th  and  13th  Books  of  Coke's  Re-
gorts  "  (New  York,  1813) ;  "  Practice  of  the  Superior
ourt  of  New  York  in  Civil  Actions  in  1821-3  "
(2  vols.,  Albany,  1841) ;  and  edited  the  3d  Ameri-
can edition  of  Paley's  "  Agency  "  (New  York,  1847)
and  about  fifteen  volumes  of  the  American  edition
of  the  English  chancery  reports.

DUNLAP,  Robert  Pinckney,  governor  of
Maine,  b.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,  15  Aug.,  1796;  d.
there,  20  Oct.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1815,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818,  and  began
practice  in  his  native  town,  but  soon  abandoned  it.
having  inherited  a  fortune.  He  was  a  member  of
the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1821-'2,  of  the
senate  in  1823,  and  its  president  in  1827-'9  and
1831-'3.  He  was  chosen  to  the  executive  council
in  1838,  was  governor  of  the  state  in  1834-'8,  and
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  184 J.  and
served  two  terms,  in  1843-'7.  He  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Bow-


DCNI.ap

doin  college,  collector  <>r  Portland  in  1848-*9,  and
postmaster  <»f  Brunswick  in  188ft-*7.  <;.. v.  Dunlap
was  a  promim-nt  freemason,  being  tin-  head  «>f  Un-
order m  the  United  Mate-  for  nine  consecutive,
years. An  eddn  1  by  him  at  1 1  **-  trien-

nial meeting  of  the  general  uraml  chapter  of  the
United  Statea  at  Hartford  wm  published  1 1

IM  M  \l*.  William,  artist, b.  in  Perth  Amboy,

N. .!..  in  1786;  -l.  in  New  fork  city, 88  Sept..  ikm».

!!.•  came  to  tin-  city  of  Nt-w  York  in  1777,  ami  !*•-

I m* i 1 1 1  portraits,  and  in  1781  Bniahod  ■  likc-

nessof  Washington, in  i7M  be  went  to  London,
for  several  years  be  studied  with  Benjamin

West. Kclurning  to  tin-  United  States,  Mr.  Dun-

Inp  became  engaged  in  various artistic, dramatic.
ami  other  literary  work.  In  17n«.»  ••  Tin-  Rather,"
one  of  his  u-st  plays,  wm  prodnoad  on  the  stage.
In  l ?«.»«;  in-  beoame  eonneotad  with  llallam  ainl
Bodgkinson  in  the  management  of  the  old  John
str.it  thi-ntr.-,  ami  in  17J>s  assumed  tin-  maiiagc-
rm-nt  of  tin-  Purk  theatre,  where,  early  in  the  sea-
son, his  tragedy  "Andre"  was  successfully  |>cr-
fonii.il. Dnring his  administration. anmeroM

imitations,  altera-
tions,  adaptations,
andtranslationsof
Qerman  ami  oth-
er foreign  authors
were  successfully
produced,  many
of  which  were
published  in  pam-
phlet -  form,  and
held  the  stage  in
after  years.  Mr.
Dunlap  continued
as  manager  and
~2B '  J? Jk  /  co-manager  of  the

/J\ i  / Mr  Park theatre  for

/T \ '  / y>  several seasons,

until  he  was  over-
taken bv  financial
ruin.  In  lH14-'ltt
he  served  as  as-
sistant paymas-
ter general  of  the
New  York  militia.  Thereafter  he  again  turned
his  attention  to  his  early  art,  and  produced  ■
series  of  large  and  imposing  paintings,  mostly
scriptural, among  which  "Christ  Rejected,"  "  Hear-
ing the  Cross,"  "Calvary,"  and  "Death  on  the
Pale  Horse"  obtained  considerable  reputation.
The  last  named  was  publicly  exhibited  in  most
of  the  large  cities  of  the  country.  Mr.  Dunlap
is  known  as  the  founder  and  early  vice-president
of  the  National  academy  of  design.  Both  as  a
writer  and  painter  he  was  a  man  of  more  than
usual  ability;  but  during  a  life  of  varied  and  am-
bitious i-x|M-riment  Htid  uninterrupted  industry  he
never  attained  financial  success.  A  "  Dunlap  so-
ciety "  was  organized  in  New  York  city  in  188<1,  for
the  pur|>ose  of  preserving  the  half-forgotten,  meri-
torious plays  of  Dunlap  and  other  olden  American
dramatists.  In  1887  the  society  published,  for  dis-
tribution to  its  members,  a  small  edition  of  •* The
Father,"  one  of  his  come. lies,  and  the  second  play
written  by  an  American  author;  and  alsoavolume
if  "Poetic  Addreosss,"  spoken  at  the  openings  of
early  American  theatre-,  since  1758.  His  writings
include  a  ••  Life  of  George  Frederick  Cooke
don.  1818);  "Life  of  Charles  Brockdeo  Brown"
(Philadelphia,  ivi">  i;  "History  <>f  the  American
Th.atr  London,  1888);  "His-

torv  of  the  BJsa  and  Progress  of  the  Art  of  Design
in  the  United  States-"  (New  York,  1834);  "Thirty


MB


Years  A  p..  If —pin  Of  a  Water-Drink,  r  '(1888):

and •  Wee  Netherlands,  Pp.mii

He  wrote,  translated.  Of  adapted  M  plant.
DI'NLA  VY,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  I>-

ty,  Ind..  1  l-'.-l...  |su. Hi-  father  \»a«  a  prominent

asmooratk  politician  in  Indiana. II.

a  private  in  the  80th  Iowa  cavalry,  and  in  1868  re-
enli-ted  in  the  :td  Iowa  cavalry,  and  BSTVed  in  T<  n-
nesase,  Missouri,  ami  Georgia  till  the  close  of  the
civil  war.  Dunn-  the  battle  of  Mine  I
sas.  2.1  (let..  1H414.  when  alone  mid  wonndsd  in  Ml
arm, he  captured the  Confed.-i  l.irina-

duke. After  the  war  In-  entered Ksjofcnl
medical  college,  wa>  graduated  m  1870, and  i-  now
I IMM7)  practising  his  profession  at  Stiles,  Iowa.

DUNLOP,  George  Kelly,  P.  i:  bishop,  b.  in

Bounty  Tvrone.  Ireland.  10  N'-.v..  1080;  d.  in  Ia*
Cruca's.  N.  M..  IS  March.  lss*.  He  WM  si
at  the  Royal  QoUege  of  Duiigaunon.  and  was  grad-
uated at  wean's  oniversity,  Qalway,  In  1888.  lb-
came  to  the  United  State-  in  OotobST,  1868,  WSJ)
maile  deacon  by  Pi-hop  Hawks,  in  Palmyra,  Mo.,  :t
Dec,  1M.",4,  and  ordain.-d  prie-t  in  St.  I>.ui-.  bv  the

same  prelate.  7  Aug.,  1888. During  bisdiaconata

Mr.  Dunlop  was  mi— ionary  at  St.Charle-.  Mo. He

then  became  re.-t.ir  <>f  Christ  church.  Lexington,
Mo.,  ami  seven  year-  afterward  rector  oi
church.  Kirk  wood.  This  latter  place  he  held  until
his  election  to  a  bishopric  He  was  active  in  dio-
cesan affairs,  was  a  member  of  the  standing  com-
mittee, ami  deputy  to  the  general  convention.  Dr.
Dunlop  was  selected  by  the  general  convention  of
1880  for  missionary  bishop  of  New  Mexico  and
Arizona,  and  ems  consecrated  In  Christ  church,  St.
Louis.  Mo..  81  Nov..  Ikmo.  The  earns  year  he  re-
ceived the  degree  <>f  s.  T.  D.  from  Racine  ooUege,

DUNLOP,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Georgetown,
D.  C.  88  March,  17W;  d.  then-,  6  Hay,  1*?2.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1811,  Studied  law
with  Francis  S.  Key,  whose  partner  he  afterward
became,  and  acted  as  district  attorney  in  his  place
wln-n  Mr.  Key  was  called  away  on  business  in
1KM.  lb-  was  recorder  of  Georgetown  till  ~7  D-<-..
18oX.  when  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  criminal
court  for  the  District  of  Columbia.  He  was  made
assistant  judge  of  the  I'.  S.  circuit  court  for  that
district  on  ;t  Oct..  1848,  and  was  chief  justice  from
27  Nov..  1866,  till  l*«*t.  when  the  court  wa>  abol-
ished. Judge  Dunlop's  opinions  often  attracted
attention  in  England  and  other  foreign  countries.

DUNLOP,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cnambersbun,
Pa.,  in  I7!i.~>:  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md..  8  April.  1861
He  was  graduated  at Dickinson  college in 1N12,

studied  law,  and  beoame  prominent  in  bis  proles
sjon.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in
1886,  and  was  twice  in  the  lower  house  of  the  legis-
lature ■nhaeonenl  t<>  that  time.  He  was  a  dele-
gate U)  the  State  constitutional  convention  oi
removed  in  that  vear  to  Pittsburg,  and  in  l^V.  to
Philadelphia.  Mr.  Dunlop  was  a  tin-less  student,
and  was  noted  for  hi-  cau-tic  wit.  Though  a  for-
midable opponent,  he  was  very  court. -on-  in  man-
ner, lb-  was  opposed  to  slavery,  and  often  aided
fugitives  to  cscujic.  ..nee  buying  a  negro  end  set-
ting him  free.  He  died  of  i>aralysis  while  eaj  a
vi-it  to  Haltimotv.  He  published  "I^iwsof  Penn-
sylvania in  1700-1888,"  chronologically  arranged,
with  notes  and  references  t<>  decision*  of  the  su-
preme court  (8d  cd.,  Philadelphia,  KkI);  "Digest
of  the  General  LOWS  Of  the  United  States"  |
and  wrote  an  elaix.rate  essay  on  the  "  ltoundari.-s
of  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland."  in  vol.  i.  of  the
State  historical  society's  collections.

DUNLOP,  William.  Scottish  educator,  b.  in
Scotland  about  HkVJ;  d.  there  in  March.  1108. He


200


DUNLOP


DUNN


was  educated  at  Glasgow  university  ami  was  li-
OOimcd  as  a  minister,  but  took  ]>art  in  the  in.-unve-
tion  of  1<>?!>,  ami  subsequently  joined  the  emi-
grant- who  colonized  Carolina.  Here  he  continued
preaching  at  intervals  till  1690,  when  he  returned
to  Scotland,  and  was  appointed  by  King  William
principal  of  Glasgow  university,  where  he  remained
until  his  death,  supporting  its  interests  with  dig-
nity and  zeal. — His  son,  Alexander,  b.  in  Caro-
lina in  1684;  d.  in  Scotland  in  1742,  became  pro-
fessor of  Greek  in  Glasgow  university,  and  after-
ward published  a  grammar  of  that  language  (1736)
that  was  long  held  in  esteem.

DUNLOP,  William,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
Greenock,  Scotland,  about  1795 ;  a.  in  Canada  in
1848.  He  was  educated  as  a  physician,  served  as  a
regimental  surgeon  in  the  war  with  the  United
States  in  1819-%,  and  in  India;  published  a  book,
founded  a  newspaper,  lectured,  and  engaged  in
other  enterprises  before  he  came  to  Canada  in  1826
with  John  Gait,  the  Scottish  novelist.  He  was  a
contributor  to  "  Blackwood's  Magazine,"  and  had
been  intimately  acquainted  with  John  Wilson,  Ma-
ginn,  Hogg,  and  others  mentioned  in  "The  Recre-
ations of  Christopher  North."  After  arriving  in
Canada  he  contributed  to  this  magazine  "The
Autobiography  of  a  Rat,"  and  wrote  much  for  the
local  literary  and  political  journals.  In  1836  he
founded  the  Toronto  literary  club,  before  which
he  frequently  lectured.  The  first  parliament  after
the  union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  met  in  1841
at  Kingston,  and  Dunlop  was  returned  to  itr  for
Huron,  which  he  represented  until  his  resignation
in  184(5. He  was  noted  for  his  eccentricities.

DUNMORE,  John  Murray,  Earl,  royal  gov-
ernor of  Virginia,  b.  in  1732 ;  d.  in  Ramsgate,  Eng-
land, in  May,  1809.  He  was  descended,  in  the
female  line,  from  the  house  of  Stuart ;  succeeded
to  the  peerage  in  1756;  was  appointed  governor  of
New  York  in  1770,  and  of  Virginia  in  July,  1771.
On  his  arrival  at  Williamsburg  in  1772  he  dissolved
the  Virginia  assembly ;  and  in  May,  1774,  he  again
dissolved  the  same  body,  because  it  resolved  to  keep
the  first  of  June,  the  day  for  closing  the  port  of
Boston,  as  a  day  of  fasting,  humiliation,  and  prayer.
On  the  following  April,  Lord  Dunmore  caused
the  removal  of  the  powder  from  the  magazine  at
Williamsburg,  on  board  an  English  ship.  This  in-
censed the  people,  and  they  took  arms  under  Pat-
rick Henry.  Lord  Dunmore,  becoming  alarmed
at  this  action,  convened  the  council,  but  nothing
changed  Henry's  purpose.  Lady  Dunmore  was
sent  on  board  the  "  Fowey  "  man-of-war,  and  the

fovernor  issued  a  proclamation  against  "  a  certain
'atrick  Henry  "  and  his  "  deluded  followers,"  but
upon  the  receipt  of  the  news  from  Lexington  he
fled  to  Fort  Johnston,  sending  his  wife  to  New
York.  In  1776,  when  the  British  army  arrived  in
New  York,  Lord  Dunmore  was  joined  by  a  few
loyalists,  and  carried  on  a  petty  warfare,  plunder-
ing the  inhabitants  on  the  James  and  York  rivers,
and  carrying  off  their  slaves.  On  9  Dec.  his  fol-
lowers suffered  a  severe  defeat  at  the  battle  of
Great  Bridge,  and  shortly  afterward  he  burned
Norfolk,  then  the  most  populous  and  flourishing
town  of  Virginia.  He  was  afterward  obliged  to
take  refuge  on  board  his  fleet,  which  was  driven
by  well-placed  batteries  from  one  place  to  another,
till  he  anchored  near  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac.
Continuing  his  predatory  warfare,  he  established
himself  early  in  June  on  G'wynn  isJand,  in  the  Chesa-
peake, there  vainly  awaiting  aid,  but  was  dislodged
by  the  Virginians  in  July,  being  wounded  in  the
leg.  Washington  said,  in  December,  1775,  "I  do
not  think  that  forcing  his  lordship  on  shipboard


is  sufficient.  Nothing  less  than  depriving  bin  of
life  or  liberty  will  secure  peace  to  Virginia,  as
motives  of  resentment  aetuate  his  conduct  to  a  de-
gree equal  to  the  total  destruction  of  that  colony."
Lord  Dunmore  with  his  fleet  of  fugitive.-  continued
during  a  part  of  1776  on  the  coasts  and  ri i
Virginia,  but,  after  various  distressing  adventures,
he  burned  the  smaller  vessels,  and  sent  the  re-
mainder to  the  West  Indies.  In  1779  his  name
appears  in  the  confiscation  act  of  New  York.  He
returned  to  England,  and  in  1786  was  appointed
governor  of  the  Bermudas, — His  wife.  Klizalnlh,
d.  at  Southwood  house,  near  Ramsgate.  England,
in  1818.  was  the  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Galloway.

DUNN,  John  Henry,  Canadian  statesman,  d.
in  London,  England,  21  April,  1854.  He  came  to
Canada  in  1820,  and,  having  been  appointed  re-
ceiver-general and  a  member  of  the  legislative  and
executive  councils  of  Upper  Canada,  retained
those  offices  till  the  union  of  the  provinces  in  1840.
— His  son,  Alexander  Roberts,  b.  in  Canada;
d.  about  1867.  entered  the  army,  and  served  in  the
Crimean  war.  He  was  a  lieutenant  of  horse  in  the
11th,  Lord  Cardigan's,  hussars,  rode  in  the  cele-
brated charge  of  the  light  brigade  at  Balaklava.
and  was  specially  selected  by  his  surviving  com-
rades as  the  most  deserving  of  them  all  to  receive
the  Victoria  cross.  After  retiring  from  the  army
he  went  to  Toronto,  Canada,  and  in  June,  1858,
together  with  Baron  de  Rottenburg,  became  at-
tached to  the  100th,  or  Prince  of  Wales's,  royal
Canadian  regiment.  Subsequently  he  was  stationed
with  his  regiment  at  Gibraltar,  and,  on  the  retire-
ment of  De  Rottenburg  from  command,  he  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel.

DUNN,  Oscar,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in  Ootcau
du  Lac,  Quebec,  in  1844;  d.  in  the  city  of  Quebec,
15  April,  1885.  He  studied  law,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  but  never  practised,  drifted  into
journalism,  and  wrote  essays  for  the  "Courtier  de
St.  Hyacinthe,"  of  which  paper  he  became  editor.
Subsequently  he  resided  in  Paris,  France,  and  con-
tributed to  the  editorial  columns  of  the  "Journal."
On  his  return  to  Canada  he  became  editorially  con-
nected with  "  La  Minerve,"  of  Montreal,  and  also
edited  "  l'Opinion  Publique,"  a  weekly,  and  was
for  a  time  one  of  the  editors  and  directors  of  "  La
revue  Canadienne."  He  became  librarian  to  the
department  of  public  instruction  of  Quebec,  and
held  the  office  of  secretary  of  that  department  at
the  time  of  his  death.  He  wrote  pamphlets  on  na-
tional, religious,  and  political  topics,  which  were
widely  read,  and  was  the  author  of  a  "  Glossaire
Franco-Canadian,"  a  second  edition  of  which  he
was  preparing  at  the  time  of  his  death.

DUNN,  Oscar  James,  lieutenant-governor  of
Louisiana,  b.  in  Louisiana  in  1820 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, 20  Nov.,  1871.  He  was  born  a  slave,  and  as
soon  as  he  was  old  enough  to  do  manual  labor  was
purchased  by  a  firm  in  the  plastering  trade,  but
after  reaching  his  majority  ran  away  from  his
owners.  When  Gen.  Butler  entered  New  Orleans
he  enlisted  in  the  first  regiment  of  colored  troops
raised  in  Louisiana,  and  reached  a  captaincv.  the
highest  rank  then  permitted  to  his  race.  When
an  incompetent  person  was  promoted  over  him  to
the  rank  of  major,  he  resigned  his  comm
After  the  war  Capt.  Dunn  was  active  in  promoting
the  reconstruction  of  his  state.  He  had  acquired
wealth,  and  in  1868  became  lieutenant-governor
of  Louisiana.  John  R.  Lynch,  then  secretary  of
state  of  Mississippi,  in  an  oration  delivered  at  his
funeral,  said:  "There  now  lie  before  us  the  re-
mains of  the  first  colored  man  who  ever  held  an
executive  office  in  this  country."*


Ml


HI  VN.  Thomas,  Canadian  legislator,  h.  in  17:«>:
■i  QnsbsO,  1"»  April,  1  -< ■  1 1 1 . ■  r  RSSnabaf

nf  tin-  Bxeoutive  oounoil  "f  Lower  Canada  ho  aa-
turned  the  administration  of  tin*  government  on

departure  of  sir  U.S.  Mllnes  io  i>"«>.*>.  and  again
became  administrator  on  the  departure  of

1*,  performing  this  function  until  the  arrival
of  Sir  George  Prevoel  in  1811.  During  the  time
tlmt  beheld  <»ill<-<-  be  permitted  Monseigneur  Panel
t,.  bt  aleoted  to  the  ooadiutorship,  ami  i»>tli  then
and  previoualv  edvooated  a  removal  of  the  disa-
bilities which  tin1  Roman  Catholic  clergy  suffered.

Hawaaalaoa jmlanajndgaol  th<>  court  of  Ung*i

bauoh,  and  ■  Lower  Canadian  seignior. — Hi-*  s,,n.
\\  i  1 1 i ii in.  British  soldier,  b.  in  London.  England,
in  1?*?;  «l.  24  July,  1868,  entered  the  army  In

red  in  tin-  campaign  in  Italy,  at  the  Iwittle

of  liafda  and  oapture  of  SoyUa  Qastls  in  inm,  in
the  expedition  t<>  Egypt  In  1*07,  and  the  cam-
paigns in  the  Peninsula  in  1810  and  1811.  He
ad  in  Canada  in  1*14  during  the  war  with  the
United  States,  and  was  present  at  the  taking  of
Moose  island  and  the  occupation  of  Castine.  In
1 B8?  he  retired  from  active  service  with  the  rank  of
major-general  on  full  pay.

lU'XN,  Williamson,  pioneer,  b.  near  Danville.
Ky..  25  Dec.,  17H1  ■  d.  in  Hanover.  Ind..  11  Nov..
t.  He  removed  to  Indiana  territory  in  1809,
settled  in  .lefferaon  county, and  was  appointe<l  jus-
tice of  the  peace,  and  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  of  .Jefferson  county,  in  1H11,  by  (Jen.
Harrison,  then  governor  of  the  territory.  Doling
the  war  of  is  12 he  was  commissioned  by  President
Madison  captain  of  a  company  of  rangers,  an  or-
ganization provided  by  congress  for  the  protection
of  the  frontier  settlements,  which  he  had  in  charge
for  two  years.  In  1814  Gov.  Posey  commissioned
him  an  associate  judge  of  the  circuit  court  of  Jef-
ferson county.  He  held  this  office  until  1816,  when
he  entered  the  first  legislature  under  the  state
constitution.  He  was  one  of  the  original  members
and  first  ruling  elders  of  the  Presbyterian  church.
Organised  in  ls2<)  at  Hanover,  a  village  laid  out
on  his  farm.  He  was  a  representative  in  the  first
three  legislatures  of  the  state  of  Indiana,  ami  was
twice  s|Hsaker.  While  in  the  state  legislature  he
was  virtually  offered  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
Hut  declined.  In  1888,  having  been  appointed  by
President  Monroe  as  register  of  the  land  office,  he
removed  to  the  wilderness,  and,  in  connection  with
Maj.  Whitlock,  the  receiver,  laid  out  the  town  of
Cniwfordsville.  He  was  re-appointed  register  in
1887,  retaining  the  office  till  1«2!».  He  returned  to
Hanover  in  1829,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Han-
over college,  to  which  he  donated  fifty  acres  of
land,  ami  served  as  one  of  its  trustees  for  many
years.  He  also  gave  to  Wabash  college  the  trad
of  land  on  which  it  was  erected,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  its  first  board  of  trustee-.  These  colleges
are  indebted  to  bin  for  Utah  aatalJIsliinant  After
his  return  to  Jefferson  county  he  was  sleeted  to
the  state  senate,  to  fill  an  unexpired  term,  and  in
1848  was  a  defeated  candidate  for  the  senate. He

I  also  served  another  term  on  the  bench,  to  which  he
was  re-elected,  and  held  the  otlice  till  the  court
was  aboiuhcd.  Judge  Dunn  began  the  movement
that  culminated  in  the  election  of  Zachary  Tav-
lor  to  the  presidency  by  the  Whigs  in
Jadge  Dunn  s  unyielding  devotion  to  conviction
twiee  oosl  him  a  scat  in  the  state  senate.  He  WSS
prominent  in  the  councils  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  ami  widely  known  as  connected  with  lin-
earis history of Indiana. —  His son, William

Mrkec.  lawyer.  i>.  in  Hanover,  Jefferson  <•<>..  Ind..
12  Dec.,  isi4;  d.  in  Maplcwood,  Fairfax  co..  Va..


'I  -I  ,:•. .  |8f3  H.  MM  graduated  at  the  Indiana
state  univer-ity  in Bloomlngton in  I  bs>

came professor  of  mat  hematics  at Han
liege,  Indiana. After  a  gradu  at  Yale,

where  be  received  the  degree  ol A  :',.  he

studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  l*r.  and  practised
for  many  years  m Madison.  Ind. He  waa  a  n
Iht  of  the legislature m 1888,  I  delegate  to  the
State  constitutional  convention m |h.V>,  and  was
then  chosen  to  c..ngrea»  as  a  Republican,  ser

from  \H:,\i  till  \sw. Whenthewat  brofcooal  he

SJBJ  offered  a  Oplonelov bj <m.\. Morton.  ,,
hrigadiership  hv I'r. -i.lent'  Lincoln,  hut  declined
bOUL During  Li-*  second term  he  VSS  chainnan

Of the  coinlillttee  oil patent*. He  Was  defeated in

the  elation  for  the  fo Mowing  OOngraSa.  and  00  II

March, lmfcj.  was  ap|>oiutcd major  and  judge-ad*

sonata,  l'.  s.  volunteers,  in  the dapartinanl  •  •<  Mis-
souri. <>n  22  June,  1KU4.  he  became  BOlooel  and
a»i>tatit jiidge-ad\oeatc-i;eneral.  C.  S.  army,  ami

was  bra  vetted  brigadier-general,  U.  s.  anay,  En

March.  1  him,  for  faithful,  mofffishwis.  Slwl  distin-
guished services  in  his  department.  <>n  the  re-
tirement of  J udge-udvocate- general  Holt,  he  was
appointed  to  the  place.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Philadelphia  loyalists'  convention  of  1888
Dunn  became  Jodge-advocate general,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  on  1  Dee..  l*7"t.  and  on
88  .Ian..  1881.  was  retired  from  active  service.

DUNNELL,  Mark  Hill,  oonflueainsn.  b.  in
Buxton,  Me..  2  July,  1*2:5.  Qs  was  graduated  at
Waterville  college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1H-1JI.
and  for  live  years  was  the  principal  of  Norway  and
Hebron  academic*.  He  was  a  member  of  the
lower  house  of  tin'  Maim-  legislature  in  1854,  and
in  185.5  of  the  state  senate,  ami  from  that  time
till  1859  was  state  sii|>criutendcnt  of  common
schools.  In  1856  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Republican  convention  at  Philadelphia.  H'
the  practice  of  the  law  at  Portland  in  intjo.  -
in  the  Union  army  as  colonel  of  the  5th  Maine  in-
fantry, and  in  1N02  was  V.  S.  consul  at  Vera  Cruz.
Mexico.  He  removed  to  Minnesota  in  1885,  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  there  in  1K07.  and  in
lM»i7~'7<>  was  state  superintendent  of  public  in*t  ruc-
tion. He  was  then  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republi-
can, and  served  four  terms  in  suooession,  in  l*71-*9.

DUNNING,  Annie  kctchum.  author,  b.  in
New  York  city.  2  Nov..  \K\\.  She  is  a  daughter  of
Hiram  Ketchuin,  a  politician  of  some  distinction  :
was  educated  in  private  schools  fa  New  York,  and
was  for  several  yean  e  pupil  of  John  s.  c.  Abbott.
She  married Rev.  Andrew  Donning,  psstorof  the

Congregational  church  In  Thompson.  Ooniu  and

!••  supplement  his  -mall  salarv  wrote  her  fitM  st..r\.
" Clement ina's  Mirror  '(New  York.  \<>1). Shetheti

became  a  writer  f<>r  the  Presbyterian  board  of  pub-
lication, by  which  most  of  her  SabsSttUOnl  volumes.
about  fifty  in  number,  have  been  published. Mi*st

of  her  IxH.ks  bavs  been  written  under  the  psemh>-
n\in of  "Nellie  Crahamc." Her b>oks include
uWhiapen  from  Dreamland"  (Philadelphia.  M)
'•Mistaken"  (New Y..rk.  ss  of

Win."  (Boston, 1888); -  Hliml  Jessie"  <ih68);
"Only  a  Penny"  (Philadelphia.  1887);  "On
Child"  (1868);  "Miss  Latimer'.-  Meeting
"Fred  Wilson"  (1870);  "Mary'i  Wei Prianda"

• \ StOfJ oj Lour Lives,  or Mistaken*'

(Boston,  1S71».

HI  \mm..  Mward  Oeborue,  stional

minister.  I>.  In  isitt;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
M March. 1*71. Ha  was graduated  «t Ya

.'.and at its theotogioal  department in IS
and  was  nettled  as  a jwistor  in  Rome  and  in  Cana-

Joharie,  N.  Y..  till 1888 Be  then  aooapssd  an


i>r,t>


DUNNINGTON


DUPARQIKT


appointment  from  the  American  Bible  society  as
thi'ir  agent  in  the  southern  states,  in  which  he
continued  till  the  civil  war,  when  he  became  a
chaplain  in  the  army,  receiving  his  appointment
23  June,  1862,  and  was  stationed  at  Cumlierland,
Md.,  but  returned  to  his  work  after  the  war.  He
had  become  interested  in  exploring  ancient  mounds
in  various  parts  of  the  south,  and  continued  his
explorations  till  11  few  months  before  his  death.

DUNNINGTON,  Francis  Perry,  chemist,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  3  March,  1851.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1872,  became
adjunct  professor  of  analytical  chemistry  in  that
year,  and  in  1885  was  made  professor  of  analytical
and  agricultural  chemistry.  He  was  elected  secre-
tary of  the  chemical  section  of  the  American  asso-
ciaiion  for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1885,
and  is  a  member  of  the  American  chemical  society
and  other  scientific  bodies.  Prof.  Dunnington  is
the  author  of  numerous  chemical  investigations.
accounts  of  which  have  appeared  in  the  "  Chemical
News,''  "  American  Chemical  Journal,"  the  trans-
actions of  various  societies,  and  elsewhere.

DUNSTER,  Edward  Swift,  physician,  b.  in
Springvale,  York  < -o..  Me.,  2  Sept.,  1834;  d.  in  Ann
Arbor,  Mich.,  3  May,  1888.  He  was  a  lineal  de-
scendant of  Henry  Dunster,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1856,  and  at  the  New  York  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1859,  beginning  prac-
tice in  that  city  in  1860.  He  entered  the  army
as  assistant  surgeon  in  June,  1861,  and  served  in
West  Virginia  and  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
acting  as  medical  inspector  and  medical  director  of
hospitals.  After  being  ordered  to  Philadelphia,
Washington,  and  West  Point,  he  resigned  on  1
Feb.,  1866.  and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession in  New  York,  making  a  specialty  of  obstet-
rics and  the  diseases  of  women  and  children.  He
was  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Medical  Journal  "  in
1866-'72.  resident  physician  in  charge  of  hospitals
on  Randall's  island  in  1869-'73,  and  professor  of
obstetrics  and  the  diseases  of  women  and  children
in  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1868-'71.  He
subsequently  held  the  same  chair  in  Long  Island
medical  college  in  the  medical  department  of  Dart-
mouth college,  and  after  1873  in  the  University  of
Michigan.  Among  his  contributions  to  professional
literature  are  papers  on  "  Relations  of  the  Medical
Profession  to  Modern  Education";  "Logic  of
Medicine  "  ;  "  Notes  on  Double  Monsters  " ;  "  His-
tory of  Anaesthesia " ;  "  The  Comparative  Mor-
tality in  Armies  from  Wounds  and  Disease  ";  and
"  History  of  Spontaneous  Generation."

DUNSTER,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Lancashire,
England,  about  1612 ;  d.  in  Scituate,  Mass.,  27  Feb.,
1659.  He  was  educated  at  Cambridge,  England,
in  1630-'4,  Jeremy  Taylor  and  John  Milton  being
among  his  fellow-students.  He  emigrated  to  this
country  to  escape  persecution  for  nonconformity,
and  was,  soon  after  his  arrival,  chosen  to  be  the  first
president  of  Harvard  college,  that  institution  hav-
ing previously  been  under  the  charge  of  Nathaniel
Eaton,  who  bore  the  title  of  "  professor,"  or  "  mas-
ter." Eaton  had  been  appointed  to  the  office
about  1637,  but  was  removed  on  account  of  the
severity  of  his  discipline.  "  President  Dunster,"
says  Quincv  in  his  "  History  of  Harvard  Univer-
sity," "  united  in  himself  the  character  of  both
patron  and  president,  for,  poor  as  he  was,  he  con-
tributed, at  a  time  of  the  utmost  need.  100  acres
of  land  "  toward  the  support'of  the  college,  "  be-
sides rendering  it  for  a  succession  of  years  a  series
of  official  services  well  directed,  unwearied  and
altogether  inestimable."  He  probably  obtained
the  charter  of  1642,  and  undoubtedly  secured  that


of  1650,  through  his  own  petition*  By  his  personal
efforts  and  sacrifices  he  built  the  president  s  house.
and  used  his  influence  with  the  general  court  for
the  relief  of  the  institution  in  its  dire  nc<
After  laboring  for  fourteen  vears,  he  was  induced
to  resign  in  October,  1654,  tlie  college  authorities
having  taken  exception  to  bis  public  proclamation,
in  the  Cambridge  church,  of  which  he  was  also
pastor,  of  certain  doubts  that  had  arisen  in  his
mind  as  to  the  validity  of  infant  baptism.  He  WM
indicted  for  the  same  offence  by  the  grand  jury,
sentenced  to  a  public  admonition,  and  laid  under
bonds  for  good  behavior.  He  was  subsequently
presented  by  the  same  body  for  neglecting  the
baptism  of  one  of  his  children.  After  his  resigna-
tion he  removed  to  Scituate,  where  he  was  em-
ployed in  the  ministry  till  his  death.  Bv  his  last
will  he  ordered  that  his  body  should  be  buried  in
Cambridge,  and  magnanimously  bequeathed  lega-
cies to  the  very  persons  who  had  been  instrumental
in  his  removal  from  the  presidency.  He  was
greatly  esteemed  for  his  extensive  learning,  his
sincere  pietv,  and  his  modest  and  unobtrusive  de-
portment. His  knowledge  of  the  oriental  languages,
especially  Hebrew,  was  remarkable,  the  new  version
of  the  Psalms  by  Eliot,  Welde,  and  Mather  having
been  submitted  to  him  for  revision.  "  The  New
England  Psalm-Book  "  (1640)  was  thus  greatly  en-
riched by  his  scholarship.  Under  his  influence
Harvard  took  a  high  stand,  and  through  his  intelli-
gent administration  of  its  interests,  as  well  as  his
thorough  educational  methods,  received  an  impulse
which  is  doubtless  felt  to  the  present  day.  Presi-
dent Dunster's  life  has  been  written  by  Rev.  Jere-
miah Chaplin,  D.  D.  (Boston,  1872).

DUNTON,  John,  author,  b.  in  Graffham,  Hunt-
ingdonshire, England,  14  May,  1659;  d.  in  New
England  in  1733.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  book-
seller in  London,  and  emigrated  to  New  England
in  March,  1686,  with  a  cargo  of  books.  This
venture  was  unsuccessful,  and  he  only  remained
eight  months  in  the  colony.  But  he  returned  sub-
sequently, established  himself  in  the  bookselling
business,  and,  after  twenty  years  devoted  to  this
pursuit,  turned  his  attention  to  authorship.  In
1701  he  was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  "  Post
Angel  "  newspaper.  Later  he  began  the  publica-
tion of  the  "  Athenian  Mercury,"  republished  under
the  name  of  the  "  Athenian  Oracle  "  (4  vols.).  In
1705  appeared  the  "Life  and  Errors  of  John
Dunton,"  by  himself,  in  which  is  to  be  found  the
"  lives  and  characters  of  more  than  1,000  con-
temporary characters  of  literary  eminence,"  and  a
description  of  many  of  the  ministers,  booksellers,
and  other  citizens  of  Boston  and  Salem.  His
"  Letters  from  New  England  "  were  published  by
the  Prince  society  (1867).

DUPARQUET,  Jacques  Diel,  colonist,  b.  in
France  about  1600;  d.  in  Saint  Pierre,  Martinique,
8  Jan.,  1658.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Enambuc  (q.  v.\
founderof  the  French  colonies  in  the  Antilles.  The
latter,  feeling  his  end  approaching  and  wishing  to
maintain  the  colony  in  Martinique,  which  he  regard-
ed as  his  own  work,  sent  Duparquet  there  in  1636.
The  affability  of  the  new  governor  gained  the  af-
fection of  all  the  inhabitants,  and  his  prudence
brought  about  a  good  understanding  between  the
Caribs  and  the  French.  Yet,  while  Martinique  was
flourishing  under  his  government,  serious  troubles
arose  in  the  part  of  St  Christopher  that  belonged
to  the  French.  The  governor-general  of  the  An-
tilles, recently  sent  out  by  the  king,  found  that
Poincy,  who  occupied  this  post,  refused  to  BUM
render  his  authority  to  him.  Duparquet  went  to
Guadeloupe  in 1646  to  take  ouUa  commission


urn


DO POHT  Dl  mm---  |0|


from  the  new  governor-general,  who  authorized
linn  t->  show  the  Oldm  Of  tli.-  king  to  I'.'iii.y.
II  MllfcHTQUWl  to  enforce  lii-«  claim  by  arms,  l>ut
Wll  defeated  aii' I  obliged  to  take  rrfuc  among
the  English,  who  surrendered  him  to  I'oincy,  and
ht  was  kept  it  prisoner  until  tin-  following  pear,

•  tnMi  set  ii>Miiit  founding  a  colony  in  (in-nada,
when-  tin-  West  In. tin  oompany  had  made  several
vain  attempts  at  a  settlement.  The  faun-  of  In-
just  dMiingl  with  tin-  natives  of  Martinique  had
reached  those  of  Grenada,  who  begged  him  to
eomfl  among  tln'in.  He  arrived  In  (irenada  in
Jane,  1680,  nod  Kafcskruan,  a  Qarib  chief,  said
that  if  hf  wanted  to  make  himself  master  of  their
Wand  be  must  consent  to  trade  with  them.
Duperquel  received  the  pro|>osal  joyfully,  and
agreed  to  give  the  inhabitants  a  certain  quantity

'•■ads,  ervstals,  knives,  and  other  wares
in  exchange  for  too  island.  When  the  bargain
was  concluded,  he  made  the  nocessarv  arrange-
ments for  establishing  the  colony,  and  returned
to  Martinique.  Hut  the  savages  forgot  their  agree-
ment, and  attacked  the  French,  who  quickly  re-
duced them  to  subjection.  .Some  time  afterward
the  English  of  St.  Lucia,  whom  Duparquet  had
vainly wanted  <>f the plots that the  natives of

that island were Conning  against them,  were

massacred  or  forced  to  leave  it,  and  he  planted
a  colony  there,  which  rapidly  liecame  prosjierous.
Then  he  went  to  France  and  purchased  the  pro-
prietorship of  the  three  islands,  the  king  appoint-
ing him  his  lieutenant-general.  In  lo54  he
received  hospitably  and  settled  in  Martinique  a
number  of  Dutch  families  who  had  been  banished
from  Hra/.il.  In  1656  he  averted  a  famine  in
(iuadelou|»e,  which  had  been  devastated  by  a  hurri-
cane, by  a  seasonable  supply  of  provisions.  The
expenses  of  his  colony  in  (irenada  absorbed  a  large
part  of  his  income,  and  he  gladly  consented  to  a
proposal  for  its  purchase  from  Father  Dutertre,
who  acted  as  agent  in  the  matter  for  a  M.  do
Cerillac.  The  rest  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  the
people  of  Martinique,  who  repaid  his  zeal  for
their  welfare  with  ingratitude  during  his  life,  but
appreciated  his  great  qualities  after  his  death.

IM  I'KltltKY.  Louis  Isidore,  French  naval
offteer,  h,  in  Paris.  21  Oot,  I7s<>;  d.  there.  io  Sept,
I0HL  He  entered  the  French  navy  in  ImikJ,  was
promoted  2d  lieutenant,  and  sailed  in  1817  for  a
voyage  round  the  world  in  the  corvette  "  ITranie."
which  vessel  was  wrecked  on  the  Malouine  islands.
and  Duperrey,  picked  up  by  an  American  vessel,  re-
turned to  France,  and  was  promoted  to  1st  lieu-
tenant. In  1822  he  received  his  commission  as
captain,  and,  in  command  of  the  corvette  "  La  ('<>-
iiuille,"  sailed  on  a  scientific  expedition  to  the
.South  American  coasts  and  the  Pacific  ocean,  from
which  he  returned  on  M  March,  1885,  During
that  time  he  visited  repeatedly  the  coasts  of  Chili
and  Peru,  whence  he  sent  to  the  navy  department
interesting  reports  UO00  the  geology  ami  institu-
tions of  those  countries,  tad  brought  home  many
thousand  zoological  and  botanical  speeimeDB.  The
observations  of  the  pendulum  taken  during  this
Ige  at  man v  different  jM.ints  proved  the  flatten-
ing of  the  earth  at  the  poles, and  Duperrevalao  de-
termined the  position  of  the  magnetic  poke  and
the  figure  of  the  magnetic  equator.  He  designed
charts  of  the  coast  of  .South  America  which  are
valued,  especially  one  showing  the  bifurcation  of
the  current  at  the  mouth  of  the  Plate. Dii|»crrwy  in

•  was  appointed  officer  of  the  Legion  >>f  II

and  in  184a  a  member  of  the  French  academy.  Be
published  "  Vovage  autoiir  du  Monde,  etc..  |h-ii-
dant  lea  ennees  1822-,3-'4-:» "( Pari-.  1826


M POI880N,  missionarv,  b.  i„ France  about
1609;  d.  in l*>uialana  in 1 7v.*l». He  name
country in 172<t.  with nlhsT f— Ha,  hi  Mil
an  invitation from  the MWi^ippi  coiti|Hinv,  and

descended  the  Misshsippl.  ac,<.m|>ani<-d  bv  Flit  her
Sonel. He  deseriU-d  the  .1.,

in a  letter  that  WW published  ibortlf afterward.
They rested for  sonic time  am
reached  Natchez  on l.i  .June,  and  emUrked  with
Father  Dumas  m  H  UM,t f,,r  the  Yazoo*. After  n
stay  of  three  davs  he  set  out  f<>r  I  ~n*  In-

dians, t.»  whom  he  had  been  UMOiallj  •  • '  m  m  i  *»ioned.

He  was  well  received,  and  as  the  b  earths

village  all  the neople came  >>ut  t.,  welcome  In

next  went  to  the  village  of  the  Santhoui*.  oi f  the

Arkansas  trilies,  when-  then-  were  BOBS  l
settlers.  He  was  welcomed  by  the  chief,  and  it-
plained  his  mission  to  the  assembled  |«-op|e  thmugh
an  interpreter.  He  found  that  they  wen-  much  de-
moralized by  their  intercourse  with  the  French
traders,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  latter  till  he
could  learn  the  language  of  the  natives.  His  |H.
Imrs  among  the  Indians  wen-  at  first  not  ven  suc-
cessful, but  after  several  months  h<-  was  enabled  to
fix  their  attention  by  some  engravings,  and  I
verted  several.  He  coiitinm-d  his  Llbon  hen-  for
two  years,  and,  as  his  triU*  was  obliged  I
down  to  the  loinks  of  the  Mississippi  during  the
winter  of  1780,  be  resolved  to  visit  Perrier,  governor
Of  New  Orleans.  He  reached  Natchez  on  '*>  Nov..
and  was  preparing  to  embark  tw<>  days  later,  when
the  Indians,  who  had  received  some  Emories  at  the
hands  of  the  French,  attacked  and  killed  him.

DUPONCEAU,  Pierre  fctienne.  author,  b.  in
Prance  in  17W>-.  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  In  1844
He  landed  at  Portsmouth,  N.  11..  in  1777,  ami  was
attached  to  Hamn  Steuben's  staff.  He  becaac  a
citizen  of  the  United  states  in  1781,  studied  law,
and  while  practising  his  profession  translated  sev-
eral works  on  law,  and  published  legal  eBBSyu  lb-
was  the  first  to  draw  attention  to  the  ethnological
labors  of  early  Catholic  missionarire  in  this  coun-
try. His  works  include  "  Memoirs  sur  1«-  ivsteme
grammatical  dee  langues  de  .pulques  nations  ln-
diennes  de  I'Aineri.pie  du  Nord"(P«t
which  lie  received  the  Volnev  prize  of  gS^OOOL

1)1 FONT  DE  NKXOI'KS.  Pierre  Samuel.

political  economist,  b.  in  Paris.  France.  14  Dec,
17M :  d.  near  Wilmington.  Del.,  6  Aug.,  1M7.  Ib-
was  of  Huguenot  parentage.  At  the  age  of  twenty-
three  he  published  two  pamphlets  on  the  finances,
which  attracted  the  attention  <>f  the  celebrated
Ouesnay.  and  led  to  Du  Pont's  enrolment  among
the  u economists,'1  as  the  belierere  in  i^uesnars
newly  discovered  principles  of  polities]  economy
were  called.  They  waged  unn-h-nting  warfare
against  the  errors  and  abuses  that  dwarfed  com-
mercial enterprise  and  ruined  the  tillers  of  the  soil.
Du  Pool  devoted  himself  to  the  cause  with  real.
and  did  limn-  than  anyone  else  to  give  curnncv  to
the philanthropic doctrines of the school. His

first  unportanl  !>ook,  ••  De  ('exportation  at  de  I'im-

portation  dee  grams"  (Bokwons,  1764),  had  a  gn*t

-. Turgot.  then  iuteudaut  at  Limoges, sought

the  fO ung  author's  acquaintance,  and  a  close  and

lasting  Intimacy  aneueOi  Darhigthe  next  f< m

Du  Pont's  chief  publications  wen-  "  Physio.

a  oompendium  <>f  Qwesnav'i  system  (Pari-.

"De  I'origineet  du  pn»gn'-s  d'unc  science  noiivelle"*
•  Du  commerce  de  la  <«inpagniede.s  hides"
(177i»i:  ••  Histoin-  ahn;gee  des  finances  de  IWnglc-
tcrre"  (1760); "Analyse  du  poOjM  des  ssi-
and  "Qbeei»stioue  sur  les  effete  de  la  lit-

c.illlllicl e  des  grains  et s|,r  ccllX  des  prohibit  I- 'lis  "

He  a|s,»  tilit.sl  the  "Journal  de  1'agru  ult-


264


DU  PONT  DE  NEMOURS


DU PONT  DE  NEMOURS


"S


ure,  du  commerce,  it  des  finances"  (1765-'6),  and
from  Mmv.  1788,  the  "  Ephcmeridcs  du cttojren,"
the  organ  of  the  economists.  To  a  minister  of  the
questionable  expedients  of  the  Abbe  Terray  a  man
like  Du  Pont  could  not  fail  to  lie  obnoxious,  and
in  1772  the  publication  of  the  "  Ephemerides  "
was  forbidden. Though  persecuted  at  home,  its

editor  received  n
rious  titles  and
decorations  from
foreign  princes,
and  in  1774  went
to  Poland,  at  the
instance  of  King
Stanislas-  Augus-
tus, to  organize
a  general  system
of  national  educa-
tion. Later  in  the
year,  when  Turgot
succeeded  Ter-
ray as  comptrol-
ler-general of  the
finances,  Du  Pont
was  named  in-
yTL  spector-general  of

/-O y^  * s/ ¥  commerce, and

/  4>uScn<S  fS*-A»*4*»u*s*  ordered  to  re-
turn forthwith  to
France.  At  the  head  of  the  bureau  in  the  minis-
try of  finance,  to  which  all  affairs  of  importance
were  referred,  he  took  a  prominent  part  in  all
the  measures  of  reform  that  Turgot  instituted.
The  famous  "  Report  on  the  Municipalities,"  which
was  really  the  draft  of  a  liberal  constitution,  was
the  work  of  Du  Pont,  though  Turgot  did  not  re-
main long  enough  in  office  to  submit  it  to  the  king.
Upon  Turgot's  disgrace  in  1776,  Maurepas,  his  suc-
cessor, placed  Du  Pont  upon  the  retired  list  and
banished  him  to  the  country,  where  he  busied  him-
self with  agricultural  and  literary  pursuits  until
recalled  to  active  duty  in  1778  by  Vergennes,  who
employed  him  in  the  task  of  negotiating  with  the
English  envoy,  Dr.  Hutton,  the  treaty  of  1783,  by
which  Great  Britain  formally  recognized  the  inde-
pendence of  the  United  States,  and  later  in  the
still  more  delicate  undertaking  of  arranging  the
terms  of  the  commercial  treaty  that  France  and
England  signed  in  1786.  In  recognition  of  these
services  he  was  made  councillor  of  state.  He  was
appointed  secretary-general  of  the  assembly  of
notables  in  1787,  and  drew  up  the  various  meas-
ures of  reform  that  Calonne  presented,  the  per-
sonal interference  of  Louis  XVI.  alone  saving  Du
Pont  from  a  second  banishment  after  the  fall  of
that  minister.  From  1772  till  1789  Du  Pont's
principal  works  were  a  translation  into  French
verse  of  a  portion  of  Ariosto's  '•  Orlando  Furioso  "
(1781) ;  a  memoir  of  Turgot  (1782) ;  and  his  "  Let-
tre  a  la  chambre  du  commerce  de  Normandie  "
(1788),  in  which  he  refuted  the  attacks  on  the  treaty
of  1786.  He  was  a  member  of  the  states-general
from  Nemours  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,
and  later  of  the  constituent  assembly,  of  which
he  was  twice  elected  president,  and  was  one  of  the
leaders  of  the  moderate  party  that  advocated  a
constitutional  monarchy.  Hi*  fearless  opposition
to  the  issue  of  an  irredeemable  paper  currency
nearly  cost  him  his  life  at  the  hands  of  the  mob,  10
Sept.,  1 790.  After  the  dissolution  of  the  assembly
be  edited  the  "  Correspondance  patriotique,"  and

(mblished  various  pamphlets  in  the  interest  of
aw  and  order,  among  others  his  memorable  letters
denouncing  Petion,  mayor  of  Paris.  Du  Pont
was  marked  for  destruction  after  10  Aug.,  1792,


when  he  ami  his  son  were  at  the  Tuileries  among
the  defenders  of  the  king,  but  escaped  to  the  coun-
try, after  being  hidden  in  the  observatory  of  the
Mazarine  college  for  several  weeks  bv  Lalande,
and  while  in  concealment  wrote  his  "Philosophic
de  l'univers"  (Paris.  1796).  He  was  final lv  im-
prisoned, and  only  the  death  of  Robespierre,  28
.lulv,  1794,  saved  him  from  the  guillotine.  Assoon
as  he  was  released  he  renewed  his  opposition  to
the  Jacobins,  appearing  in  print  with  ins  ••  1'lai-
doyer  de  Lycias,  which  compared  the  enormities
of  the  "  terror  "  with  an  episode  in  Athenian  his-
tory, and  with  his  "Constitution  pour  la  repnb-
lique  Francaise "  (1795),  and  other  productions.
He  also  founded  and  edited  the  "  Historien,"  a  po-
litical journal.  He  was  elected  to  the  council  of
ancients  in  1795,  and  became  its  president  in  17!t?:
but,  when  the  Jacobins  broke  up  the  councils  with

Augereau's  troops.  Du  Pont  was  again  impris d.

his  house  and  property  being  pillaged  and  de-
stroyed. In  1799  he  emigrated  with  his  family  to
this  country,  where  he  was  received  with  much
consideration,  and  at  Jefferson's  request  prepared
a  work  on  national  education  in  the  United  States
(2d  ed.,  1812).  The  author's  plan,  though  not  car-
ried out  in  the  country  for  which  it  was  intended,
has  been  partially  adopted  in  his  native  land.  Re-
turning to  France  in  1802,  Du  Pont  de  Nemours
was  instrumental  in  promoting  the  treaty  of  1803,
bv  which  Louisiana  was  sold  to  the  United  States.
He  was  strongly  opposed  to  Napoleon,  refusing  to
hold  office  under  his  government,  but  became  presi-
dent of  the  Paris  chamber  of  commerce  and  of
several  charitable  institutions.  Besides  numerous
papers  for  the  French  institute,  of  which  he  was  a
member,  he  published  "  Sur  le  droit  de  marque  des
cuirs"  (1804);  "Sur  la  banque  de  France"  (1806);
and  "  Memoires  sur  differents  sujets  d'histoire  natu-
relle  "  (1807).  In  1814  he  was  secretary  of  the  pro-
visional government,  but  when  Napoleon  escaped
from  Elba  he  rejoined  his  sons  in  America.  He
wrote  also  "  Sur  l'education  nationale  dans  les  Etats-
Unis  d'Amerique  "  (Paris,  1812).  His  last  work  was
"  Examen  de  Malthus  et  lettre  k  Say  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1817). — His  son,  Victor  Marie,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  1  Oct.,  1767 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30
Jan.,  1827,  entered  the  diplomatic  service  in  1787
as  attache  of  the  French  legation  to  the  United
States,  where  he  remained  for  several  years.  In
1795,  when  M.  Adet  was  minister,  he  had  become
first  secretary  of  legation,  and  the  same  year  was
appointed  French  consul  at  Charleston,  S.  0.  He
was  promoted  to  consul-general  of  France  at  New
York  in  1798 ;  but  the  president  refused  him  an
exequatur  on  account  of  the  grave  difficulties  that
had  arisen  with  the  French  republic.  Returning
to  Europe,  he  left  the  government  service  and  emi-
grated to  the  United  States,  arriving  in  Newport,
ft.  I.,  1  Jan..  1800.  with  his  father  and  brother.  In
connection  with  the  former  he  founded  the  busi-
ness house  of  Du  Pont  de  Nemours,  fils  et  cie,  of
New  York,  which  was  very  successful  until  ruined
bv  heavy  advances  made  to  refit  and  provision  the
French  squadron  from  Santo  Domingo,  payment
of  the  drafts  on  the  French  treasury  being  refused
by  order  of  Napoleon,  who  saw  a  favorable  oppor-
tunity of  striking  a  political  enemy.  In  1800  Vic-
tor Du  Pont  went  to  Angelica,  N.  Y.,  and  three
years  later  joined  his  brother  near  Wilmington.
Del.,  where  he  established  a  cloth  manufactory,  in
which,  later,  he  was  assisted  by  his  oldest  son,
Charles  Irenee  Du  Pont.  Victor  Du  Pont  was  a
member  of  the  Delaware  legislature,  and  a  director
of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  and  lived  in  Dela-
ware till his  death.— Another sop,  Eleiithcre


I>1' PONT


!»l PONT


MO


heriee.  I>.  in  IB*,  ITTl  |  <1.  iti

Philadelphia.  1  l His  tastes  turned

early  toward  scientific  pmh^  ami  his  father's
friend.  l.a\«>i>i<T.  tin- fiuiticiit  chemist,  whom  Tur-
bad  made  superintendent  of  the  government
powder-mills, offered  to  take  him  iti  charge  an
cure  his  reversion  to  that  iuqiortant  post.  This
ltd  t<«  his  going  to  the  royal  mills  at  Kssomie  to
acquire  a  practical  knowledge  of  tin-  nittniifwl urc

of  gunpowder,  where  beramainad  until  tha  French

•lution  seemingly  changed  his  whole  career.

Mr  waa  ■oHtmooad  to  Paris,  8  June,  1791,  so  take

(•harp- of  the  printing  and  publishing  house  that

his  father  had  established,  and  found  himxdf  con-
ducting a  great  business  almost  alone,  lie  was
three  tiims  Imprisoned,  and  was  in  the  utmost
|M«ril  after  H»  Aug..  1798,  when  he  ami  his  father
I  at  the  Tuileries  among  the  armed  rappoiten
of  Louis  x\  I. When  the  Jecobine,  beaten  at  the

|>olls,  called  in  Augereau's  soldiers  to  o\erthrow
the  government.  8  Sept..  17H7.  his  father  was  im-
prisoned, and  the  print iiig-hoiisc  was  sacked  and
Qestroved.  The  family  sailed  for  the  Fnited  States
in  1799.  Some  months  after  his  arrival  an  acci-
dental circumstance  called  In'nee  du  I'ont's  atten-
tion to  the  bad  quality  of  the  gunpowder  made  in
this  country,  ana  gave  him  the  Brat  Idea  "f  erect-
ing works  EOT  its  manufacture.  He  went  back  to
Frame  in  January,  1801,  and  revisited  Kssonnc  to
procure  plans  and  model;,  returning  to  the  United
States  in  August  with  some  of  the  machinery.
Thomas  .lelT.-rson  was  very  anxious  that  the  works
should  In-  built  in  Virginia;  but  there,  as  in  Mary-
land, Ircnee  Du  Pont  was  deterred  by  the  institu-
tion of  slavery  and  its  effects  upon  the  white  race.
In  June,  lHtri,  he  bought  a  tract  of  land,  with
water-power,  on  the  Brandywinc  river,  near  Wil-
mington, Del.,  arrived  there  with  his  family  on
19  July,  and  set  to  work  at  once.  After  many
disappointments  and  losses,  his  energy  and  cour-
age surmounted  every  obstacle.  His  works,  the
largest  of  their  kind  in  the  country  at  the  time  of
his  sudden  death  from  cholera,  have  been  greatly
increased  under  the  management  of  his  sons,  Al-
fred Victor  (1798-1850),  Henry,  and  Alexis  Ire-
nee  (1814-1867),  and  of  his  grandsons,  Fi.kithekk
Irenee  (1888  1*77).  Lammot  (1831-1884).  Fiuene,
Francis  (iirney,  Henry  Algernon,  and  William.
Since  1N")<)  the  business  has  Im-cu  under  the  direc-
tion of  Henry  Du  Font,  second  son  of  its  founder,
b.  near  Wilmington.  Del.,  s  Aug..  1812,  a  graduate
of  theV.  S.  military  academy.— Samuel  Francis,
naval  officer,  son  of  Victor  Marie  Du  Font  de  Ne
mours.  b.  at  Bergen  Point,  X.  J..  27  Sept.,  1803:  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.. 88 June,  1888.  He  wasappoint-
ed  a  midshipman  in  the  navy  from  the  state  of  Dela-
ware in  December.  1818,  his  first  sea  service  being
on  the  ••  Franklin."  in  the  European  squadron.  In
1881  he  served  for  a  year  on  the  ••Constitution,'*
after  which  he  was  attached  to  the  "  Congress"  in
the  West  Indies  and  on  the  coast  of  Brazil.  He
waa  in  the  Mediterranean  in  1824  on  the  "North
Carolina."  of  which  vessel  he  liecame  sailing-mas-
ter, four  months  of  this  cruise  being  sjK-nt  00  the
"  Porpoise,"  to  which  he  was  ordered  soon  after  his
promotion  as  lieutenant, 88  April.  1888.  He  was
attached  to  the  "  Ontario  "  in  1*2!'.  made  another
three  rears1  cruise  in  European  waters,  and  from

i  Ull  183M  was  executive  officer  of  the  "  War-
ren "  and  of  the  "  Const. •llation."  and  commanded
the  "(irampus"  and  the  "Warren"  in  the  tlulf
of  Mexico.  In  the  latter  year  he  joined  the  "  <  >hio."
the  Hair-ship  of  Com.  Hull,  in  the  Mediterranean
squadron,  his  erui-e  ending  in  1841.  lb'  WSJ  pro-
moted commander  in  1H42.  and  sailed  for  (  hiua  on


^SS/&*4L//P


>h.  I.ut  a  ssesna  illnesi  forced  h.

aire  up  his  command  and  return  home.  In
he  was  ordered  to  the  Pacific  as  commander  of
the  "Congress,"  the  Baa? ship  of  Com.  Stockton.
Wheel  they  reached  California  the  Mexican  war
had  tiegun.  and  Du  P<>nt  was  at  ■  -nee  assigned  to
the command of the ■•  <  „M July, 184ft.

With  this  ves-
sel he  captured
San  Diego,  took

Itosseewion  of  Fa
'a/,  the  capital
of  Lower  Cali-
fornia, spiked
the  guns  of  San
Bias,  and  en-
tered the  har-
l>or  of  (inay-
inas,  burning
two  gun-boats  .  <\
and  cutting  out  x^
a  Mexican  brig
under  a  heavy  V
fire.  These  op-
erations cleared
the  Gulf  of  Cali-
fornia of  hos-
tile ships,  thirty
of  which  were
taken  or  destroyed.  He  took  part  in  the  capture
of  Mazatlan  under  Coin.  Shubrick.  11  Nov.,  1847,
leading  the  line  of  lioats  that  entered  the  main
harbor.  On  16  Feb.,  1*4*.  he  landed  at  San  Jose*
with  a  naval  force,  and  engaged  a  large  bodr
of  Mexicans,  marching  three  miles  inland  and
successfully  relieving  Lieut.  Haywood's  detach-
ment, which  was  closely  !>csieged  in  the  Mission-
house  and  about  to  surrender,  loiter  be  led.  or
sent  out,  various  expeditions  Into  the  Interior,
which  00-oporated  with  OoL  Burton  and  Lieut,
(afterward  General)  Henry  W.  Halleck.  who  wen-
moving  southward,  clearing  the  coiintrv  of  DOStfls
troops  ami  taking  many  prisoners.  Be  was  or-
dered home  in  184X.  became  captain  in  1KV»,  and
two  years  later  went  on  special  service  to  China  in
command  of  the  "Minnesota,"  witnessing  while
there  the  naval  operations  of  the  French  and  F.ng-
lish  forces,  notably  their  capture  of  the  Chinese
forts  on  the  Peibo.  Alter  visiting  Japan,  India.
and  Arabia,  he  returned  to  Boston  in  May,  1859.
Placed  in  command  of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard.
:il  Dec..  1880,  he  took  the  most  prompt  and  ener-
getic measures,  on  his  own  res|>otisibility.  when
communications  were  cut  off  with  Washington,
sending  a  naval  fon-c  to  the  Chesapeake  to  |
tlie  landing  of  troops  at  Annapolis,  In  Jum  .  1881,
he  was  made  president  of  a  l>oanl  convened  at
Washington  to  elaborate  a  general  plan  of  naval
operations  against  the  insurgent  states.  He  was
appointed  flag-officer  in  September,  and  led  the
expedition  that  sailed  from  Norfolk  in  the  follow-
ing month,  no  American  officer  having  e\.  r  com-
manded so  large  ■  Beat.  <>n  7  No*  he  success-
fully attacked  the  fortifications  defending  Port
Koval  harbor,  which  Ware  ably  planned  and  skil-
fully  executed.  This  engagement  is  justly  regard  <-d
as  one  "f  the  most  brilliant  achievements  of  naval
tactics.  His  anarasored  vessel*,  divided  into  main
and  flanking  divisions,  steamed  into  the  harU>r  in
two  parallel  columns.  The  flanking  division,  after
engaging  the  smaller  fort  and  driving  Iwu-k  the
enemy's  -lops,  took  irrJlrTn  to  enfilade  the  princi-
pal work,  before  which  the  main  column,  led  by
i  he  Mag-ship  ••  Wabash,"  passe,  |  and  repassed  in  an
elliptic  course,  its  tremendous  tire  inflicting  heavy


260


DU  PONT


IHTRATZ


damage,  Du  Pont  actively  followed  up  his  victory.
TvImc  was  seized,  giving  a  base  for  the  redaction
of  Fort  Pulaski  by  the  army ;  a  combined  naval
and  military  force  destroyed  the  batteries  at  Port
Royal  ferry ;  the  sounds  and  inland  waters  of
Georgia  south  of  the  Savannah,  and  of  the  eastern
coast  of  Florida,  were  occupied;  St.  Man's.  Per-
nandina,  Jacksonville,  and  other  places  were  cap-
tured ;  Fort  Clinch  and  the  fort  at  St.  Augustine
were  retaken,  and  fourteen  blockading  station-
were  established,  all  thoroughly  effective  save  that
off  Charleston,  where  the  vessels  at  command  were
insufficient  to  cover  the  circuit  of  twenty-three
miles  from  Bull's  Bay  to  Stono.  In  recognition  of
his  services,  Du  Pont  received  the  thanks  of  con-
gress, and  was  appointed  rear-admiral,  to  rank  from
16  July,  1862.  Toward  the  close  of  the  year  several
armored  vessels  were  added  to  his  command,  mostly
of  the  monitor  type,  one  of  which  destroyed  the
Confederate  steamer  "  Nashville,"  under  the  guns
of  Fort  McAllister.  Being  the  first  officer  to  whom
the  monitors  had  been  assigned,  he  carefully  tested
their  offensive  powers  by  several  attacks  upon  this
work,  on  which  they  were  unable  to  make  any  im-
pression on  account  of  the  small  number  of  their
guns  and  the  slowness  of  their  fire.  Assuming  im-
mediate command  of  his  nine  armored  vessels,
mounting  thirty-two  guns,  Du  Pont  made  a  reso-
lute attempt,  on  7  April,  1863,  to  take  Charleston.
Unable  to  manoeuvre  in  the  tortuous  channels,  filled
with  obstructions,  that  led  to  the  harbor,  the  iron-
clads were  exposed  to  a  terrible  cross-fire  from  a
hundred  guns  of  the  heaviest  calibres,  and,  dark-
ness approaching,  the  ships  were  wisely  withdrawn,
one  sinking  soon  afterward  and  five  others  being
disabled.  This  action  was  fought  pursuant  to  ex-
press instructions  from  the  navy  department,  its
probable  result  not  having  been  unforeseen  by  the
admiral,  who  had  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  the
co-operation  of  troops  was  necessary  to  secure  suc-
cess. Time  has  fully  confirmed  the  entire  correct-
ness of  Du  Pont's  judgment ;  his  able  successor,
with  a  larger  force  of  armored  ships,  was  no  more
fortunate,  and  Charleston  only  fell  on  the  approach
of  Sherman's  army.  In  June,  the  iron-clad  ram
"  Atlanta  "  coming  out  of  Savannah,  Du  Pont  sent
two  monitors  to  intercept  hex,  one  of  which,  under
Capt.  John  Rodgers,  succeeded  in  capturing  her
after  a  brief  engagement. This  was  the  last  im-

fiortant  incident  of  Admiral  Du  Pont's  command,
rom  which  he  was  relieved  on  5  July,  1863.  Dur-
ing the  intervals  of  more  than  twenty-five  years  of
service  at  sea  he  was  almost  constantly  employed
on  duties  of  importance.  He  was  a  member  of  the
board  that  prepared  the  plan  of  organization  for
the  naval  academy,  and  was  one  of  the  officers  that
in  after  years  revised  and  extended  the  system  then
adopted.  He  served  on  the  light-house  board,  took
part  in  two  revisions  of  the  rules  and  regulations
for  the  navy,  and  was  a  member  of  the  naval  re-
tiring board  of  1855.  Admiral  Du  Pont  was  the
author  of  various  papers  on  professional  subjects,
including  one  on  corporal  punishment  in  the  navy,
and  one  on  the  use  of  floating  batteries  for  coast
defence,  which  has  been  republished,  and  is  large-
ly cited  by  Sir  Howard  Douglas  in  his  work  on
naval  gunnery. — Henry  Algernon,  soldier,  son  of
Henry,  b.  near  Wilmington,  Del.,  30  Julv,  1838,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  6
May,  1861,  at  the  head  of  his  class,  and  promoted
to  2d  lieutenant  of  the  engineer  corps.  On  14  May
he  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant.  5th  artillery,
and  became  captain  24  March,  1864.  He  was  act-
ing Ml istant  adjutant-general  of  the  troops  in  New
York  harbor  in  1862-'3,  and  commanded  a  battery


in  West  Virginia  from  1H(>3  until  24  May.  18(>4,
participating  in  the  battle  of  Newmarket.  As
chief  of  artillery  of  that  department  from  the
latter  date  he  commanded  the  artillery  in  engage-
ments at  Piedmont,  Lexington,  and  Lynchl
during  the  spring  and  summer  of  1864.  Later  in'
the  vear  he  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Cedar  Ci  •
Hall'town,  Berryville,  Opequan.  and  I'i-her's  Hill,
in  command  of  the  artillery  of  Crook's  corps,  being
brevetted  major  for  gallant  services  in  the  two
last-mentioned  engagements,  and  lieutenant-colo-
nel, 19  Oct.,  1864,  for  services  at  Cedar  (reck.
After  the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  to
assimilate  the  tactics  for  the  three  arms  of  the
service.  Col.  Du  Pont  resigned  in  March,  1875.
Since  5  May,  1879,  he  has  been  president  of  the
Wilmington  and  Northern  railroad  company.

IHPORTAIL,  Lonis  LeMqae,  chevalier,
soldier,  b.  in  France  in  lTMO;  <1.  at  sea  in  1808,
He  was  educated  at  the  military  school  of  Mezieres,
and  was  an  excellent  engineer.  He  was  one  of  four
French  officers  engaged  by  Dr.  Franklin  and  Silas
Deane  to  serve  in  the  American  army  (see  articles
Ducoudray  and  Deane),  they  being  the  only  ones
engaged  by  the  express  authority  of  congress.  He
was  appointed  colonel  of  engineers  on  his  arrival,
promoted  to  be  brigadier-general,  17  Nov.,  1777,
and  major-general,  16  Nov.,  1781.  He  had  charge
of  the  engineering  operations  at  the  siege  of  York-
town,  and  was  one  of  the  general  officers  particu-
larly mentioned  by  Washington  in  his  despatches
after  the  capitulation.  He  returned  to  France,
and  in  1788  was  named  marechal-de-camp.  Owing
to  his  intimate  relations  with  Lafayette,  whose  po-
litical views  he  approved,  he  was,  on  16  Nov.,  1790,
appointed  minister  of  war;  but,  sharing  in  the  mis-
fortunes of  his  friend  and  patron,  he  was  de-
nounced in  the  assembly  for  maladministration  of
his  office,  and  resigned,  3  Dec,  1791.  He  was  then
given  a  military  appointment  in  Lorraine;  but,
being  warned  in  1792  that  a  serious  accusation  was
about  to  be  brought  against  him,  left  the  army,
and,  after  living  two  years  in  concealment,  retired
to  America.  He  was  recalled  by  the  events  of  the
18th  Bruraaire,  but  died  on  the  homeward  passage.
During  his  service  in  the  American  army  the
Chevalier  Duportail  was  much  impressed  by  the
timidity  and  bad  generalship  of  the  British  offi-
cers. In  1777  he  wrote:  "The  success  of  the
Americans  is  not  owing  to  their  strength  or  brav-
ery, but  to  the  astonishing  conduct  of  the  British
forces,  to  the  slowness  and  timidity  of  the  British
general."  Referring  to  the  battle  of  Brandywine,
he  writes :  "  If  the  English  had  followed  up  their
advantage  that  day  Washington's  army  would
have  been  spoken  of  no  more ;  sinee  that  time,  also,
Gen.  Howe  has,  in  all  his  operations,  exhibited  such
slowness  and  timidity  as  to  strike  me  with  aston-
ishment. With  30,000  men,  an  active,  enterprising
general  must  reduce  this  country."

DUPRATZ,  Antoine  Simon,  Le  Page,  author,
b.  in  Tourcoing.  France,  in  1689;  d.  in  Paris  in
1775.  He  entered  the  French  army,  saw  service  in
Germany,  and,  having  obtained  an  interest  in  the
French  western  land  company,  sailed  from  La  Ro»
ohelle  in  May.  1718,  to  take  possession  of  the  terri-
tory ceded  to  the  association  near  New  Orleans.
After  several  attempts  at  colonization,  he  ascended
the  Mississippi  in  1720  and  settled  among  the  N
ohez  Indians,  by  whom  he  was  at  first  well  received,
but  subsequently  became  involved  in  difficult
These  being  arranged,  he  pushed  into  the  interior,
visited  the  region  watered  by  the  Missouri  and
Arkansas,  and.  after  eight  years'  labor  as  a  pio-
neer, returned  to  New  Orleans  to  become  treasurer


I»l l'U>


•


Ml


of  l!i.'  WMiy,  «'ti  tin-  abolition  <.f  which  ofli
■  I  f>.r  France,  whew  he  landed.  '•.'•"»  June.

iHiiH,  <>r  <>f  the  Western
Put* of  Virginia  and  Carolina  "(Paris,  ir."»H;  |,.,n.
don.  commended for its  exactness,  the

iiitlmr  having  paid  especial  attention  to  geology,
mim ttmlogy,  end  "Hut  natural  sciences.

Dl  PI  Is.  Mathlaa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Picardy,
France,  early  in  the  17th  century  ;  d.  in  Orleans.
Be  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  1«>I I.  ami  wa>
M  n  missionary  to  (iuadclou|tc  and  other
French  possessions  in  America  in  Kill.  He  re-
turned in  1880  and  wrote  "  Relation  lie  I'ctnhlisse-
ment  d'une colonic  franchise  dans  I'ilede  la  Guade-
loupe, el  lies  moeurs  •savages"  (Caen,  1688).

IM  I* I" IS,  Thomas  K.,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in KrneMtown.  Ontario,  8B  March. 1888, lie  wan

(graduated  at  Queen's  college.  Kingston,  its  a  phy-

hi  in  1H<*»0.  In  ism  he  passed  a  summer  in  the
Armory  Square  hospital,  Washington,  1).  ('.,  as  as-
sistant ■nrgeon.  Be  attended  Harvard  medical
school  in  1870,  and  studied  diseases  of  the  eye
under  Drs.  William-  and  Derby  at  the  Boston  eye
infirmary.  In  1871  he  received  the  diploma  of  the
Bojal  eollegs  of  phyakdaoaaiid  surgeons  at  Kings-
ton, Ontario,  and  in  1881  that  of  the  Royal  college
of  surgeons  in  London,  England.  In  18(58  Dr.
Dupuis  was  appointed  profeaaorof  botany  in  the
iioyal  medical  college  oi  Kingston,  which  chair  he
vacated  in  1*7:1  to  take  that  of  anatomy,  which  he
still  holds  (1SST).  Me  is  also  a  lecturer  on  clinical
surgery,  to  which  chair  he  was  appointed  in  1880.
He  was  elected  to  the  council  of  Quean's  universi-
ty in  1*77.  re  elected  in  1888,  and  still  retains  the
office. Dr.  Dupuis  has  travelled  extensively  through

the  United  states.  Canada,  and  Europe,  and  has

written  interesting  descriptions  of  his  travels. —
His  brother,  Nathan  Fellones,  i».  in  Portland, On-
tario, in  IXW,  received  his  rudimentary  education
at  a  common  school,  and  from  his  fourteenth  till
his  eighteenth  year  worked  at  the  business  of
dock  and  watch  making.  He  then  entered
(Queen's  college,  Kingston,  where  he  was  graduated
with  honor-.  In  IHo7hewas  appointed  professor
of  chemistry  in  (Queen's  college,  and  in  1880  was
transferred  to  the  chair  of  mathematics.

sHJPUY,  Kliza  Ann,  author,  b.  in  Petersburg,
Va.,  aiMiut  1814;  d.  in  New  Orleans  in  Jannarr,  1881.
She  was  descended  from  Col.  Dupuv,  who  led  the
band  of  Huguenot  exiles  to  the  banks  of  James
river.  At  an  early  age  she  became  a  governess
in  Natchez,  and  while  so  employed  wrote  her  first
book,  "The  Conspirators,"  in  which  Aaron  Burr  is
the  prindpal  character.  Her  other  works  include
"The  Huguenot  F.xiles":  "  Kinina  WiattOO,  or
Trials  and  Triumphs  "  :  ■•  <  leleste  "  :  "  Florence,  or
the  Fatal  Vow  ':  "Separation  J  "Concealed
Treasure  "  ; "  istllnlgtl ** . and "The Country

rhhorhood."  She  wrote  in  all  aliout  forty
>tories,  Bosi  of  them  for  the  New  York  "  Ledger.''
IH'QF  ESN  K.Joseph  Marie  Eazare,  Viscount,
French  naval  otlioer,  b.  in  Havana,  Culm,  in  18
d.  in  Mexico  in  1854.  He  was  a  descendant  of  the
famous  Admiral  Duquesne,  studied  at  the  naval
aoUege  of  Angouleme.  France,  was  promoted  2<\
lieutenant in  1881,  1st lieutenant in 18:51,  and  in

mmander  of  the  hrii;  "  Le  Laurier,'1  in  the

licet  operating  against Mexico. Hi- distinguished
himself  during  the  borebardment  of  San  Juan  de
Ulna  in  1838,  and  contributed  greatly  toward  the
capture  of  the  fortifications  of  Vers  Cruz. He
promoted  corvette  captain  in 1880,  OOnUBOdon in

•  for  bravery  at  lunger  and  Hogador,  and  rear-
admiral  in  1888, and ai  such  commanded  the  French
fleet  opsmting  in  the  West Indies  and  the  (iulf  of


During  a  visit  to  the  city  of  Mexico  be
died  of  yellow  (ever.

IM  Ql'EMNI  IM  Ml  wi  Ml  IE.  Marquis.
nvernor  of  New  Frame,  b.  m  Prance  early  in  the
l*th  eantury.  He  was  a  grand  nepheu  of  Abraham
Duquesne,  I  reneh  manner,  early  •

the  royal  marine  .1  became  a'«  ,

In 17VJ he »n> appointed governor
France,  having  Ijccii  recommended  to  tin-  offlos  by
(lallissoni.re. Be  Introdn
the  colony,  placed  the  colonial  troo|Ntona  liar  with

the Bnropean i>>  eonstead  drilling  ami  study,

erected  forts  in  the  far  wist,  ami insisted "
croachinents  of  the English and colonial trOODS,
Among  the  fort-  I «n<  the  one  bearing

his  name  OSJ  the  present  site  of  1'ittshiirg.  It  vu
during  his  administration  that  the  SJBa»i  nation  of
.liiuionville  tiH.k  place,  and  also  the  brilliant  vic-
tory over  the  English  at  Oottloa da  VQlien  r
Dnqnesne  solicit. -d  his  recall,  and  dcjiarted  for
France  in  17.V>.

IM  (Jl'KT,  Joseph,  Canadian  notary,  b.  in
Chateampiay,  <  anada.  in  1817;  d.  in  Montreal  in
1X1H.  He  Id-gall  his  studies  in  the  college  of  Mon-
treal, and  finished  them  in  the  QoBege Of Chsssjhtj.
He  adopted  the  profession  of  notary,  and  bsOMM
the  partner  of  his  uncle,  M.  Dcmaray.  in  the  town
of  Saint-Jean.  The  latter,  a  member  of  the  Cana-
dian legislature,  was  arrested  iii  1K17.  along  with
several  others.  Duquet  attempted  a  rescue,  which
failed,  and  then  set  out  for  Montreal,  to  put  his
friends  on  their  guard, and  to  organize  a  force  that
would  secure  the  release  of  the  prisoner*  When
he  arrived  at  LongueU,  learning  that  his  Mends
had  been  rescued  and  that  be  was  himself  in
great  danger  from  the  pursuit  of  the  snTlSHiassjt
noons,  he  Bed  to  the  United  States. Be  returned

to  Canada  after  a  short  Stay, taking  |uirt  in  the
fight  at  Moor's  Corner,  in  which  the  Canadians
were  beaten.  He  escaj>ed  to  the  I'nited  States  and
remained  at  Swanton  until  I/ord  Durham's  procla-
mation of  amnesty,  when  he  returned  to  his  own
country.  When  be  learned  that  the  Canadian
exiles,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Doited  Stati-s.
were  preparing  to  return  to  Canada  under  the
command  of  Robert  Nelson,  he  prewired  to  assist
them.  He  was  one  of  the  most  active organisatl
of  the  Chasseurs,  a  secret  society,  and  went  from

parish  to  parish,  preparing  the  people  for  the
great  rising  of  tbeod  of  November.  <>n  that  date,
in  conjunction  with  Cardinal,  he  arrested  all  the
principal  toriee  of  Laprairie,  and  set  oul  at  the
head  of  a  small  force  to  take  jiossession  of  Caugh-
nawaga  and  daprive  the  Indian  inhabitants  of
their  arms,  lb-  was  betrayed  bythosswho  vers
to  aid  him,  arrested,  ami  conduct e<l  to  the  prison
Of  Montreal,  where  he  was  hanged,

1)1' RAN,  Martin  (doo-ran  i.  Mexican  priest,  b.
in  Santiago.  Tlaltcloleo,  Mexico;  d.  there  in  1884
Be  WSJ  OX  pure  Indian  blood,  WSJ  sdnOSted  in  the

Pranoiecan  oollogn  estsMishod  in  his  native  town,

and  entered  the  religious  Older  of  the  iKninnuan
fathers,  soon  liecoming  one  of  the  most  celebrate*!
pulpit  orators  of  the  time.  In  l.V*4  he  hail  \*r-
mi— ion  to  preach  in  the  Mexican  language  in  the
church  of  Santiago  Tlaltcloleo;  and  in  his  first  scr-
nion  dared  to  denounce  slavery  and  t<>  support  the
doctrines  of  Bartolome  de  la>  Casaa,  Du ran  was
arrested  and  warned  by  the  chun  h  not  to  |
to  tin-  Indians  thes»- siTinoiisaj^nnst  the  est  a1
order  <>f  things.  1'atlnr  Prancisoode  los  Kins  was
then  commissioned  by  the  archbishop  to  hear  the
succccdini;  sermons  of  Duran.  and,  after  listening
to  one.  accused  the  preacher.  Iiefon  the  luoulsition.
of  pro|Mtgating  among  the  Indians  heretical  and


268


DURAND


DURAND


immoral  ideas,  and  hatred  to  the  Spaniards.  I  Miran
was  seized  by  the  Inquisition,  and  his  property,
which  consisted  only  of  books,  was  also  seized.
Among  them  were  found  two  magnificent  works,
which  had  been  overlooked  by  the  inquisitors,  and
the  authorities,  hearing  of  the  existence  of  similar
works  among  t  hi-  Indians,  caused  Duran  to  be  sub-
jected to  the  most  cruel  torments  in  order  that  he
should  reveal  where  he  had  obtained  them ;  but
their  cruelty  was  met  by  the  Indian  friar  with  great
courage,  and  he  revealed  nothing.  The  torment
lasted  for  several  days,  and  at  last  Duran  was
burned  alive,  on  suspicion  of  being  a  heretic.

DTRAND,  Cyras,  engraver,  b.  in  Jefferson  vil-
lage, N.  J..  27  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Irvington,  N.  J.,  18
Sept.,  1868.  He  was  descended  from  Huguenots  who
came  to  this  country  after  the  revocation  of  the  edict
of  Nantes,  and  his  father  was  a  watch-maker.  ( 'vrus
received  a  common-school  education  in  his  native
village,  and  was  for  a  time  occupied  in  the  con-
struction of  machinery.  In  this  he  was  eminently
successful,  and  when,  in  consequence  of  the  non-
intercourse  acts  passed  by  England,  factories  sprang
up  everywhere,  his  services  were  in  great  demand.
In  1814  he  settled  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  where  he  worked
as  a  silversmith,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year
volunteered  as  a  drummer,  and  served  for  three
months  at  Sandy  Hook.  A  year  later  he  was  em-
ployed in  the  Taurino  factory  in  Rahway,  N.  J.,
making  machines  for  spinning  and  carding  hair
for  the  manufacture  of  carpets.  His  attention  was
then  directed  to  bank-note  engraving,  and  he  made
for  Peter  Maverick,  of  New  York,  a  machine  for
ruling  straight  and  wave-lines  for  bank-notes.
During  the  next  year  he  made  two  other  machines,
one  for  drawing  water-lines,  and  the  other  for  mak-
ing plain  ovals.  These  machines,  of  his  own  in-
vention, may  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  that
series  of  geometrical  lathes  by  which  machine-
work  on  bank-notes  has  been  carried  to  a  degree  of
excellence  that  rivals  the  rich  effects  of  the  burin
and  pencil.  After  this  Durand  devoted  himself
to  bank-note  engraving,  and  his  inventions  include
many  appliances,  the  principal  of  which,  beside
the  geometrical  lathe,  are  machines  for  engine-
turning  and  transfer  presses.  He  was  a  skilled
workman  of  unusual  ability,  and  was  considered
capable  of  working  in  twenty-two  occupations. —
His  brother,  Asher  Brown,  artist,  b.  in  Jefferson,
N.  J.,  21  Aug.,  1796;  d.  in '  South  Orange,  17
Sept.,  1886,  acquired
in  his  father's  work-
shop some  knowledge
of  the  elementary
processes  of  engrav-
ing. At  first  he  con-
fined his  attention  to
cutting  initials  on
spoons  and  similar
objects.  His  earliest
attempts  at  engrav-
ing prints  were  made
on  plates  rolled  out
of  copper  coins  and
with  gravers  of  his
own  make.  The  suc-
cess of  these  efforts
led  to  a  commission
on
snuff-
box. In  1812  he  was
apprenticed  to  Peter  Maverick,  an  engraver  in
New  York  city,  and  live  years  later  he  was  ad-
mitted into  partnership  with  his  master.  His
first  original  work  was  a  "  Beggar,"  after  a  paint-


a  syp,  ■)  ^^-^  led  to  a  commissi
C0^M4^yr>>^  ft  coPv  a  Portrait
^  the lid of a  snu


tag  by  Samuel  Waldo,  and  when  John  Trum-
bull painted  the  "  Declaration  of  Independent  ■••,"
Charles  Heath,  of  London,  was  to  have  engraved
it.  but,  business  complications  having  arisen,  the
picture  was  given  to  Durand.  He  worked  stead-.
lly  at  it  for  three  years,  and  the  best-known  en-
graving in  the  United  States  was  the  result.  His
reputation  was  at  once  established  and  his  work
grew  in  demand.  "  Musidora,"  engraved  in  1825,
and  "General  Jackson,"  in  1828,  are  prominent
plates  of  this  period.  Mr.  Durand  contributed  ex-
tensively to  the  "annuals,"  which  were  then  fash-
ionable, and  some  of  his  best  work  appears  in  t  beat,
including  "The  Wife,"  by  S.  P.  B.  Morse,  "A
(ivpsving  Party,"  after  Charles  R.  Leslie,  ami  the
"  White  Plume,"  by  Charles  C.  Ingham.  Many  of
the  heads  engraved  for  the  "  National  Portrait  Gal-
lery" were  executed  by  him,  and  "Ariadne,"  after
John  Vandcrlyn's  painting,  was  his  work.  Mr.
Durand,  who  was  an  admirable  draughtsman  and
possessed  an  instinctive  sense  of  color,  became  dis-
satisfied with  the  limits  of  engraving,  and  aspired
for  a  wider  field  of  art.  He  studied  nature  dili-
gently, and  became  most  proficient  in  landscape
painting,  which  from  1836  became  his  chosen  oc-
cupation. Prof.  Robert  W.  Weir  speaks  of  him  as
one  of  "  the  fathers  of  American  landscape."  A
few  portraits  are  among  his  earlier  productions  in
oil,  such  as  heads  of  Andrew  Jackson,  John  Quincy
Adams,  James  Madison,  and  Edward  Everett,  while
those  of  William  Cullen  Bryant,  James  Kent,  and
Gouverneur  Kemble  are  among  his  latest  works  in
this  line :  and  he  also  executed  several  figure-paint-
ings, among  which  are  "  Harvey  Birch  and  Wash-
ington," "  The  Capture  of  Andre,"  "  The  Dance  on
the  Battery,"  "  Trie  Wrath  of  Peter  Stuyvesant,"
and  "God's  Judgment  on  Gog."  His  landscapes
include  "The  Catskills  from  Hillsdale,"  "The
Franconia  Mountains,"  "  The  Rainbow,"  "  Sunday
Morning,"  "  Primeval  Forest,"  "  Franconia  Notch,
and  several  views  of  Lake  George.  His  largest
canvas,  "  A  Mountain  Forest "  (1869),  now  hangs  in
the  Corcoran  gallery,  Washington.  Of  his  recent
works,  "Studies  from  Nature,"  "II  Pappagallo,"
and  "  Kauterskill  Clove,"  were  sent  to  the  Phila-
delphia exhibition  in  1876.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  National  academy  of  design  in
1826,  and  after  the  resignation  of  Samuel  F.  B.
Morse,  in  1845,  was  its  president  till  1861. — His
son,  John,  art  critic,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  May,
1822,  edited  for  several  years  a  monthly  publica-
tion called  "The  Crayon."  devoted  especially  to
the  interests  of  the  fine  arts.  He  has  also  trans-
lated several  of  Taine's  works,  including  "  Ideal
in  Art"  (New  York,  1868);  "Italy,  Rome,  and
Naples"  (1868);  "  Italv,  Florence,  and  Venice"
(1869);  "Philosophy  of  Art;  Art  in  the  Nether-
lands" (1870);  and  "  Art  in  Greece"  (1871).

DURAND,  filias,  botanist,  b.  in  Mentz,  France
(now  Germany),  25  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  15  Aug.,  1873.  He  studied  medicine  in  Paris,
and  on  his  graduation  joined  the  medical  corps  of
Napoleon's  army.  Dr.  Durand  was  present  at  the
battles  of  Lutzeo,  Bautzen,  Hanau,  Katzbach.  and
Leipzig,  but  after  the  downfall  of  the  emperor  he
left  France  and  came  to  the  United  States.  1  It-
settled  at  first  in  Baltimore  and  then  in  Philadel-
phia, where  he  established  a  drag-store  which  be*
came  the  resort  of  manv  of  the  most  eminent  phy-
sicians of  the  day.  He  also  devoted  himself  to
botany,  and  became  thoroughly  familiar  with  the
flora  of  North  America,  collecting  an  herbarium
that  included  ten  thousand  species  of  North  Amer-
ican plants.  This,  the  work  of  nearly  forty  years,
he  presented  to  the  museum  of  the  Jardin  des


DURAND


i»ri{\«»


E (antes  in  Paris  in  18(18. A  seiuiratc  gallery  ha-
1  to  the  collection  in  thai  institution,

and  it  was  called  ••  llcrlmria  I > u r« i n 1 1  after  the
donor.  I >r.  Durand  am  it  contributor  li>  scientific
journals,  and a  member  of scientific  societies  in

the  United  states  and  Swops.
IM  BAND,  .Marie,  ringer,  I.,  in  CharIsston,&

li  educated  in  New  Yurk,
lying  music  with  Signor  Adults  Bnani,  and

made  bar  first  aptR-urance  in  Chicago  asZerlina  in
••!>.. n  iiiiivaniii.'  Alter  continuing  her  musical
studies  for  some  years,  she  ap|»eared  at  the  impe-
rial  OtMn  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  then  sane;  in
Frenrfi  opera  in  Brussels.  Returning  t<>  the
l'nite.1  States,  she  was  seen  in  New  Orleans,  hut
went  t<>  Italy  and  sang  at  Milan  and  elsewhere.
She  was  induced  t<>  leave  light  soprano  jwirts  and
devote  herself  tO  those  great  dramatic  represent  a-
tions  in  which  she  has  since  achieved  distinction.
such  as  Selika  in  "  I/Africaine."  Later  she  DeonnM
known  for  her  hrilliant  performances  in  "  Lei
Huguenots,"  "Norma,"  ••  Bobtti  la  Diahle."  and
•  Boi  de  Ijahore."  In  1883  she  made  her  first  ap-
pearance at  the  royal  Italian  opera  in  London,  in
the  role  of  I.a  (Jioconde.  of  which  she  was  the  first
exponent  outside  of  Italy.  She  was  then  engaged
for  the  entire  opera  season  in  St.  Petersburg,  but
in  April,  1HN4,  returned  to  London  to  sing  in  Co-
vent  Garden.

DURANQ,  Charles,  dancer,  b.  in  Philadelphia
in  1T1M1;  d.  there.  15  Feb.,  1870.  He  made  his  first
appearance  in  the  Chestnut  street  theatre  in  lso:i.
and  subsequently  |>erformed  in  almost  every  theatre
in  the  United  States.  Mr.  Durang  was  actor,
author,  stage-manager,  prompter,  ballet-master,
and  finally  opened  a  dancing  academy.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Philadelphia  State
from  1981  to  1854,"  which  appeared  serially  in  the
Philadelphia  "  .lournal."

DURAN'qrKT.  Hyaelnthe,  Jesuit,  b.  in  Cler-
mont. Auvcrgne,  in  180V.  He  studied  theology  in
the  colleges  of  the  society  in  France,  became  a
Jesuit  in  1836,  and  in  the  same  year  embarked  for
the  United  States,  landing  at  New  Orleans  in  1837.
K..r  the  next  ten  loan  he  taught  in  the  college  of
(irand  Coteau.  llccamc  to  New  York  in  1847  and
taught  for  the  next  five  years  in  St.  John's  college,
Konlhain.  Since  1858  he  has  been  chaplain  of  the
Tombs  prison  and  the  institutions  on  BlackweU's
Island,  and  was  the  first  Roman  Catholic  mission-
ary appointed  to  that  office.  His  success  in  per-
suading criminals  condemned  to  death  to  repent  has
been  noteworthy.  He  has  written  many  artieJea
on  missionary  life  for  the  French  magazines,  and
has  published  in  the  "  Messenger  of  the  Sacred
Heart"  a  series  of  papers  embodying  his  reminis-
cences of  New  York  prisons.  He  is  now  engaged
(1889)  on  a  volume  of  the  same  character.

M'RANT,  Charles  S..  aeronaut,  b.  about  1805;
d.  in  .Jersey  City,  '2  March,  1H?3.  He  made  a  l»l-
loon  ascension  In  1*33  from  the  Battery  in  New
York,  which  was  one  of  the  first  ever  made  by  a
native  American.  Subsequently  he  made  fourteen
others,  on  oneSoccasion  descending  into  the  Atlan-
tic mean.  Mr.  Durant  was  the  author  of  several
Itooks  of  a  scientific  character,  one  of  which  was  a
"Treatise  on  Shells  and  Sea- Weeds."

IM'RANT,  Henry  Torrle.  philanthropist,  b.  in
Hanover.  V  ll..  ■„•'»' |-Yi...  is-j-,>;  d.  in  Wellealey,
Mass.,  3  Oct..  1881.  His  name  was  originally  Henry
Welles  Smith.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1M1.  and  subsequently  studied  law  with  (Jen.  But-
ler. In  is4<>,  baring  been  admitted  to  the  oaf,  he
<nt. red  on  the  nraonosoJ  his  profession  in  Boston,

and  soon  became  prominent. After  (hanging  his


to Our-Hiit he  was  associated  with Bfjftsj
Ghosts,  and  other  noted lawyers  of  ti..
was  verr  successful  with  case*  comm

Meanwhile  he  became  oonie  <  t.-l  »itl

•  ver  in  the  formation  of  ti
Inn  and  packing  company,  and  also  in  the  pun-ham
of  iron-mines  in  north.  i  k.  both  ol

enterprises  profsd  eseeedingh  profitable. In  1868
his  only  son  died,  and  during  th  ucas  he

<letermine<l  thenceforth  to  consecrate  hi*  life  to  the
anaasof  the  christian  religion. Pindingthat  "  the

law  and  the  gospel  were  diametrically  op|««ed,"  he

disposed  of  his'  law  biasness,  slthongh  it  was  ex-
ceedingly profitable. He  mads  Nee  York  •
residence  for some time,  and bassjM impressed
with the necessity of providing a college  where


women  oooid  obtain  a  mperior  ednestjon. His

f dans  were  put  into  execution  and  Welles!
age  resulted.  This  institution,  built  and  equipped
at  an  expense  of  $  1 ,000.000,  was  opened  in  Septem-
ber, 1875.  and  has  since  been  maintained  at  an  ex-
pense of  160,000 per  annum,  furnished  through  the
liberality  of  Mr.  Durant.  The  college  buildings
are  heautifullv  situated  in  the  midst  of  a  park  of
300  acres  in  Wellesley.  aboul  fifteen  miles  \*
Boston.  While  undenominational,  the  institution
is  distinctively  and  positively  Christian.  After
1S((4  he  became  a  lay  preacher,  and  held  a  great
number  Of  meetings,  not  only  in  Boston  and  its
neighborhood, but  in  many  towns  of  Massachusetts'
and  New  Hampshire.  Failing  health  led  to  his
discontinuing  public  exhortation,  but nil  interest

In  Christian  enterprises  continued  throughout  his

life.  He  left  a  large  pro|»erty  at  his  death,  and
the  work  of  the  college  is  continued  by  his  widow.
Ill' RANT,  Thomas  Jefferson,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  8  Aug*  1H7;  .1.  in  Wash
I).  ('..  4  Feb..  1HM'2.  He  removed  to  New  Orleans
at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and  was  SDpotntsd  a  clerk
in  the  post-oflrptt  then-. After  studying  law  he  was

admitted  to  the  bar  and  beosns  prominent  in  his

profession.  He  WSS elected  state  senator,  afterward
appointed  I".  S.  district  attorney  for  I>.ui-iana,
and  then  bssaJM  attorney-general  of  the  state,  lb-
was  a  1'nion  man  during  tin-civil  war  and  a  recog-
nized leader  of  thon  who  siipjiortcd the  national

rrarnmont When  New  Orleans  was  captured  by

•arragut  in  1811  tt BOS  of  governor  was  ten-
dered to  Mr.  Durant.  but  he  declined  it  ssj  the
ground  that he  could  not l>e  governor  and  at  the

sjinie  time  be  subordinate  to  military  authority. In

is*;.",  he  left  New  Orleans  and  settl.-din  Washington,
irhere  be  soon  took  high  rank  as  a  lawyer.  He
practi-ed  bsfOte  the  supreme  court,  and  at  tin-  time
of  his  death  was  counsel  for  the  united  States  be-
fore the  Spanish  ami  American  claims  commission.
Dl'RAO.  Jose  da  Santa-Rita.  Brazilian  poet,
b.  in  Infssaaeado-a  parish  of  Mariasnayjionnoi
of  Minaa-Geraes,  in  1737;  d.  in Lisbon,  Portugal.


R


270


DURBIN


DURELL


in  1783.  He  studied  in  the  University  of  Coimbra,
Portugal,  where  he  was  made  < loi-t < >r  of  luw>.  un
obtained  greet  distinction  as  a  scholar.  He  after-
ward entered  the  order  of  the  Friars  of  St.  Augus-
tin,  and  at  once  became  celebrated  as  a  preacher.
His  opinions  in  favor  of  the  Jesuits  excited  the
enmity  of  the  Marquis  of  Pombal,  the  minister  of
Josepn  1.,  of  Portugal,  who  had  been  his  protector.
When  the  Jesuits  were  expelled,  Durao  thought
himself  in  danger,  and  fleu  to  Andalusia  in  1762.
Hostilities,  however,  had  begun  the  same  year  be-
tween Portugal  and  Spain,  and  he  was  imprisoned
as  a  Portuguese  spy  till  the  signing  of  the  treaty  of
Paris,  10  Feb.,  1763,  when  he  left  Spain  for  Italy.
He  took  up  his  residence  in  Rome,  where  he  en-
joyed the  acquaintance  of  Alfieri,  C'esarotti,  and
the  noted  literary  men  of  the  period.  Here  he  be-
gan to  write  the  poem  on  which  his  fame  princi-
pally rests,  "  Caramuru,  or  the  Discovery  of  Bahia,"
which  was  completed  and  published  in  1781.  In
1 771  lie  returned  to  Lisbon,  and  from  that  time
till  his  death  was  professor  of  theology  in  the
University  of  Coimbra.  In  addition  ^o  his  poem  of
"Caramuru"  he  wrote  many  other  works  in  prose
and  poetry,  but  the  only  one  of  them  read  to-day
in  Portugal  and  Brazil  is  the  "  Caramuru,"  and  its
popularity  is  constantly  increasing.  The  hero  is
the  Portuguese  navigator  Diogo  Alvares,  who  was
shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Brazil  in  1508  or  1509,
and  who  was  called  by  the  natives  "  Caramuru,"
or  "  man  of  fire,*'  from  the  guns  of  his  followers.
In  his  pictures  of  Indian  manners  and  customs,
and  in  his  descriptions  of  the  splendid  scenery  of
Brazil,  Durao  is  considered  to  have  equalled  Feni-
more  Cooper,  the  novelist.  Durao  was  little  known
beyond  Brazil  and  Portugal  before  1823,  when  a
French  translation  of  the  "Caramuru"  was  pub-
lished by  De  Monglave.

DURBIN,  Elisha  J.,  missionary,  b.  in  Madison
county,  Ky.,  in  1800.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  en-
tered the  Roman  Catholic  seminary  of  St.  Thomas,
Ky.,  and  was  ordained  priest  in  1822,  afterward  be-
coming professor  in  St.  Joseph's  college,  Bards-
town,  and  assistant  at  the  cathedral  there.  In  1824
he  was  intrusted  with  the  pastoral  care  of  the  en-
tire Roman  Catholic  population  of  western  and
southwestern  Kentucky,  with  headquarters  in  Mor-
ganfield,  Union  co.  After  1832  he  was  also  obliged
to  visit  Nashville  several  times  a  year.  During
fifty  years  of  his  missionary  labors  his  horseback

{'ourneys  averaged  200  miles  a  week.  Father  Dur-
»in  himself  estimates  that  during  sixty-two  years
he  has  travelled  over  500,000  miles.  Within  two
years  after  his  nomination  to  the  mission  of  south-
western Kentucky  he  built  the  Church  of  the
Sacred  Heart,  then  the  only  Roman  Catholic  church
west  of  Breckinridge  county  and  east  of  the  Mis-
sissippi, and  the  Church  of  St.  Ambrose  in  Union
county.  He  erected  the  Church  of  St.  Gerome  in
Graves  county  in  1836,  that  of  the  Sacred  Heart,
Morganfield,  in  1855,  and  St.  Agnes's  church,  Union-
town,  in  18(50,  of  which  he  was  appointed  pastor.
In  1873  he  was  relieved  of  his  pastoral  duties  in
Union  county,  but  insisted  on  being  allotted  active
work,  and  was  given  charge  of  the  Roman  Catholics
living  along  the  Elizabethtown  and  Paducah  rail-
road. Here  he  remained  till  1883,  when  he  was
Jersuaded  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  St.
oseph's  seminary,  Bardstown.  In  1885  he  peti-
tioned his  bishop  to  be  restored  to  active  duty,  and
was  assigned  to  pastoral  work.

DURBIN,  John  Price,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bour-
bon county,  Ky.,  in  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,  17
Oct.,  1876.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  appren-
ticed to  a  cabinet-maker,  and  in  1819  entered  the


itinerant ministry of the Methodist Episcopal
church. I !.• ■tamed at Miami  university while

E reaching  at  Hamilton,  Ohio,  was  graduated  at
incinnati  college  in  1825,  and  soon  afterward  was
appointed  professor  of  languages  in  Augusta  col-
1. jge,  Kentucky.  He  was  elected  chaplain  of  the
U.  S.  senate  in  1831,  and  in  1832  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  natural  science  in  the  Wesleyan  oniversu1  y.
and  became  editor  of  the  "Christian  Advocate  and
Journal,"  New  York,  in  1833.  In  1834  he  «H
elected  president  of  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle.  Pa.,
and  during  his  incumbency  made  an  extensive
tour  in  Europe  and  the  east.  As  member  of  the
general  conference  of  1844  he  was  a  prominent
actor  in  the  great  contest  on  slavery  which  divided
the  church.  After  retiring  from  his  office  in  1845
he  was  pastor  of  churches  in  Philadelphia,  and  was
also  presiding  elder  of  the  Philadelphia  district.
He  was  secretary  of  the  missionary  society  from
1850  to  1872,  when  he  retired  in  consequence  of
physical  infirmity.  To  his  labors  was  largely  due
the  establishment  of  missions  in  India,  Bulgaria,
western  and  northern  PJurope,  and  many  parts  of
the  United  States,  and  the  reinvigoration  of  those
in  China  and  elsewhere,  while  through  his  plans
the  annual  contributions  were  increased  from
$100,000  to  $600,000.  In  1867  he  visited  Europe
in  the  interest  of  missions.  He  was  distinguished
for  his  eloquence  and  administrative  ability.  Be-
side numerous  contributions  to  periodical  litera-
ture, Dr.  Durbin  published  "Observations  in
Europe,  principally  in  France  and  Great  Britain  "
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1844),  and  "Observations  in
Egypt,  Palestine.  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor  "  (2  vols.,
1845),  and  edited,  with  notes.  Wood's  "  Mosaic
History  of  the  Creation  "  (1831).

HI  III  \l  DE  LA  MALLE,  Jean  Baptiste
Joseph  Bene.  French  scholar,  b.  in  Santo  Do-
mingo, 21  Nov.,  1742 ;  d.  in  Landres,  France,  19
Sept.,  1807. He  became  an  orphan  in  infancy,  and

Jras  sent  to  France  when  he  was  but  five  years  old.
n  1749  he  entered  the  college  of  Plessis,  where  he
distinguished  himself  for  scholarship,  and  after-
ward he  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  literary
pursuits.  His  thorough  and  critical  knowledge  of
the  principal  European  languages  and  his  fond-
ness for  comparative  philology  led  him  to  the
study  of  the  classics  later  in  life.  His  house  in
Paris  became  the  resort  of  the  most  distinguished
literary  men  in  France,  and  he  was  intimate  with
La  Harpe,  D'Alembert,  Marraontel,  and  Delille.
Dureau  was  named  a  member  of  the  corps  legisla-
tive in  1802,  and  of  the  institute  in  1804.  He
published  "Traite"  des  Bienfaits,"  a  translation
from  Seneca  (1776),  and  a  translation  of  the  works
of  Tacitus,  which  was  at  once  recognized  as  supe-
rior to  all  previous  French  translations  of  that  au-
thor (3  vols.,  1790).  After  his  death  appeared  his
translations  of  Sallust  (1808),  Livy  (1810),  and
Valerius  Flaccus  (1812).

DURELL,  Edward  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  14  July,  1810;  d.  in  Schoharie,  N.  Y.,
29  March,  1887.  His  father  was  chief  justice  of
the  state,  and  U.  S.  district  attorney  during  the
first  Jackson  administration.  After  studying  at
Phillips  Exeter  academy,  the  son  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1831,  and  studied  law  there  and
with  his  father.  He  also  became  familiar  with  the
French,  Spanish,  Italian,  and  German  languages.
In  the  autumn  of  1834  he  settled  in  Pittsburg;
Miss.,  which  he  re-named  Grenada,  and  removed  to
New  Orleans  in  1836.  where  he  resumed  the  practice
of  his  profession.  Mr.  Durell  drafted  a  statute  in
1*43  that  made  a  change  in  the  law  of  the  deeeeai
of  property  in  Louisiana,  thereby  removing  the


«-V


DTJBFBB

source  of  many  family  feuds. In  .  wan

n  member  .if  buowob  oovnei]  of  New  Orieane,

iimi  as  chairman  of  its  tiii;ui<<-  <  •  •mtnit  ti<«*  wtt^  t  h<-

author  of  several  Important  meaearsa By  sinking

hii  artesian  well  in  •  t,  .Mr.  Durell  |>i

rent  ti I'ini-'ii  of  Sir  Chanei  Lv.ii.  thai

Orleans  rests  on I  ho

bed Of the. SCa. ill'

■tnmoaalv opposed

tin-  adoption  of  the
eeoession  ordinance  in
fsTejhrtana  left  the
Democratic  |>arty  on
thai awaa, and for

some  tiiiH-  aftiTWanl
In-  livi-il  in  retirement.

After  the  capture  of
Ni'w  Oriaaae  by  Kar-
ragut.  Mr.  Duel]  was
eauad upon  to  eon-

struet  a  new  muim-i-
pal government,  ami

S /y^^A-^^yyy1  drafted  the  so-called
&  Ss  <C'*'*Y'&&c.  bureau  system,  which
remained  in  force
from  -I nlv.  IMe\tfll  some  vears  after  the  war.  Ha
president  <>f  the  city's  bureau  of  finances  in
i  *4.  ami  mayor  of  New  Orleans  during  part  of
:.  administering  the  office  with  Kraal  credit
In  1868  he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln
l'.  S.  judge  for  the  easteni  district  of  Louisiana.
and  presided  over  the  entire  state  after  the  alx»li-
tion  of  the  western  district  in  1806.  Judge  Durell
was  presidcnl  of  tin- state  constitutional  conven-
tion of  1804,  and  in  1805  declined  the  office  of  jus-
tice of  the  U.S.  supreme  court,  tendered  him  by
Mr.  Lincoln.  In  1867,  by  a  personal  visit  to
Washington,  he  brought  about  a  discontinuance  of
legal  procedure  in  Louisiana  under  the  confisca-
tion laws,  mnl  in  the  same  year  declined  the  Aus-
trian mission.  In  1808  he  was  mentioned  as  a
candidate  for  vice-president.  He  resigned  from
the  bench  in  1874,  and  from  1875  till  his  death  re-
sided chietly  in  Schoharie,  N.  Y.,  engaged  in  liter-
ary pursuit^,  lie  contributed  much  to  periodical
literature,  ami  imhlishcd  "Sketches"  under  the
Pen-name  of  "II.  Didimus"  (New  York,  1840).
lie  left  in  manuscript  a  translation,  made  in  1840,
of  P.  C.  Roux's  "Essay  on  the  History  of  France,
and  the  Immediate  Causes  of  the  Revolution  of
1 7>!>,"  and  a  volume  of  notes  to  the  same ;  and  had
in  pn-paration  a  "History  of  Seventeen  Years:
from  1860  to  the  Retiring  of  the  Federal  Anns
from  Louisiana  and  Smth  Carolina."

DUBFEE,  ltradford  Matthew  Chaloner,
mere  Kent,  b.  in  Kail  River,  Mass.,  15  June,  1848;
d.  there.  i:{  Sept,  1M7-J.  His  father  ilied  shortly
after  the  bov's  birth,  leaving  him  a  large  fortune.
He  entered  Vale,  but  failing  health  compelled  him
to  leave  OoUage  iluring  his  sophomore  year,  and  he
viMNsl  Europe  in  1M(m.  ■pending  two  ami  a  half
years  in travel. On his return  he  assumed  the

management  of  his  affairs,  but  hie  health  I pel  led

him  to  be  largely  on  the  sea,  and  he  became  an
ardent  yachtsman.  For  several  years  he  made  long
anises  on  his  yacht  "Josephine,"  visiting  various
countries  on  the  Atlantic  ocean.  Ihirfee  hall,  one
Of  the  finest  college  dormitories  in  the  I'nited
States,  was  his  gift  to  Yale,  which  honored  him
With  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1871.

DUBFEE,  Job,  jurist,  b.  in  Tiverton,  R.  I..  20
Sept..  17!M>;  d.  there.  M  July.  1S47. He  WSJ  gradu-
ated at Brown  in 1*18,  and  then,  after  studying
law,  admitted  to  practice. In  1*14  he  was  eli
a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  serving  coutinu-


DURI


271


ously  until  1810.  ami  again  fr..,,,  I8S7till  iftan  be-
coming speaker  in  1H28. II,
eraliM to  congrww,  and  served from  H  I)
till  :«  March,  UBS. At  the  sJom  of  |, if*  eongres-*
Monal  career  he  declined  n  rtmoraination,  ami  re>

tired to  his  farm,  where  be  devoted hk*att«

'"  li'ctat  r  he  resumed  his  legal  practice,

ami in 1KW  wh.h  Hp|M)1Ilt,,|

two vears  later,  chief  justice  of  the  Mill  ami  I
Of his  state,  which  oflbv  in-  hehi will, hOBOT  to
himself  during  Iforr's  rebellion  ami  till hi-  death
Judge  Durfcc  wrote  poetry,  atid  published  "What
Cheer  I  or  Roger  Williams  in  Kxiie  pul>-

Uebed  m  Kiiglandi:  also  an  ahetraat  philosophical
treatise  entitled  uPanidea

of  Job  Duffee.  with  a  Memoir  of  hi  hted

by  his  son  (Providence,  1X4!»i.

DUBFEE,  William  Franklin,  laoiaaiC  b.  in
New  itedford.  Mass.,  15  Nov..  ixu,  received  a
practical  mechanical  training  at  home,  and  took
a  curse  of  special  study  at  the  I^wrence  scientific
school  of  Harvanl.  In  1K*,.{  he  In-came  an  engineer
and  architect  in  his  native  town,  and  for  fi\c  years

held  the  appointment  of  city  mrrayot,  II.'  was
ehoeen  as  one  of  the  representatives  of  New  Bed-
ford in  the  legislature  of  1861.  and,  as  secretary  of

its  inilitary  committee,  was  active in forwarding

legislation  for  the  equipment  of  troops  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war.  While  holding  ofloi  hi
introduced  a  resolution  requesting  congress  to  re-
|K-al  "all  laws  which  deprive  any  class  of  loyal
subjects  of  the  government  from  bearing  arms  for
the  common  defence."  This  is  believed  to  hate
been  the  first  definite  proposal  for  the  arming  of
colored  troops.  Subsequent  to  the  adjournment
of  the  legislature  he  devoted  himself  to  Ins  pro-
fession, and  designed  a  gun  for  naval  use.  A  i
eminent  OOmmissiOD  reported that  it  was  the  U-st

of  its  kind  that  ha«l ever  been  brought  to  n*  aotiee,

Kvery  essential  feature  of  this  weapon  entleipi
that  of  the"  Destroyer"  of  John  Kriesson  ;  but  the
goveniment  was  slow  to  adopt  new  weapone,and
all  efforts  to  Ultrodace  it  were  abandoned  l.v  Mr.
Durfee.  In  June,  1802,  he  was  invited  to  ascertain
if  the  iron  ores  of  the  Lake  Superior  region  were
suitable  for  the  manufacture  of  steel  by  a  mat  hod
invented  i>y  William  Kelly,  and  he  erected  experi-
mental works  where  ingots  of  steel  were  produced
from  which  were  rolled,  00  85  Mav.  IMS,  the  first
steel  rails  ever  made  in  the  United  States.  Mr.
Durfee  became  convinced  early  in  his  stndj  of  the
Bessemer  process  that  an  exact  knowledge  of  the
chemical  composition  of  the  crude  materials  was

necessary. and  for  this  purpoee equipped, at  Wyan-
dotte. Mich.,  the  first  aualytiea.  laboratory  built
as  an  adjunct  to  steel-works  in  the  United  States.
Since  that  time  he  has  had  the  management  of
various  works,  and  has  successfully  iatroduosd  tin-
Siemeiis's  regenerative  furnace  in  several  places.
During  1876  he  was  one  of  the  group  of  jmigesat
the  Centennial  exhibition  in  Philadelphia,  h«\
under  its  su|MTvisi(.n  the  examination  of  moOB
tools  for  wood,  llOU,  and  stone  working.  For
sen  ices  he  receive*  1  a  medal.  Afterward  he  !>uilt,
at  Ansonia.  Conn.,  tin-  first  ■BjOBOmfOjl  furnaces  for
refining  Oopper  by  the  use  of  gaseous  fuel  0*11
constructed  in  tin-  Dotted  States.  (»f  iiis  recent
work,  the  most  conspicuous  undertaking  was  the
removal  of  a  brick  chimney,  eight  feet  square  at
the  base  and  1<H>  feet  high,  weighing  17n  tons,  from
its  original  foundation,  and  MOOemfUlty  placing
the  same  upon  a  new  one  some  thirty  feet  distant.
In  l*s<;  he  Bccepted  the  general  management  of
the  l  .  s.  mitis  eompany,  owners  of  Impoitaai
patenti  for  the  ntodnotinn  of  ommgiaViron  and


272


DURFEE


DURKEE


■tee!  Otfri  ings.  Mr.  Durfee  is  a  member  of  numer-
ooa  scientilic  bodies,  to  whose  proceedings  he  has
contributed  papMl  of  technical  intcn-i.

DURFEE,  Zoheth  Shearman,  manufacturer,
1).  in  Fall  River,  Mass..  22  April,  lbUil  j  d.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  8  June,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at
the  New  Bedford  high  school,  and  finished  at  the
Friends'  academy  in  that  city.  On  the  completion
of  his  studies  he  learned  the  blacksmith's  trade,
after  which  he  was  associated  with  his  father  and
uncle  in  the  same  business.  In  1858  he  was  re-
quested by  a  number  of  New  Bedford  capitalists
to  report  on  a  new  process  for  the  making  of  steel
direct  from  pig-iron,  invented  by  Josepn  Dixon.
This  led  to  a  careful  study  of  the  entire  subject  of
the  manufacture  of  steel,  and  especially  of  the
Bessemer  process,  then  recently  invented  in  Eng-
land. He  discovered  that  a  patent  substantially
the  same  as  Henry  Bessemer's,  but  claiming  pri-
ority over  it,  had  been  granted  in  the  United
States  to  William  Kelly.  After  satisfying  himself
of  the  validity  of  this  patent,  he  obtained  control
of  it,  and  visited  England  for  the  purpose  of  buy-
ing Bessemer's  rights  in  the  United  States,  but
failed.  Meanwhile  he  accumulated  much  informa-
tion relative  to  the  practical  details  of  the  manu-
facture of  steel,  and  oecame  convinced  that  the  in-
vention of  Robert  Mushet  was  an  essential  feature
in  both  processes.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  organized  a  company  of  prominent  iron-
makers  for  protecting  and  introducing  into  prac-
tical use  the  Kelly  patent.  In  1863  he  again  visited
England,  secured  tne  control  of  the  Mushet.patent
for  the  United  States,  and  subsequently  experi-
mental steel-works  were  erected  by  the  Kelly-pro-
cess company  in  Wyandotte,  Mich.,  where  the  in-
gots from  which  the  first  steel  rails  ever  made  in
the  United  States  were  produced.  During  the  fol-
lowing year  Mr.  Durfee,  after  a  course  of  experi-
ments, indicated  the  desirability  of  melting  the
charge  in  the  cupola  instead  of  in  the  reverberatory
furnace.  That  feature  prevails  exclusively  to-day
and  demonstrates  the  correctness  of  Mr.  Durfee's
views.  In  1866  the  conflicting  interests  of  the  rival
patentees  were  united  in  the  Pneumatic  steel  asso-
ciation, of  which  he  became  secretary  and  treasurer,
holding  that  office  till  his  death.  Later  he  was
called  to  superintend  the  steel-works  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
but  relinquished  that  appointment  in  1868  and  re-
turned to  New  York,  henceforth  devoting  his  ex-
clusive attention  to  the  steel  association,  whose
business  he  managed  until  a  short  time  before  his
death.  He  patented  various  improvements  in  ma-
chinery for  the  manufacture  of  iron  and  steel,  and
made  the  first  movement  and  probably  did  more
than  any  other  single  person  toward  introducing
cheapened  steel  into  the  United  States.

DURHAM,  John  George  Lambton,  Earl  of,
English  statesman,  b.  in  Lambton  castle,  county
Durham,  12  April,  1792 ;  d.  in  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight,
28  July,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  Eton  and
Cambridge,  served  a  short  time  in  a  regiment  of
hussars,  and  in  1813  was  returned  to  parliament,
where  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  liberal  views.
During  the  reform  excitement  of  1819  he  advocated
the  popular  cause,  both  in  parliament  and  at  public
meetings.  He  was  one  of  the  defenders  of  Queen
Caroline,  and  in  1821  brought  forward  a  scheme  of
parliamentary  reform  which,  though  at  that  time
unsuccessful,  was  embodied  in  the  reform  act  of
ten  years  later.  In  1828  he  was  raised  to  the  peer-
age as  Baron  Durham:  in  1830  he  was  lord  privy
seal  in  Earl  Grey's  ministry,  and  in  1833,  on  his
retirement  from  the  cabinet,  was  made  an  earl.  In
1836-'7  he  became  ambassador  to  Russia,  and  in


l^oS  iras  sent,  with  extraordinary  powers,  to  Can-
ada, as  governor-general.  When  he  arrived  there
he  found  the  disturbed  state  of  public  feeling,  i  on-
sequent  upon  the  rebellion  of  1887,  still  in  exist'
ence,  the  constitution  practically  suspended,  and
the  efficient  administration  of  the  law  no  longer
possible.  In  order  to  remedy  these  evils  he  issued
different  ordinances  which  declared,  among  other
things,  an  amnesty  to  all  the  rebels,  save  their
leaders,  who  were  declared  banished  to  Bermuda.
His  administration  of  the  duties  of  his  office  failed
to  give  satisfaction,  either  in  Canada  or  I
Britain,  and  he  was  in  consequence  recalled  in
December,  1839.  Soon  after  his  return  to  England
an  elaborate  report  by  him  on  Canadian  affai
published.  In  it  he  proposed  the  scheme  of  the
union  of  the  British  ^orth  American  provinces  for
legislative  purposes,  and  insisted  upon  the  fullest
constitutional  freedom  for  the  people. It  is  sup-

fosed  that  the  disgrace  of  his  recall  preyed  upon
is  mind  and  hastened  his  death.
DURHAM,  Milton  Jamison,  lawyer,  b.  in
Mercer  county,  Ky.,  16  May,  1824.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Asbury  university  in  1844,  after  which  he
studied  law  with  Joshua  F.  Bell  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Louisville  law-school  tn  1850.  For
several  years  he  followed  his  profession  with  great
success,  and  in  1861-'2  was  one  of  the  circuit
judges  of  Kentucky.  He  then  returned  to  his  law
practice  in  Danville,  which  he  continued  till  1873,
when  he  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1873,  till  3  March,  1879.  Mr.
Durham  resumed  his  profession,  but  in  March,
1885,  was  appointed  first  comptroller  of  the  na-
tional treasury,  an  office  which  ne  now  holds.

l)URIER,"Antoine,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Rouen,
France,  in  1833.  He  was  preparing  himself  for
the  priesthood  in  the  seminary  of  Lyons  when,  in
response  to  an  appeal  from  Archbishop  Blanc,  of
New  Orleans,  he  volunteered  for  the  mission  of
Louisiana.  He  arrived  in  the  United  States  in
1855,  and  was  sent  to  the  College  of  Mount  St.
Mary's  of  the  West,  where  he  completed  his  theo-
logical course  and  studied  English.  He  was
ordained  in  1856,  and  stationed  at  Chillicothe,
Ohio.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  assistant  pastor
of  the  cathedral  of  New  Orleans,  and  afterward
became  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Annunciation
in  the  same  city.  In  1885  he  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Natchitoches.

1)1  RIVAGE,  Francis  Alexander,  author,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  1881.  He  was  a
contributor  of  poems,  humorous  articles,  short
stories,  and  sketches  to  the  magazines,  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Old  Un."  In  connection  with  W.  S.
Chase  he  translated  Lamartine's  "  History  of  the
Revolution  of  1848."  At  a  later  date  he  issued,
with  George  P.  Burnham,  who  wrote  under  the
pseudonym  of  "  Young  Un,"  "  Stray  Subjects  ar-
rested and  bound  over,  being  the  Fugitive  Off-
spring of  the  Old  Un  and  the  Young  Un  that
have  been  lving  around  loose,  and  are  now  tied
up  for  Fast  Keeping  "  (Boston,  1848).  He  was  the
author  of  several  plays,  and  was  for  a  time  co-
editor  of  "Ballou's  Pictorial."  In  addition  to  the
works  previously  mentioned,  he  published  a  "Cv-
clopa?diaof  History"  (Hartford,  1836).  and  "Life
Scenes  from  the  World  around  Us"  (Boston,  1858).
DURKEE,  Charles,  senator,  b.  in  Royalton,
Vt.,5  Dec.,  1807:  d.  in  Omaha.  Nek.  14  Jan.,  1870.
He  was  educated  in  his  native  town  and  in  the
Burlington  academy,  after  which  he  engaged  in
business,  and  later  emigrated  to  the  territory  of
Wisconsin,  where  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Southport,  now  Kenosha. He  was  a  member  of


DURI


DU;


H8


t Ti<  rial  lcgislatureof  Wis<-on»in.  held  in

But  .va  and  Minnesota  being  then  parts

of  tl  In  1841  he  was  again  a  mem  I  «er

of  tin-  territorial  legislature,  and  in  1848  was  eli
t<»  ilir  tirM  state  l<--^i-ljit  tin-  <-f  Wisconsin. Hi-  was
.(I  m  ■  Free-eoUer  t<>  congress,  serving  (Rm
|  D  till  8  Man-li.  1808,  and  wee  the first

distinctive  atiti-sla\ery  man  in  OOOgTHi  from  the
northwest.  In  1865  In* III oboaon M •  Republican
to  In-  U.S.  senator  from  WiMonsin,  succeeding  Isaac
P.  Walker.  Ho  was  a  member  of  the  |>eace  con-
gress in  1881,  ami  wae  appointed  gofemorof  Utah
in  1865,  holding  that  office  until  failing  health
compelled  him  to  resign.

Dl'KkKK,  John. soldier, b.  in  Windham.  Conn.,
in  1798;  d.  in  Norwich,  89  May,  1  ?*•„>.  Jl,.  served
in  the  French  ami  Indian  war,  besoming  a  major
of  militia,  and.  from  the  place  of  his  residence,
was  known  as  the  "bold  oean-hiller."  In  1768,
at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  stamp-act,  the
county  of  New  London  appointed  him  to  cor-
mpoad  with  the  Sms  of  Lilierty  in  tho  adjoining
provinces.  He  was  among  those  who  settled  in
Wyoming  valley  under  the  name  of  the  Susque-
hanna oomnanj  in  1709,  and  was  the  leader  of  the
Connecticut  forces,  commanding  the  fort  that  bore
his  name.  Subsequently  he  was  captured  by  the
force  sent  out  by  Gov.  John  Penn,  and  taken  to
Philadelphia,  where  for  a  time  he  was  closely  con-
fined. In  1770  he  was  released,  and  again  took
command,  !>ut  afterward  returned  to  Connecticut.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he
raised  "one  hundred  choice  men,"  who  were
annexed  to  Putnam's  brigade,  of  which  he  was
maior.  He  distinguished  himself  at  Hunker  Hill,
and  commanded  a  regiment  in  the  battles  of  Long
Island,  Germantown,  Harlem,  White  Plains,  Tren-
ton, and  Monmouth,  and  was  in  Gen.  John  Sulli-
van's ex|M*ditiou  against  the  Six  Nations  in  1779.
A  year  later  he  resigned  from  the  army.

1)1'  ROC II ER,  Laurent,  lawyer,  b.  in  the  Mieak >n
of  St.  (Jemvieve,  Mo.,  in  1786;  d.  in  Monroe,  Mich.,
81  S-|.t.,  lsiji.  His  father  was  a  French-Canadian.
Ijaorent  was  educated  in  Montreal,  and  settled  at
Fremlitown.  on  the  river  Raisin,  in  1805.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  he  joined  (Jen.  Hull's
army,  and  rendered  ini|>ortant  services  to  the  gov-
ernment after  his  surrender.  He  was  clerk  of
Monroe  county  from  its  organization  in  1818  till
about  1838,  for  six  years  was  in  the  territorial
council,  and  in  1835  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  first  constitution  of  Michigan.
He  also  served  in  the  state  legislature,  and  was
justice  of  the  peace  and  probate  judge  at  Monroe.
He  was  the  great  legal  authority  among  the  French
population  on  the  river  Raisin.

M'KKKTT.  Ken  ben  Thomas  lawyer,  b.  in
Henry  county,  Ky.,  24  Jan.,  1824.  After  studying
at  Georgetown  college,  Ky.,  he  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1K4»,  and  at  the*  law  department  of  the
University  of  Louisville  in  I860,  and  practised  his
profession  in  Louisville  until  1HS0.  From  1857
till  185!>  he  wax  editor  and  half  owner  of  the  Ixiuis-
ville  "Courier."  He  was  the  founder  of  the  public
library  of  Kentucky,  of  the  LooJtrilk  Abstract  and
loan  association,  and  of  the  Filson  club  of  Louis-
ville, ami  has  collected  one  of  the  most  complete
and  rateable  private  libraries  in  the  southwest.  He
is  president  oi  the  associations  that  he  has  formed,
and  a  —amber  of  various  historical  BOOietieB-  and
has  travelled  extensively,  lb*  is  the  author  of
••The  Life  and  Writing  of  John  POflOn,  the  Firsi
Historian  of  Kentucky  n  (published  by  the  Filaon
cluii,  1884),  and  has  assisted  in  the  preparation  of
many  historical  works,  and  contributed  to  various
vol.  ii. — 18


iteriodicala. A  series  of  articles  on  tic
1 1  ions  of  17'.»h •(•,  ip|„;,r.,  1  in  tl
Bivouac'"  in  1888. Many  of  hi»ai
dreatea,  both  legal  and  literarv.  hare  In.
IH'RIMI. I)an I.  ! si.,  i,.

Albany,  N.  V..  |  Jan.. 1818. lb-  OW
the  schools  of  that  city, and  in  Smth  II
He  liecame  a  bookseller  at  Albany  in  I  *  ;
to  the  west  in  I M.V»,  resumed  thfttbusim
son, Wis.,  in 1858.  and  followed it till 188

became  librarian  of  tl.  -forked

society  of  Wi*cotiMii.  lb*  has  l-4-.-ri  superintendent
of  public  schools'  at  Roxbury,  and  secretary  of  the
Madison  board  Of  ednoation.  Among  his  publica-
tions arc  genealogical  histories  of  the  Sle«de  and
Holt  families  (Albany,  1868  ami  1884);  "  Biblio-
graphica  (b-nealogica  Americana,  or  Imh  \  |0
American  Pedigrees"  (3d  cd..  1km;,;  ••  ||,.
Madison.  Wis.,  and  the  Four-Lake  Coiintrv  "(Madi-
son.  1*74); with W. B. Davis.  ••  Historv  of Mis-

souri "  (St.  Louis.  im:.-),;  ,in(i  "Wlmommi  Blo-

graphical  Dictionary."

HI  Kill  \LKR.  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ste.
Marie-au-Migtie,  Alsace,  in  1N1U:  d.  in  New  York
in  I**."*,  lie  was  educated  at  the  Lvoeum  of  Stras-
bourg, and  took  his  degree  at  the  University  of
France.  He  studied  theology  in  the  S-mitiary  ..f
Strasbourg,  and  beeame  a  Jeenit  in  1*44.  Henaj
then  employed  iii  teaching,  and  naa  noted  for  the
DOmber  of  artistic  and  literarv  celebrities  that  had
Im-cii  his  pupils.  During  the  ({evolution  of
came  to  the  United  States,  at  his  own  request  was
s»*nt  on  the  Indian  mission,  ami  in  lKVt  arrived  at
Walpok  island.  Here  he  was  stricken  with  typhoid
fever,  and  on  his  recovery  was  sent  to  teach  in
St.  Mary's  college,  Montreal.  He  was  next  trans-
ferred to  St.  Francis  Xavier's  college.  New  York,  of
which  he  may  be  considered  the  founder.  He  built
the  new  college,  made  it  legally  a  collegiate  institu-
tion, extended  the  course  of  science,  strengthened
its  classical  curriculum,  and  began  its  fine  mitiera-
logical.  botanical,  and  oonoboJogioal  collections.
In  1863  he  resigned  the  presidency  of  St.  Francis
Xavier's  and  went  to  Buffalo,  where  he  built  a
large  church  for  the  Germans,  and  bonded  the
classical  school  that  was  afterward  developed  into
(anisiiis's  college.  In  1*71  he  retained  to  St.
Francis  Xavier's  college,  but  after  a  short  stay  went
to  Hoboken,  when*  be  organized  a  German  i«arish.
In  1*7"*  he  was  named  rector  of  St.  Joseph's  church.
New  York,  and  during  the  mnooodlnj;  ten  vears
built  a  church  and  school-houses,  and  founded  a
convent  and  school  of  the  Sisters  of  Notre  Dame.

Dl'RYKK,  Ahram.  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city.  88  April.  1815.  He  is  of  Huguenot  descent,
and  his  grandfather  eerrod  in  the  Revolutionary
war.  being  »t  one  time  a  prisoner  in  the  old
sugar-house  on  Liberty  street.  His  father  and
two  of  his  uncles  served  as  offloan  in  the  war  of
1818.  Young  Duryee  was  graduated  at  tlmCreeby
street  high  school,  and  tiamed  to  mercantile  life,
accumulating  a  fortune  Of  ft  mahogany  merchant
in  New  York.  Be  entered  the  New  York  state
militia  in  1*33.  and  served  in  the  142(1  regiment.
Five  years  later  he  joined  the  27th  regiment  (now
the  7th)  as  a  private,  and rose  gradually  until  he

beeame  its  colonel  in  1848,  holding  that  ofl

fourteen  years.  During  the  4at0f  pinm  riots  he
commanded  his  regiment  and  was  twice  wounded,
and  he  also  |iart icipated  in  the  sultsei'iient  |tolice,
city  hall,  sixth  ward,  and  *  dead-rabbit  "  riots  with
the  7th.  In  April.  1*«U,  he  raised  in  less  than  a
week  the  6th  New  York  volunteers,  a  regiment
U*st  known  as  ••  Duryce's  zouaves,"  His  command
.aged  at Big"  Bethel,  the  first  battle  of  the


274


DURYEE


DISUAU


war,  and  after  the  fight  he  was  made  acting
brigadier-general,  sujKTseding  Gen.  E.  W.  Pierce.
In  August,  1801,  he  received  his  commission  as
brigadier-general  and  was  given  command  of  a
brigade  in  (Jen.  James  B.  Ricketts's  division.  He
participated  in  the  battles  of  Cedar  Mountain,
Thoroughfare  Gap,  second  Bull  Run,  and  Chan-
tilly,  and  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  at
South  Mountain  and  Antictam,  where  he  com-
manded Gen.  Ricketts's  division  when  the  latter
succeeded  Gen.  Hooker  as  corps  commander.  He
then  obtained  a  short  leave  of  absence,  and  on  his
return  to  the  army  found  that  his  brigade  had
been  given  to  an  inferior  in  rank.  HL  claims
for  t  he  old  position  were  ignored,  and  in  conse-
quence he  resigned  in  January,  1863.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  received  the  brevet  of  major-
general.  Subsequently  he  was  elected  colonel  of
the  71st  regiment,  and  brigadier-general  of  the
4th  New  York  brigade,  but  both  of  these  honors
he  declined.  Besides  his  own  regiment,  the  165th
(2d  Duryee  zouaves)  and  the  4th  regiments  in  the
national  guard  bore  his  name.  In  1873  he  was
appointed  police  commissioner  in  New  York  city,
which  office  he  held  for  many  years.  At  the  time
of  the  communistic  gathering  in  Tompkins  square
during  January,  1874,  with  a  small  force  of  police
he  attacked  the  crowd,  captured  their  banners,
and  drove  them  from  the  square.

DURYEE,  William  Rankin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  10  April,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Rutgers  in  1856,  and  at  the  New  Brunswick
seminary  in  1861,  and  ordained  in  Bergen,  N.  J.,
in  1862.  In  1862-'3  he  was  a  chaplain  in-the  army,
and  after  a  brief  pastorate  at  East  Williamsburg
became  in  1864  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  at
Lafayette,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.  He  has  published  a
premium  tract  for  soldiers,  entitled  "  Sentinels  for
the  Soul  "  (New  York,  1862);  "  Our  Mission  Work
Abroad,"  "  Centennial  Discourses  of  the  Reformed
Church  "  (1876) ;  and  critical  essavs  and  poems  in
religious  journals.  His  song  of  "  The  Kingdom  of
Home  "  was  awarded  a  prize.

DL'SSAUCE,  Hlppolyte,  chemist,  b.  in  France ;
d.  in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  20  June,  1869.  He  stud-
ied chemistry  under  Chevreul  in  Paris,  and  held
important  scientific  posts  under  the  govern-
mejrt  of  France.  About  1863  he  came  to  the
'.?  |  -d  States,  and  subsequently  acted  as  chemist
to  various  firms,  being  at  the  time  of  his  death  in
charge  of  the  laboratory  of  a  manufacturing  chem-
ist in  New  Lebanon.  He  translated,  edited,  and
prepared  numerous  technical  works  for  the  press,
including  "Treatise  on  the  Coloring  Matters  de-
rived from  Coal  Tar"  (Philadelphia,  1863);
"  Blues  and  Carmines  of  Indigo  "  (1863) ;  "  A  Com-
plete Treatise  on  the  Art  of  dyeing  Cotton  and
Wool"  (1863);  "A  Complete  Treatise  on  Per-
fumery "  (1864) ;  "  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the
Fabrication  of  Matches,  Gun-Cotton,  Colored  Fires,
and  Fulminating  Powders  "  (1864) ;  "  A  New  and
Complete  Treatise  on  the  Arts  of  Tanning,  Curry-
in  u  and  Leather-Dressing"  (1865);  "A  Practical
Guide  for  the  Perfumer"  (1868);  "A  General
Treatise  on  the  Manufacture  of  Vinegar "  (1868) ;
and  a  "General  Treatise  on  the  Manufacture  of
every  Description  of  Soap"  (1869).

DUSTIN,  Hannah,  pioneer,  b.  about  1660.  She
was  t  he  wife  of  Thomas  Dust  in.  of  Haverhill,  Mass.,
whom  she  married,  3  Dec,  1677.  In  the  spring  of
1  (>!)?.  when  the  New  England  frontier  settlements
were  almost  depopulated  by  the  French  and  Indians,
Haverhill,  thirty  miles  from  Boston,  suffered
greatly,  forty  of  its  inhabitants  being  killed  or
captured. Among  them  was  the  family  of  Hannah


Dust  in,  who,  on  15  March,  with  her  infant  and
nurse,  was  captured  and  carried  off.  Her  husband,
who  first  saw  the  savages  approach  and  hastened
to  the  rescue  of  his  family,  obeyed  the  entreaties
of  his  brave  wife,  and  tied  as  a  protector  to  the  re-
maining seven  children.  Mounting  his  horse  and
overtaking  them,  he  placed  himself  between  the  foe
and  the  little  ones,  and  all  escaped.  The  captive
mother  saw  her  infant,  a  week  old,  killed  in  her

Sresence,  and  her  home  set  on  fire.  The  following
ay  she  was  compelled  to  begin  a  long  march  with
her  enemies,  walking  eight  hours  on  the  first  day,
through  snow,  without  shoes,  and  with  inadequate
clothing,  after  which  they  were  suffered  to  sleep
on  the  wet  ground  unsheltered.  These  hardships
were  repeated  day  after  day  until  they  reached
the  home  of  the  leader  of  the  savages,  who  lived
on  the  island  at  the  junction  of  the  Merrimack
and  Contoocook  rivers,  near  the  present  sight  of
Concord,  N.  H.  Mrs.  Dustin  being  told  by  the
chief,  to  whom  she  had  become  a  slave,  that  his
prisoners  would  run  the  gauntlet  at  an  Indian
village  and  be  subject  to  torture  and  wounds,  re-
solved to  escape.  Instructed  by  an  English  lad
from  Worcester,  who  had  been  a  prisoner  of  the
Indians  for  a  year,  and  aided  by  her  companion  in
suffering,  she  learned  how  to  kill  instantly  and
how  to  take  off  the  scalp.  In  the  night,  while  her
captors  were  asleep,  she  obtained  a  tomahawk,
and  killed  nine  of  them,  the  lad  killing  the  lead-
er. A  squaw,  unhurt,  and  a  young  Indian  boy,
though  badly  wounded,  escaped.  Sinking  all  the
boats,  the  party  prepared  one  for  their  own  trans-
fer, with  provisions ;  but,  when  about  to  leave  the
filace,  Mrs.  Dustin,  remembering  that  she  had  not
ull  evidence  of  the  tragedy,  returned  and  scalped
the  slain  savages.  Reaching  Haverhill  after  many
hardships,  she  found  her  family  safe;  and  in  recog-
nition of  her  heroism  she  was  made  the  recipient
of  many  honors  among  the  people  of  her  own  and
adjacent  colonies.  To  the  governor  in  Boston  she
presented  a  gun,  tomahawk,  and  ten  scalps,
trophies  of  her  victory.  The  general  court  gave  to
Mrs.  Dustin  and  her  child-companion  $250  each.
The  island  is  now  call  Dustin's  Island.  There,  in
1874,  the  commonwealths  of  Massachusetts  and
New  Hampshire  erected  a  granite  monument,  on
whose  tablets  are  inscribed  the  names  of  Hannah
Dustin,  Mary  Neff,  the  nurse,  and  Samuel  Leonard-
son,  the  English  boy.

DUSUAU,  Francis  Emanuel  Frederick,
Count  de  Lacroix,  statesman,  b.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  1  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  1  Sept.,
1836.  He  was  the  son  of  Francis  Dusuau  De  La-
croix, founder  and  president  of  the  bank  of  Louisi-
ana. At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  intrusted  to
the  guardianship  of  Bishop  Dubourg,  of  New  Or-
leans, who  took  nim  to  France  and  placed  him  in
the  academy  of  AbW  Liautard.  He  showed  re-
markable ability  in  his  studies,  and  on  their  comple-
tion entered  the  bureau  of  the  department  of  for-
eign affairs.  During  the  ministry  of  the  Baron  de
Damas  his  talents  and  activity  placed  him  in  the
first  rank  among  the  pupils  of  the  diplomatic
school  founded  by  that  statesman.  He  afterward
became  secretary  of  the  cabinet  in  the  ministry  of
Prince  de  Polignac,  and  in  1830,  during  the  three
days  of  July,  showed  courage  and  skill  in  perform-
ing a  difficult  mission  intrusted  to  him  by  Charles
X.  After  the  accession  of  Louis  Philippe  he  threw
himself  with  ardor  into  the  cause  of  the  legitimists,
in  whose  interests  he  made  several  journeys  to
England,  Holland,  Italy,  and  Portugal.  He  en-
tertained Don  Carlos  at  the  time  of  his  journey  to
Paris,  and  was  decorated  by  him  with  the  order  of


DUTCH KU


DPI


198


Charles III. Daring  the intervals  (.f  his crave
. ] >iit t< •n->  be  took  |n»rt in  editing  tin-  ••  Benora-
tiur. '  and  contributed political  articles  to  the
otidienne." In 1884  In-  published  a  transla-
tion nf  i»  work  by  OgL  Hamilton,  u8ar  lee  boi— i
- mu'iirs  " Hi-  had  planned

ml iitifM >rt4int works, which his premature
death  prevented  him  from  accomplishing.

BUTCHER  Lddlsoi  Porter.  physician,  h.  in
Durham.  Greene  00-  N.  V.,  11  <'•!..  1*1*:  ,|.  m
dereland,  Ohio,  80  .Inn.,  1884  He  «n>  educated
in  the  sohool  of  Benjamin  Rotnain,  began  tin-
study  of  medicine  in  New  York  city.  and  in
was  graduated  at  the  New  Tork  College  <>f  phy-i-
cians  and  surgeons.  After  practising  in  Cooks-
bnrg,  N.  V..  and  New  Brighton,  Pa^  he  established
himself  at  Boon  Valley,  N.  Y..  in  1*17.  and  re-
mained there  until  1H«H,  when  he  accepti-d  tin-
chair  of  the  principles  and  practice  of  medicine  in
Charity  hospital  medical  college,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
which  he  held  fur  two  years.  Since  lWMI  he  has
practised  medicine  in  Cleveland.  He  was  actiw-
in  the  movement  for  the  abolition  of  slavery,  and
luts  taken  a  prominent  part  as  a  speaker  and  writer
in  that  for  the  prohibition  Of  the  sale  of  intoxicat-
ing liquors,  lie  has  published  "Selections  from
my  Portfolio,  comprising  Lectures  and  Essays  on
Popular  and  Scientific  Subjects"  (Pittsburg,  f858);
"Pulmonary  Tuberculosis  (Philadelphia,  in?<>):
"Sparks  from  the  Porge  of  a  Rough  Thinker"
(Cleveland,  1880);  "Two  Voyages  to  Europe"
(1M84);  papers  on  "Epidemic  Dysentery"  and
■  Incision  of  the  Uterine  Neck,"  and  lectures  de-
livered at  the  Charity  hospital.

DUTCHER,  Jacob  <J.,  clergyman,  b.  about
1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  ls-p.j.  and
at  the  theological  seminary  of  the  Reformed  church
in  1K46.  After  holding  pastorates  in  New  Jersey,
and  from  1858  till  1860  in  various  churches  of
New  York  city,  he  was  settled  in  18(W  in  Round
Brook,  N.  J.,  and  was  subsequently  appointed
I*.  S.  connul  at  Port  Hope,  Canada.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Requisites  of  National  Greatness  "  (1843) ;
"Sketch  of  Captain  Damming,"  written  at  the  re-

?ue«t  of  the  New  York  legislature  (1804);  "The
'rodigal  Son"  (1870);  "Our  Fallen  Heroes";
••  Washington,"  an  oration  (1872);  "The  Old  Home
by  the  River  *' (1874);  "America:  Her  Danger  and
Safety"  (1873):  and  "Frank  Lyttleton,  or  Will-
ie his  Wav."

DUTCH  V,  an  Apache  Indian.  He  was  a  memlier
of  Geronimo's  band,  and  one  of  the  most  vindic-
tive of  his  race.  When  the  band  submitted  to  Gen.
Crook  in  1885,  Dutchy  showed  the  sincerity  of  his
peacemaking  by  entering  the  U.  S.  cavalry  as  a
scout.  He  turned  the  knowledge,  skill,  and  dar-
ing that  had  made  him  a  formidable  foe  into  snob
use  that  he  soon  became  famous.  He  was  unerr-
ing in  the  use  of  the  rifle,  and  claimed  that  be
never  missed  his  mark.  He  became  especially  at-
tached to  ("apt.  Emmet  Crawford,  of  the  3d  cav-
alry, and  attended  him  in  the  treacherous  attack
when  Crawford  was  killed.  Dutchy  sprang  for-
i.  laid  his  de;id  master  on  the  ground,  and
killed  not  only  the  Mexican  who  had  shot  him.
but  the  commanding  officer  ol  the  Mexican  de-
tachment to  which  the  slaver  belonged  He  is
ranked  as  one  of  the  most  faithful  as  well  as  dan-
its  in  the  western  service,
Dl  II  i:  IRK.  Jean  Baptiste.  clergyman,  b.
b  Calais,  Fiance,  in  1610;  d.  Paris  in  1687.  Bl
served  at  lir-t  on  Itoard  the  Dutch  Meet,  then  .n-
:  the  army,  and  was  present  at  the  taking  of
Maastricht  in  1633.  After  escaping  numerous
danger-,  he  went  to  Paris  and  entered  the  Domini-


um-


can  order  in UML The  confidence  of  his  supe-
riors in  hi  1  knowledge  of  affair
them  to  send  him  on  a  miation  to  the  Ant  dim  In

16601 Th.-re  h<-  passed  sjahtan  ream  i

to  Frame  several  times  in  the  spiritual  Interest

tin-  new  colonies.  ||,  u,,t  only  pnjw'hi-d  t-'tln-na-
tiv.-s,  but  gave  useful  advice  to  the  authorities,  as-
sisted in  maintaining  peace  and  order,  ami  care-
fully took  notes  of  all  that  was  int.

oas  in  his  ■orronndings. After  hi»  refton

Fram-e he  made  preparations  f->r  publishing  the
history  of  the  kdands  he  had  VMt.-d. In  |6M
work  was  interrupti-il by  an invitati.-ii  fr..m
OS  CerillaO,  who  aished  to  form  a  Oaloay  in  Amer-
ica, and  for  that  pur|>o«e  atiked  Dntertre  to  go  to
that  continent  and.  as  hi-  ap-nt,  with  Dui«r<iu.t.

parohaat  the  i-laml  of  Granada.  He  rinded  re-
luctantly. His  ship  had  hardly  left  p'.rt  when  it
was  captured  by  the  BflgUah  and  taken  to  Plym-
outh. His  Mends  obtained  bit  ttbortj,  and  also

letters-patent  ordering  his  effect*  to  be  restored.
"  Hut,"  he  says,  "one  knows  not  what  it  is  to  find
one's  self  in  a  country  like  that.  My  robbers,  seeing
that  I  wa>  tired  of  such  a  melancholy  residence
and  ready  to  abandon  everything  to  get  out  of  it,
kept  the  letters,  and  n.-ver  s|H.ke  of  them  until
after  my  departure."  To  avoid  such  difficulties  in
future,  he  embarked  at  Texcl,  and  lauded  safely  at

Martinique. Then,  baring  trramlnsd  Grenada  and

concluded  tin-  purchase  of  the  island,  ha returned

to  France  toward  the  close  of  1657.  In  pursuance
of  his  promise  to  Ccrillac,  he  sailed  fr<.m  II  ,
with  him  for  America;  but  a  terrible  storm  forced
the  ship  to  put  into  an  BngUeh  js>rt,  when  Duter-
tre abandoned  the  enterprise  and  returned  to
France.  He  was  sent  to  the  convent  of  Tulle,
when-  he  remodelled  his  work  and  added  to  it  tin-
new  documents  he  had  procured.  He  was  after*
ward  recalled  to  the  house  of  his  order  in  Paris.
His  works  are  ••  Bistoire  generate  dee  iies  st.  chris-
tophe.de  la  Guadeloupe,  de  la  Martinique  et  au-

tres  de  I'Ameriqne,  OO  I'on  verm  lV-tablissment  des
colonies  francoises  dans  ces  lies,  leurs  gucrrvs  civ-
Dei  et  etrangeres,  et tout ce  ipii  *c  |  «*.*«•  dans  le

voyage  et  retourdes  hides,"  mm  taming  etranehv
tiou  into  Oarib  of  several  prayers  of  the  church
(Paris,  1664;  enlarged  ed..  4  vols.,  I667-T1),  and

"La  vie  de  Ste  Austreberte,  premiere  abbesse  de
L'abbaye  de Pavilly.  pies  de Rouen,  tin'-*-  de  I'an-

cien  manuscrit  de  oamte  •  Aostreberte  de  Moor

treuil  sur  iner"  (1»m!M.  The  former  comprises  a
narrative  of  all  that  passed  in  the  founding  of
French  colonies  in  the  Antilles  from  1688  to  1
and  al><>  the  natural  history  of  the  islands,  as  well
as  curious  details  concerning  the  savages,  creolea,
and  negroes,  and  has  often  been  laid  under  contri-
bution by  writers  on  natural  history.

Dl'TKA  I  KELL0,  Antonio  PraacteM

tra-a-mavl -vo), Hra/ilian poet,  b.  in Rio  .lam

I.  H  F.b..  ivi:{.  At  an  early  age
he  lost  his  father,  but  through  the  efforts  of  his
mother  he  finished  his  education.  In  his  spare
hours  he  cultivated  poetry,  writing  verses  that
have  been  pronounced  anions  the  best  productions
of  American  poeta  He  wasaoonvs|N>nding  mem-
ber of  the  Polytechnic  society  of  Pari*,  and  ■
blf  of  several  other  vii-ntilic  and  litcran
IL-  principal works  include  "  A'noite impiraoio

jKH-ti.a."  ••  aVnoite  de  s.  Io6o,M  ■  Koto  curs.,  peno-

tico,  aualvti. •>•.  thoorjoo  |  SJBthctico  da  lingua  in-
gle/a applnado  a  lingua  portuguc/a":  and  "llis-
toria  ontJOS  da  lingua  latma"'

BUTTON,  Aaron,  clergyman,  b,  in  W  atertowu.
Conn.,  -M  Mar,  iWOj  d.  in  N.-w  llav.-n.  Conn.,  in
June,  is4i*. He  was  prcjiarcd  for  college  by  the


27G


DUTTON


DUTTuX


lu\.  Azi]  Backus,  mid  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808.
He  studied  theology  under  President  Dwigfat,  and

was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
at  Guilford  in  18<M$.  He  resigned  in  1842  because
his  abolitionist  views  were  unacceptable  to  his  con-
gregation. A  year  later  he  went  as  a  missionary
to  Iowa,  but  was  attacked  with  the  disease  of  which
he  eventually  died,  and  did  not  remain. — His  son,
Samuel  William  Soiltlllliuyd,  clergyman.  1».
in  Guilford,  Conn.,  14  March,  1814;  dT  in  Mill-
bury,  Mass.,  20  Jan..  1866.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1833,  and  spent  the  following  year  in
teaching  in  Mount  Hope  college,  Baltimore,  Md.
In  1H:54  he  was  rector  of  the  Hopkins  grammar-
school  in  Xew  Haven.  From  1836  till  1888  he
was  a  tutor  in  Yale,  and  at  the  same  time  pursued
theological  studies  in  the  seminary.  He  was  pas-
tor of  the  North  church  in  New  Haven  from  June,
1838.  unt  il  his  death.  As  a  preacher,  he  was  char-
acterized by  plainness,  directness,  and  simplicity.
He  was  widely  known  for  his  charity,  and  was  a
noted  champion  of  the  anti- slavery  cause.  In
1843,  upon  the  establishment  of  the  "  New  Eng-
lander,  he  became  one  of  the  associate  editors,
and  contributed  to  its  pages  more  articles  than
any  other  writer  save  Dr.  Bacon.  He  also  pub-
lished various  addresses,  and  a  "  History  of  the
North  Church  during  the  Last  Century"  (1843).

BUTTON,  Arthur  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Wal-
lingford,  Conn.,  15  Nov.,  1838;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  2  July,  1864.  He  was  graduated- at  West
Point  in  the  engineer  corps  in  1861.  He  served
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Mansfield  in  Washington  at
the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  then  had  charge
of  the  defences  of  Fernandina,  Fla.,  until  he  be-
came colonel  of  the  21st  Connecticut  regiment
on  5  Sept.,  1862.  While  on  duty  in  North  Caro-
lina with  his  regiment,  he  served  as  chief  of  staff
to  Maj.-Gen.  Peck,  and  subsequently  held  a  simi-
lar position  upon  the  staff  of  Maj.-Gen.  W.  F.
Smith.  After  the  battle  of  Drury's  Bluff,  in  which
he  greatly  distinguished  himself,  he  was  placed
in  command  of  the  3d  brigade.  While  reconnoi-
tring with  his  brigade  in  the  neighborhood  of  Ber-
muda Hundred  on  5  June,  1864,  ne  came  upon  the
enemy  strongly  intrenched  and  almost  hidden  from
view.  Being,  as  usual,  on  the  skirmish  line,  he
was  mortally  wounded  in  the  beginning  of  the
engagement.  —  His  brother,  Clarence  Edward,
soldier,  b.  in  Wallingford,  Conn.,  15  May,  1841,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1860,  and  subsequently
spent  two  years  in  study  at  New  Haven.  In  1862
he  became  1st  lieutenant  and  adjutant,  and  short-
ly afterward  captain,  in  the  21st  Connecticut  volun-
teers. He  was  engaged  at  Fredericksburg,  Nor-
folk, Cold  Harbor,  Bermuda  Hundred,  and  Drury's
Bluff.  In  1863  he  was  admitted  to  the  U.  S.  army
as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  ordnance  corps,  after
passing  a  severe  competitive  examination,  and  was
promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  March,  1867.  Mean-
while he  had  been  stationed  at  Watervliet  arsenal
in  West  Troy,  in  1865,  and  came  under  the  influ-
ence of  Robert  P.  Whitfield  and  Alexander  L.
Holley,  who  directed  his  attention  to  geology  and
the  technology  of  iron.  For  five  years  his  leisure
was  occupied  in  the  study  of  these  subjects,  and  in
1870  he  read  his  first  paper,  "  On  the  Chemistry  of
the  Bessemer  Process,  before  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science,  at  their  Troy
meeting.  He  was  transferred  to  the  Frankford
arsenal  in  1870,  and  in  1871  to  the  Washington  ar-
senal, where  he  remained  until  May,  1876,  having
been  promoted  to  captain  in  June,  1878..  While
in  Washington  he  renewed  his  studies  in  geology
and  devoted  considerable  attention  to  the  micro-


scopic examination  of  rocks.  His  work  was  no-
ticed by  the  officers  of  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,
and  during  the  summers  of  1875-T  he  was  detailed
for  duty  in  connection  with  the  survey  of  the
Rocky  mountain  region  under  Maj.  John  W.  IW-
ell.  The  winters  of  these  years  were  spent  in  tin-
west  as  chief  ordnance  officer  of  the  Department  of
the  Platte.  In  1878  he  was  ordered  to  report  to
the  secretary  of  the  interior,  and  subsequently  was
associated  with  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  being
in  1887  geologist  in  charge  of  the  division  of  vol-
canic geology.  His  work  on  the  geology  of  the
high  plateaus  of  central  Utah  was  hegun  in  1  m 7."i
and  completed  in  1877,  and  that  in  the  Grind
Canon  district  was  finished  in  1880.  In  1882  he
visited  the  Hawaiian  islands  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
amining the  volcanoes,  and  then  made  a  special
study  of  the  great  volcanic  fields  of  the  northwest.
He  began  the  examination  of  the  Mount  Taylor
and  Zuni  district  of  New  Mexico  in  1884,  and  in
1885  began  an  investigation  of  the  cascade  and
coast  ranges  of  northern  California  and  Oregon,  on
which  he  is  now  (1887)  still  occupied.  In  1886  he
was  employed  for  a  short  time  in  studying  the
causes  of  the  Charleston  earthquake,  concerning
which  he  prepared  a  monograph.  Capt.  Dutton  is
a  member  of  several  scientific  societies,  and  in  1884
was  elected  a  member  of  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  Besides  upward  of  fifty  articles  on  scien-
tific subjects,  he  has  published  the  following  gov-
ernment reports :  "  Geology  of  the  High  Plateaus  of
Utah  "  (Washington,  1880) ;  "  Tertiary  History  of
the  Grand  CaQon  District "  (1882);  "Physical  Ge-
ology of  the  Grand  Canon  District"  (1882);  "Ha-
waiian Volcanoes  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Mount  Taylor
and  the  Zuni  Plateau  "  (1886).

DUTTON,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Plymouth,
Conn.,  12  Feb.,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  12
April,  1869.  His  grandfather,  Thomas,  was  a  cap-
tain in  the  Revolutionary  army.  He  was  brougnt
up  on  a  farm,  prepared  himself  under  difficulties
for  college,  entered  the  junior  class  at  Yale,  and  was
graduated  with  honor  in  1818.  He  then  taught
school,  and  at  the  same  time  studied  law  in  Fair-
field, Conn.,  was  a  tutor  in  Yale  in  1821-'3,  and
after  that  established  himself  in  practice  at  New-
town, where  he  remained  fourteen  years,  and  was
twice  elected  to  the  legislature.  The  next  ten
years  he  practised  at  Bridgeport,  where  he  was
prominent  in  his  profession,  became  state  attorney,
and  was  for  two  terms  a  member  of  the  legislature.
In  1847  he  became  professor  of  law  in  Yale,  and
removed  to  New  Haven.  He  was  elected  to  the
state  senate  in  1849,  once  again  to  the  lower  house
of  the  legislature,  was  for  one  year  judge  of  the
New  Haven  county  court,  and  in  1854  was  elected
governor  of  Connecticut.  He  was  judge  of  the  su-
perior court  and  of  the  supreme  court  of  errors  from
1861  to  1866,  at  the  same  time  retaining  his  profes-
sorship. After  he  was  retired  from  the  bench  at
the  statutory  age  of  seventy  vears,  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law  till  compelled  to  retire  by  failing
health.  He  served  on  the  commissions  of  1849  ana
1866  to  revise  the  state  statutes,  and  was  chairman
of  the  committee  that  made  a  new  compilation  of
them  in  1854.  Judge  Dutton  was  instrumental  in
the  passage  of  the  law  allowing  parties  to  a  suit  to
testify  in  civil  cases.  He  advocated  the  law  allow-
ing the  prisoner's  counsel  the  right  of  a  closing  ar-
gument before  the  jury,  introduced  in  the  1<
ture  the  bill  giving  the  superior  court  sole  juris-
diction in  divorce  cases,  and  aided  in  the  passage
of  bills  to  secure  more  effectually  the  rights  of  mar-
ried women.  He  published  a  "Digest  of  the
Connecticut  Reports"  (1833),  wirti  an  analytical


DUTTON


m


|n«t**H  of  an  alphabetical  arrangement  of  subjects,

:■  >ti of Swift- -I)!-.-!"  (1848).— His

oooam,  (ieorge VFaahliifrtoi,  physician, i».  In

Sheldon,  Vt..  Is  D  k'raudson  of

(.'apt.  Thomas.  Be  rtndled  tit  Oberlin  college,
Ohio,  In  1844-*0|  tnlitttd  In  1840  in  an  Ohio  regi-
ment <-f  \<iiuiii«-ri>,  and  wired  during  the  M

war  in  the  coinini*.*arv  and  inrdiral  departments.
After  studying  medicine  three  years,  ami  attend-
ing a  course  of  lecture*  in  the  I  "niversity  of  Penn-
sylvania, hr  begin  practice  ut  Independence,  (»lii..,
and  in  I  si  >o  removed  t«i  Tomales,  Cal.  In
attended  a  second  course  of  lectures  in Philadel-

Ehia,  and received hi*  doototfl degree. Among
is  contribution* to inedical literature is  a pa-
lter mi  "Treatment  of Fracture  of the Femur,"

printed  In  the  " Tranwentimn **  <d  the  California

medical  society  for  1*74,  in  which  he  first  called
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  sound  liinli  iiiiim  \»-
stretched  eipially  with  the  broken  limb  as ft  crite-
rion of  measurement  in  order  to  avoid  inequality
of  length  ujMin  recovery.

DITTOS',  Henry  tVorthington,  journalist,  b.
in  Lebanon,  Conn..  1?  April.  1  ?!»(» ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  April,  1875.  When  he  rm  about  five
years  old  his  father  removed  to  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,
and  erected  the  first  tannery  in  that  part  of  the
statr.  After  his  death  Henry  returned  to  Connecti-
cut with  his  mother,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  yean
was  sent  to  Hadley.  Mass.,  where  he  was  taken  into
a  private  family,  sent  to  school  in  winter,  and
worked  on  a  farm  in  summer  until  1*1:2.  when  he
was  indentured  to  a  printer  in  Stockbridge.  He
remained  there  two  years,  then  went  to  I'ittslield.
Mass.,  ami  with  KU-nezer  Ooopat  printed  for  some
months  the  "Berkshire  Reporter."  On  the  dec-
laration of  peace  with  Great  Britain  in  1810,  he
settled  in  Boston  and  I  tectum-  a  journeyman  printer
in  the  office  of  Wells  &  Lilly,  and  afterward  fore-
man until  1824.  During  a  part  of  this  time  James
Gordon  Bennett,  founder  of  the  "New  York  Her-
ald," waaaoopy  holder  and  proof-reader  in  the  same
office.  He  In-gaii  business  in  Boston  with  James
Wentworth  in  1*24,  and  after  the  latter's  death,  in
1848,  continued  it  with  his  widow  till  1856,  when
Mr.  button  purchased  her  interest  in  the  "'  Tran-
script," and  took  his  son,  William  Henry,  into
?artner*hii>.  For  twenty-five  years  the  firm  of
hitton  &  Wentworth  had  been  state  printer*,  tin-
contract  terminating  in  1M.V2.  The  office  of  the
"Transcript  "  was  twice  destroyed  by  fire,  once  in
1851,  and  again  in  the  great  fire  of  1878,  but  the
regular  ham  of  the  paper  was  never  omitted.

DUVAL,  Gabriel,  jurist,  1>.  in  Prince  George
ooanty,  Md..  8  Dec.  i?.vj;  d.  there,  <;  March,  is44.

He  received  a  classical  education,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  became  clerk  of  the
Maryland  legislature  praTioOJ  to  the  Heclaratioii
of  Independence.  He  wa*  elected  to  congress  to
fill  a  vacancy,  ami  re-elected,  niliug  from  N<  m  tu-
ber, 17U4,  till  March.  1  ?!»<!.  when  he  resigned  t<>
take  his  place  on  the  banohof  the  Maryland  su-
preme court.  In  Peccmlier,  1802,  he  was  apjtoint-
ed  OOmptroller  of  the  currency,  which  office  he
held  till  in  Nov.,  1811,  whan  he  was  appointed  ■
ju*tice  of  the  C.  S.  supreme  court.  In  If
ltl|telled  by  deafness  to  resign.

DUVAL.  Isaac Hurdin,  soldier,  b.  in  Wells-
burg. Brooke  co.. \'a., 1 .Sept.. 1884 lb- receded

a c<iiniuon-*chool education,  was many j
hunter  in  the  Boekj  mountain*,  commanded  the
first company  that  crossed  the  plains  from  Texas
to  California,  ami  travelled  in  Mexico  ami  Central
and  Booth  America. In 1846V7  he  was  secret  an

to the commissioners sent by President Polk t«i


treat  with  the  Indians  on  the  Texan  frontier.  On
1861,  In-  entered  the  I  .  S.  ■  hmteer  senrico
■J  inajnr  of  the  1st  West  Virginia  infantry.  Ho
wan  proumtol  i  .ili.nel  mi  1  S-pt..  1888,  brigadier-
getientl  <>u  1  NOv..  I *il4,  assigned  to  the  command
«if  kh«  1st  division  of  the  8th  arms  corj
made  major-general  by  brevet  at  the*  end  <if  the
war.  He  was  two  years  in  the  -
■tola,  two  years  adjutant-general  .,f  tl„.  state,  and
in  \**'tX  was  elated  as  a  republican  to  congress,
serving  OM  term,  lb-  was  appointed  ummot  of
internal  IW?CMM  in  1871,  and  was  oolleotor  f<>r  the
first  district  of  Wesl  Virginia  in  Is;:'.  '5,  lb-
irntly  followed  the  insurance  business,  and
in  lHNS  was 'elected  (■-  the  legislature.

DUVAL,  William  1\.  lawyer,  b.  in  Virginia

in  17H4;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  19  March
His  great-grandfather  wa*  a  French  Hugm-not.
win.  tattled  ill  Virginia,  his  grandfather  a  inem-
U-r  of  tin-  house  of  burge*se*,  and  hi*  father,
Maj.  William,  an  officer  of  tin-  lb-volution,  who
poeeessed  a  high  reputation  as  a  chancery  lawyer,
*|H-nt  a  large  fortune  in  helping  the  pxir,  ami  en-
joyed  the  friendship  of  Washington.  Tin-  son  re-
moved to  Kentucky  when  a  boy.  *tudie<l  law  there,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  commanded  a
company  of  mounted  volunteer*  against  the  In-
dians in  1812,  and  was  elected  to  I HlieiatJ  in  that
year,  serving  from  '24  March,  1818,  t-i  -  March,
1815. After  his  return  to  Kentucky  he  pn

law  at  Bardatown  till  1888,  when  be  waa appointed

governor  of  the  territory  of  Florida  by  President
Monroe.  He  was  continued  in  that  ofBoe  b]
I'residents  Adam*  and  Jackson,  earring  till  1884.
He  removed  in  1848  to  Texas,  and  died  of  a  |*ara-
lytk  aboek  while  visiting  Washington.  Hi*  life
and  character  ha\e  been  celebrated  in  fiction  by-
James  K.  Paulding,  who  portrayed  him  in  "Nim-
rod  Wildfire."  and  by  Washington  Irving,  who
drew  from  him  the  character  of  "Ralph  King-
wood."— His  brother,  John  Pope,  lawyer,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va..  ;J  June.  1?!K);  d.  in  Florida  al«>ut
1855,  wa*  educated  at  Wa*hington  college  and
at  William  and Mary,  studied  law in Richmond.

and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  181 L lb-  became

1st  lieutenant  in  the  90th  U.S.  infantry.  !i  April.
1812,  served  on  the  Canadian  frontier,  and  was
promoted  to  captain  in  January.  1814  serving  in
Virginia.  After  the  dose  of.  the  war  he  r.
hfcl  commission  ami  entered  on  the  practice  of  the
law.  but.  not  meeting  with  rnoOBOS,  eold  his  pnt|»-
artyand  emigrated  t<»  Florida,  where  hi*  brother
was  governor,  arriving  in  Tallahassee  m  June,
1827.  He  obtained  a  good  practice,  but,  owing  to
the  unhealthfulne** of the  climate, removed u.

1888  t-i  Bardatown,  K\..  wham  be  remained  till
lNoti.  organizing  volunteer  forces  during  the  war
bet weeo  Tern  and  Maxieo,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  in  the  Texan  service,  lb-  was
on  the  point  <>f  departing  for  the  scene  of  I
lies  when  the  war  ended  with  the  capture  of  Bawta
Anna, lb-  than  returned  to  Florida  a*  secretary

of  the  territory,  gained  a  high  reputation  tt
a  lawyer,  and  waa  oomndeNoned  by  Gor.  Call  t<t
make" a  ••  Digaal  "f  the  Lewi  "f  Florida "  (1840),
While  acting  as  governor  he  MOUrad  the  capture
of  a  large  bodj  "f  Indian*  00  the  Appalachicola
ri\er. After ilie adini-s-ion of Florida to the

I'nion  he  wa*  prominent  m  a  Damooratk  politt~

cian,  but  was  a  firm  uiiiniiist  during  t he  secession-
ist agitation  of  1*

HI  \  1  Ml  K.  Frank,  artist,  b.  in  Covit
Kv..  al tout 1845, He  was  a  student in Fans  for
ten Mara  Of  more,  and  a  pupil  nf  Died lbs.  ui
five  portraits  to  the  Boston  art  club  in  1ST


878


Dl'VEKXAY


DWKXOER


trihuting  to  the  National  academy  exhibition  in
1877  a  portrait  of  Charles  Dudley  Warner  and  a
•  •  Turkish  Page,"  the  most  noted,  of  his  works.
Hr  sent  "The  Coining  Man"  and  ••  Interior  of  St.
Mark's,  Venice,"  to  the  opening  exhibition  of  the
American  artists'  society  in  1878.  Other  works
from  his  hand  are  "A  Circassian,"  now  the  prop-
erty of  the  Boston  museum  of  fine  arts,  and  "  Ital-
ian" Girl "  and  "  The  Professor,"  which  were  ex-
hibited at  the  Boston  mechanics'  fair  in  1878.  He
was  many  years  in  Munich,  and  about  1881  went
to  Florence,  Italy,  where  he  has  since  resided  and
successfully  taught,  with  the  exception  of  two
years  that  he  passed  in  Boston.

DUVERNAY,  Lodge r,  Canadian  editor,  b.  in
Vercheres,  Canada,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  Cana-
da, in  1852.  He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools
of  Vercheres,  came  to  Montreal  in  1813,  and  became
an  apprentice  in  the  office  of  the  "  Spectateur."
He  founded  the  "  Gazette  des  Trois  Rivieres "  in
Trois  Rivieres  in  1817,  edited  it  till  1822,  and  in
1823  published  the  "Const itutionel,"  which  lived
only  two  years.  He  established  the  "  Argus  "  in
Trois  Rivieres  in  1826,  and  in  1827  came  to  Mon-
treal, where,  in  conjunction  with  A.  N.  Morin,  he
founded  the  "  Minerve." From  this  period  he  was

Srominent  as  an  advocate  of  Canadian  indepen-
ence,  and  was  three  times  imprisoned  by  the  gov-
ernment. In  1833  he  laid  the  foundation  of  the
Society  of  Saint- Jean- Baptiste,  with  the  object  of
preserving  the  creed,  language,  and  nationality  of
the  Canadian  French,  lie  was  elected  a  member
of  the  Canadian  legislature  in  1837,  and  was  some
months  afterward  obliged  to  fly,  in  order  to  escape
imprisonment,  taking  refuge  in  Burlington,  where
he  founded  the  "  Patriote.  He  returned  to  Cana-
da in  1842,  and  revised  the  "  Minerve,"  which  he
continued  to  publish  in  the  interest  of  the  Cana-
dian liberals  till  his  death.

DUYCKINCK,  Evert  Augustus,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city,  23  Nov.,  1816 :  d.  there,  13  Aug.,
1878.  He  was  the  son  of  Evert  Duyckinck,  who
was  at  his  death  the  oldest  publisher  in  New  York
city.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1835,
studied  law  with  John  Anthon,  being  admitted  to
the  bar  in 1837,  but,  after  spending  a  year  in

Europe,  devoted
himself  to  litera-
ture. Previous  to
going  abroad  he
had  contributed
articles  on  the
poet  Crabbe,  the
works  of  George
Herbert,  and  Oli-
ver Goldsmith,
to  the  "  New
York  Review."
In  1840  he  be-
gan with  Cor-
nelius Mathews
a  monthly  pe-
riodical, enti-
tled "Arcturus,"
much  was  con-
tinued till  1842.
Ti  ;his  magazine
he  contributed
articles  on  authors  at  home  and  abroad.  In  1847
he  entered  upon  the  editorship  of  "  The  Literary
World,"  a  weekly  review  of  books,  the  liic  arts.
etc.,  which,  with  the  exception  of  one  year,  was
carried  on  by  his  brother  George  and  himself  to  the
oloee  of  1853.  Memorials  of  Francis  L.  Hawks,
D.  D.,  LL.  D.  (1867; printed, 1871); Henry  T.


Ct-W^. S&rlCtt^y  **&*■***£}


Tuckerman  (1872);  and  James  W.  Beekman  (1877),
were  read  by  bin  baton  the  New  York  historical
society:  similar  memorials  of  John  Wolfe
and  Samuel  G.  Drake  (1876)  were  read,  the  last
named  written  for  the  American  ethnological  so-
ciety (1876).  In  1854  the  brothers  were  again*
united  in  the  preparation  of  " The  Cyclopa-dia  of
American  Literature"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1855;
enlarged  eds.,  1865  and  1875).  He  published  •■  Wit
and  Wisdom  of  Sydney  Smith,"  with  a  memoir
(New  York,  1856);  an  American  edition  of  Will-
mot's  "Poets  of  the  Nineteenth  Century"  (1858).
Immediately  after  the  death  of  Washington  IrwhUL
Mr.  Duyckinck  gathered  together  and  published  m
one  volume  a  collection  of  anecdotes  and  traits  of
the  great  author,  under  the  title  of  "Irvingiana"
(1859);  "History  of  the  War  for  the  Union"  (8
vols.,  1861-'5) ;  "  Memorials  of  John  Allan  "  (1864) ;
"  Poems  relating  to  the  American  Revolution,  with
Memoirs  of  the  Authors "  (1865) ;  "Poemsof  Philip
Freneau,"  with  notes  and  a  memoir  (1865);  "  Na-
tional Gallery  of  Eminent  Americans"  (2  vols.,
1866);  "Historv  of  the  World  from  the  Earliest
Period  to  the  Present  Time "  (4  vols.,  1870) ;  and
an  extensive  series  of  "  Biographies  of  Eminent
Men  and  Women  of  Europe  and  America"  (2  vols.,
1873-'4).  His  last  literary  work  was  the  prepara-
tion, with  William  Cullen  Bryant,  of  an  edition  of
Shakespeare,  which  is  still  (1887)  in  manuscript.
In  January,  1879,  a  meeting  in  his  memory  was
held  by  the  New  York  historical  society,  and  a  bio-
graphical sketch  of  Mr.  Duyckinck  was  read  by
William  Allen  Butler.  See  also  a  memoir  of  him  by
Samuel  Osgood,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.  (Boston,  1879).— His
brother,  George  Long,  writer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  17  Oct.,  1823;  d.  there,  30  March,  1863,  after
attending  Geneva  college  entered  the  University  of
New  York,  and  was  graduated  there  in  1843.  He
studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  never
practised.  After  the  completion  of  his  legal
studies  he  travelled  extensively  in  Europe  in
1847-'8,  and  on  his  return  became  joint  editor
with  his  brother  Evert  of  the  "  Literary  World,"
afterward  becoming  joint  author  with  his  brother
of  the  "  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Literature."  He
then  revisited  Europe,  and,  on  his  return  in  1857,
entered  on  a  separate  career  of  authorship  in  a
congenial  department.  He  was  by  early  training
and  long-established  choice  warmly  attached  to  the
liturgy  and  order  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  especially  interested  in  its  biographical
literature.  To  this  he  devoted  himself,  and,  having
been  elected  treasurer  of  the  Sunday-school  union
and  Church  book  society,  he  began  a  series  of  bi-
ographies of  English  clergymen,  with  a  view  to  at-
tract the  interest  of  American  readers.  The  first
of  these  was  the  "  Life  of  George  Herbert "  (New
York,  1858);  followed  by  the  lives  of  Bishop
Thomas  Ken  (1859),  Jeremy  Taylor  (1860),  and
Hugh  Latimer  (1861).  These  memoirs  were  unpre-
tending in  form,  and  were  condensed  to  a  simple
narrative ;  but  they  are  regarded  as  contributions
of  high  value  to  the  class  of  works  to  which  they
belong.  Mr.  Duyckinck  contemplated  writing  the
life  of  Bishop  Leighton,  but  before  entering  on  its
preparation  he  was  seized  with  the  illness  which
terminated  his  blameless  and  beautiful  life.

DWENGER,  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  1>.  in  St.
John's,  Ohio,  in  1837.  He  was  educated  in  the
school  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  Cincinnati,  and  after-
ward studied  for  the  priesthood  in  the  Seminary  of
Mount  St.  Mary's  of  the  West.  In  1859  he  received
ordination  and  was  appointed  professor  in  the
College  of  the  precious  blood.  He  was  next  placed
in  charge  of  the  congregations  of  Wapakoneta  and


DWIGHT


DWM'HT


TO


St.  Mary's,  micl  was  iltO  connected  with  tin-  S-mi-

Be  was  a  travelling  mhtsi
in ili.- states  of <»hi<>.  Kentucky,  MM Indiana  in
and mi tin-  luit.T  year  wu  consecrated
hi-lmp  "f Kurt  Wayne. Hi  iminediatelv  < li-\ •  >t <••!

himself  to  tin-  development  and  organization  of
tin'  namnhlil anhooi  qjstom  hi  hii  < J n .«.--«. n.

established  a  diocesan  school  board, and  mt r« « 1  mt<  1
uniformity  of  fcaohlng  MM  grading.  Hi  imrdalrtd
his  system  on  that  uf  the  public-school  of  the
United  States,  and  with  groat  -u. ..»-..  in  ismj  i,,
had  ttztjaohooli  ta  operation  with  8J)00  pupUs,
in  it  Soman  Catholic  population  of  85,ooo. Hm

I'nivorsity  of  Notre  Dame  was  established  through
him  under  the  priests  of  the  holy  cross,  ami  ho
also  lonnded  numerous  sisterhoods,  lie  aooOBV
-miiied  the  American  pilgrimage  to  Home  as  its
Mi|H-rior,  ami  was  present  at  the  third  plenary
council  of  Baltimore.

I ' M  1 1.  ii  I.  John  Sullivan,  musical  critic,  b,
in  Boston,  Mass.,  U  May,  1818,  Hi  is  one  of  the
Dwights  of  Shirley,  Mass.,  whose  ancestor,  (apt.
John  Dwight,  is  ranpOBBd  to  have  ban  a  nephew
of  ('apt.  Henry,  of  Hatfield.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1888,  at  the  Cambridge  divinity  lohool
in  18"J5,  and  in  1840  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Unitarian  church  in  Northampton.  Mass.  He  soon
left  the  ministry  from  symiiatfiy  with  the  socialistic
ideas  of  the  famous  Brook  Farm  community,  of
which  he  was  one  of  the  founders,  and  where  he
lived  for  five  years,  teaching  Latin. Greek,  German,
ami  music,  ami  at  the  same  time  farming,  cutting
wood,  cultivating  trees,  and  engaging  in  other  in-
dustries. He  returned  to  Boston  in  1*4*  and
derated  himself  to  literature,  contributing  to  the
"  Harbinger  "  (which  was  at  one  time  the  organ  of
the  Brook  Farm  community,  hut  afterward  re-
moved to  New  York),  the  Boston  "Dial,"  the
"Christian  Kxaminer,"  and  other  periodicals.  He
now  devoted  himself  specially  to  musical  criticism,
doing  much  to  foster  a  taste  for  the  best  compo-
sitions, I xith  by  his  articles  and  by  lectures  on
Bach.  Beethoven,  Handel,  and  Mozart,  which  he
delivered  in  the  principal  cities  in  the  country.  In
April,  1852,  he  established  in  Boston  "  Dwight's
Journal  of  Music,"  the  publication  of  which  was
ined  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  in  1858.  but  Mr.
Dwight  continued  its  sole  editor  until  1881.  when
it  was  discontinued.  It  was  for  several  years  the
only  musical  journal  in  the  country,  and  always
expressed  the  opinions  of  its  editor  without  fear
or  favor.  He  earnestly  opposed  Wagner,  Berlioz,
Rubinstein,  and  the  "music  of  the  future,"  and  as
st  reuuouslv  upheld  Bach.  Handel,  and  Beethoven.
Mr.  Dwight  has  published  "Translations  of  .Se-
lect Minor  Poems  from  the  German  of  Goethe  and
Schiller,  with  Note*"  (in  Ripley's  "Specimens  of
Foreign  Standard  Literature."  Boston.  1838).  These
are  distinguished  for  grace  of  diction,  close  ad-
herence to  the  origuala,  and  musical  rhythm. His

haft-known  original  poem  is  "God  Sara  the  state."
—  His  sist.r,  Frances  Kllen,  b.  in  Booton  in  1819,
became  a  teacher  of  music  in  that  citv.

DWIGHT,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  'in  Dedham,
Mass..  16  Oct..  1708 ;  d.  in  Great  Barrington,  Mass.,
1!»  June,  1765.  Ilh  father,  (apt.  Henry  Dwight.  of
Hatfield,  Mass.,  was  grandson  to  John  Dwight,  of
Dedham,  Mass.,  from  whom  all  of  the  name  in  this
country  are  descended.  Joseph  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1 72*2,  and  was  a  merchant  in  Spring-
held,  Mass..  j„  l728-'31,but  removed  to  Brook
Mass..  and  was  admitted  to  the  liar  in  1788.  lb-
was  eleven  times  a  nieiiiUT  of  the  colonial  council

between  1781  and  1751, and  ite speaker  in  17c

In  1789  he  wa>  Judge  of  the  OOUrt ol  coiniin.n  pleas


of  Worcester  coimtv. He  had  btOOM  a  colonel  of
militia,  and  on  20  Fell.,  1745.  was  made  brigadier-
general,  and  Was  vend  In  command  at  the  attack
on Louiaburg  In that  year,  where  he  led  iii
the  "Ancient  and  honorable  company  of  artillery
of  Boston,"  and  was  commended  for  Ins  i
and -kill by Gen.  IYp->creU. In 1 T-VJ h<
manded  a  brigade  ol  Massachusetts  militia,  nt  Lake
Chainplain.  in  the  second French wai
removed  in  1752 to  Stockbridge,  where  bi
several years trustee of Indian schools, and in

1758-'(J1  Was  cluef  justice  of  the Halll]^llire  county

court  of  common  pleas,  lb-  went  to  (ireat  liar-
rington  in  1758,  and  on  the  formation  of  i!
(■■unity  of  Berkshire  in  17»J1  beoami  judge  of  it-
court,  and  also  judge  <>f  probata,  holding  theai
offices  till  his  death.  (Jen.  Dwight  was  a  man  of
fine  personal  appearance,  dignified  in  bearing*,  and
much  esteemed  throughout  the  colony .—  His  grand-
son,  Henry  Williams,  congressman.  b>  in  Btoek-
bridgc,  Mass.,  2<>  Feb.,  17*8;  d.  in  New  York  city.
81  Feb.,  1845.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was
a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  and  treasurer  of  Berk-
shire county  from  1784  till  1804.  Henry  wee  edu-
cated at  Williams,  Itecame  a  lawver  mStochbridgO,
and  in  the  war  of  1818  W8J  aide  to  Gen.  Whiton,
with  the  rank  of  colonel.  Hi  was  |  member  of  the
legislature  in  1818  and  1884,  and  served  fi\esii<-
cessjve  terms  in  congress,  1821  till  lKM.  Col.
Dwight,  fond  of  fine  stock,  was  one  of  the  first
bnportenof  merino  sheep  and  Devonshire  cattle.
—  Henry  Williams's  brother,  Edwin  Welles,
clergyman,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass..  17  Nov..  1 7*-'.' :
d.  there,  25  Feb.,  1841,  was  graduated  at  Vale  in
1809,  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  at
Richmond,  Mass.,  in  1819-':17.  and  published  a
"  History  of  Berkshire  County,  MtamrihllSOtti "
(Pittsfleld,  Mass.,  1889).— Another  brother.  Louis,
philanthropist,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  25  March,
179:';  d. in  Boston,  Maim.  12  July.  1*54.  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1818, and  at  Andorar  theological
seminary  in  1819.  He  was  prevented  from  preach-
ing by  weak  lungs,  caused  by  inhaling  "  exhilara-
ting gas"  <luring  a  college  chemical  lecture  Hi
v>.is  an  agent  of  the  American  tract  societv  in
1819-21,  and  of  the  Education  society  in  1881  '».
and  was  ordained  in  Salem.  Mass..  on  27  Nov..  1888
In  1824  he  married  Louisa  Willis,  sister  of  N.  P.
Willis,  the  poet,  and  in  the  latter  |>art  of  that  year,
during  a  six-months'  horseback  ride  for  his  health,
distributed  Bibles  among  the  inmates  of  priaom  in
various  states  of  the  UtUOD.  The  abuses  that  thus
liecame  known  to  him  led  to  the  formation  in  1825
of  the  Prison  discipline  society,  of  which  he  was
secretary  and  practical  manager  till  his  death,
effecting  many  needed  reforms.  In  184<i  he  visited
Europe  and  Inspected  the  prisons  there.  The
series  of  twenty-nine  annual  rsporta  published  by-
Mr.  Dwight  contained  a  vast  amount  of  valuable
information  not  tobifound  elsewhere.— Harrison
Gray  litis,  missionary,  great -grandson  of  Gen.
Joseph's  elder  brother  Soth.  b.  in  Conwav,  Mass,,
22  Nov..  1898:  d.  in  Vermont,  85  Jan..  i'mbJ,  was

graduated  at  Hamilton  college,  Clinton.  N.  Y..  in
[888,  and  at  Andowr  theological  seminary  in  1888,
and  on  15  July.  1829,  was  ordained  and  commis-
sioned •  missionary  of  the  American  Ixmrd.  whoso
agent  he  had  been  for  a  short  time.  He  sailed  for
Malta  in  Januarv.  IKtO,  and  in  the  same  year  be-
gan, with  Dr.  Fli  Smith,  a  h^teon-months' explora-
tion  of  Asia  Minor.  Parma,  Armenia,  and  Georgia.

In  July,  1881,  he  settled  in  Constantinople,  and
U-caine  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Armenian
mission  there.  He  was  one  of  the  most  noted
American missionaries, and. in addition to his


280


DWIGHT


DWKJIIT


daily  work,  carried  on  a  voluminous  correspondence
wiili  prominent  Christiana  in  all  parts  of  the
world.  He  travelled  extensively  in  connection
with  his  labors,  his  last  long  journey  being  a
solitary  horseback  ride  of  thousands  of  miles
through  Asia  Minor,  in  1859-'60.  He  revisited  the
United  States  for  the  sixth  time  in  November,
1861,  and  was  killed  in  a  railroad  accident  in
Vermont  while  on  his  way  to  attend  a  missionary
anniversary  in  Canada.  Hamilton  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  1).  in  1852.  Dr.  Dwight  wrote  books
and  tracts  in  the  languages  of  the  east,  translated
portions  of  the  Bible,  and  published  "  Researches
of  Smith  and  Dwight  in  Armenia"  (Boston,  1833);
■•  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.  Dwight,"  his  wife

glew  York,  1840);  and  "Christianity  Revived  in  the
ast "  (1850 ;  London,  1854).  He  also  contributed
to  the  journal  of  the  American  oriental  society
a  "  Complete  Catalogue  of  Literature  in  Armenia,
and  left  many  unpublished  manuscripts. — His  son,
William  Buck,  scientist,  b.  in  Constantinople,
Turkey,  22  May,  1833,  came  to  the  United  States
in  1850,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1854,  at
Union  theological  seminary,  New  York,  in  1857,
and  at  the  Y'aje  scientific  school  in  1859.  He  took
part  in  founding  the  village  of  Englewood,  N.  J.,
in  1859,  and  established  a  young  ladies'  school
there,  of  which  he  was  principal  till  -1865.  He
was  occupied  in  raining  explorations  in  Virginia
ami  Missouri  in  1865-'7,  taught  at  West  Point  in
1867-'70,  and  in  1870-'8  was  assistant  principal  and
professor  of  natural  science  in  the  State  normal
school  at  New  Britain,  Conn.,  also  editing  the
Connecticut  "School  Journal"  in  1872-'5.  He
was  chosen  professor  of  natural  history  and  cura-
tor of  the  museum  at  Vassar  college  in  1878,  and  in
1882  was  also  made  curator  of  the  museum  of  the
Vassar  Brothers'  institute,  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.
In  1885  he  invented  a  machine  for  making  thin
slices  and  other  sections  of  rocks  and  fossils.  Mr.
Dwight  has  given  special  attention  to  the  geology
and  paleontology  of  the  lower  Silurian  rocks.
Since  1879  he  has  carried  on  an  extended  investi-

fation  in  the  Wappinger  valley  limestones  of
►utchess  county,  N.  Y.,  developing  a  new  group
of  fossils  for  which  he  proposes  the  name  "  Roch-
dale group."  He  has  also  investigated  the  Taconic
limestones  of  Canaan,  N.  Y.  Many  of  his  results
have  been  published  in  the  proceedings  of  the
National  academy  and  the  American  association,
and  in  scientific  periodicals,  and  when  complete
they  are  to  be  issued  in  book-form,  illustrated. —
Mary  Ann,  author,  granddaughter  of  Gen.  Joseph's
brother  Josiah,  b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  17  Sept.,
1806 ;  d.  in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  4  Nov.,  1858.  Her
taste  was  formed  in  her  father's  excellent  library,
and  she  became  a  teacher  of  drawing  and  painting.
She  published  "  Grecian  and  Roman  Mythology  "
(New  York,  1849) ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
Art "  (1856) ;  an  elementary  astronomy ;  "  Poetry
for  the  Young;"  and  an  edition,  with  notes,  of
Cowper's  translation  of  the  •'  Iliad."  She  had  also
prepared  for  publication  an  abridgment  of  Lanzi's
"History  of  Painting." — Edmund,  merchant,
grandson  of  Gen.  Joseph's  brother  Edmund,  b.  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  28  Nov.,  1780;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  April,  1849,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1799,  and  studied  law  with  Fisher  Ames,
but  never  practised.  After  travelling  in  Europe  in
1802-'4  he  became  a  merchant  in  Springfield,  and
in  1815  established  the  house  of  William  II.  &  J.
W.  Dwight,  which  founded  the  manufacturing
villages  of  Chicopee  Palls  in  1822,  Cbicopee  in
1831,  and  Holyoke  in  1847.  His  firm  had  for
several  years  the  directiop  of  factories  in  which


3,000  persons  were  constantly  emplojed.  Mr.
Dwight  took  an  early  and  active  part  in  the  mu-
st ruction  of  the  Western  railroad  from  W<
to  Albany,  and  was  one  of  its  directors  for  many
years,  becoming  president  in  the  year  of  his  death,
lie  made  a  liberal  use  of  his  large  fortune  fur
objects  of  public  importance,  rendering  especially

im-at  service  to  the  cause  of  popular  education,
t  was  chiefly  through  his  exertions  that  the  Mas-
sachusetts state  board  of  education  was  established,
and  he  was  the  first  to  propose  the  present  normal-
school  system.  In  1838  he  pledged  $10,000  for
its  establishment,  on  condition  that  the  legislature
should  appropriate  an  equal  amount,  which  was
promptly  done.  Mr.  Dwight  was  for  many  years
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and
one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  antiquarian
society  in  1812. — His  son,  Edmund,  merchant,  b.
in  Boston,  3  Sept.,  1824,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1844.  In  1871  he  went  abroad  to  superintend
the  distribution  of  the  fund  raised  by  subscription
in  Boston  for  the  relief  of  the  suffering  caused  in
Prance  by  the  war  with  Germany,  and  on  his  re-
turn he  published  an  interesting  "  Report  to  the
Executive  Committee  of  the  French  Relief  Fund"
(Boston,  1872).  — The  elder  Edmund's  nephew,
Francis,  educator,  son  of  James  Scutt  Dwight,  b.
in  Springfield,  Mass.,  14  March,  1808 ;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  15  Dec,  1845,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1827,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1830.  After  a  tour
in  Europe  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834,
and  practised  in  the  states  of  Massachusetts,  Michi-
gan, and  New  York,  but  gave  up  his  profession
in  1838,  and  established  at  Albany,  in  1840,  the
"  District  School  Journal,"  under  state  patronage,
which  he  conducted  until  his  death.  He  was
active  in  devising  and  establishing  the  present  code
of  public  instruction  in  the  state  of  New  York. —
William,  soldier,  grandson  of  Edmund's  brother
Jonathan,  b.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  14  July,  1831 ;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  21  April,  1888,  was  at  the
United  States  military  academy.  West  Point,  in
1849-'53,but  resigned  before  he  was  graduated  and
became  a  manufacturer  in  Boston,  and  afterward
in  Philadelphia.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in
the  13th  U.  S.  infantry  on  14  May,  1861,  and  in  June
of  that  year  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  70th
New  York  volunteers,  of  which  Daniel  E.  Sickles
was  colonel.  At  the  battle  of  Williamsburg  half
the  regiment  were  killed  or  wounded,  Col.  Dwight
being  wounded  three  times  and  left  for  dead  on  the
field.  For  his  gallantry  on  this  occasion  he  was
promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  29
Nov.,  1862,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  brigade  of
Grover's  division,  which  he  led  in  the  attack  on
Port  Hudson.  He  also  served  on  the  commission
to  settle  the  terms  of  surrender  of  that  place.  In
May,  1864,  he  was  Gen.  Banks's  chief  of  staff  in  the
Red  river  expedition,  succeeding  Charles  P.  Stone,
and  in  July  of  that  year  was  put  in  command  of
the  1st  division  of  the  19th  army  corps,  under
Sheridan,  with  which  he  rendered  important  ser-
vice at  Winchester,  Fisher's  Hill,  and  Cedar  Creek.
He  remained  in  the  army  till  15  Jan.,  1866,  and
subsequently  removed  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio. — His
brother,  Wilder,  soldier,  b.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
23  April,  1833 ;  d.  in  Boonsborough,  Md.,  19  Sept.,
1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853,  and  at
the  law-school  in  1855.  He  practised  in  Boston
from  1857  till  24  May,  1861,  when  he  became  major
of  the  2d  Massachusetts  infantry.  He  distinguished
himself  in  Gen.  Banks's  retreat  through  the
Shenandoah  valley,  and  was  taken  .  prisoner  at
Winchester  on  25  May,  1862.  He  was  made  lieu-
tenant-colonel on 13 June, 1862,,  was  mortally


DWHillT


D  WIGHT


n


avunded  at  Antietam,  ami  died  in  ho-pital  two
tier. BfeM Life  end  Letters"  were  published

b\ In- BOtber, Elizabeth Vin.li.i.  .liter  ..f

Daniel  Appletoa  White,  of,  Salem,  Ma—.
other  brothers, Howard

I  li.u  !■  -  also in llif national

mi  1  it  it  i  daring  the  civil  war Tfclili,

physfa  tan,  another  grandson  of  Jonathan,  i>.  in
'Boston,  Mass.,  19  OcL,  Is  W.  ipenl  two  years
at  Harvard,  and  than  entered  the  medical  school,
where  he  received  bis  degree  In  1887,  taking
the  ii i — -t  Boylston  j>ri/.e  bj  an  essay  on  "Inter*
cranial  Circulation.'  After  studying  abroad  for
ir>,  he  was  tnetrnotorin  compsjrativoojmtoeny

at Harvard in 1878-'8, leotorer  and professor  of

anatomy  at  Bowdoin  in  1878-'8,  instructor  in  hh>

lology  lit  Harvard  in  lN74-'83,  and  in  the  latter
year  succeeded  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  a-  professor
of  anatomy.  Dr.  Dwight  is  a  Roman  Catholic,  and
the  Bret  of  that  faith  to  hold  a  Harvard  professor-
ship. In  1878  he  won  the  prize  of  the  Meeeechusetts

medical  society  by  an  essay  on  the  "  Identification
of  the  Human  Skeleton/'  Ho  is  a  member  of
various  medical  societies,  and  in  IKSO-'l  was  presi-
dent >'f  the  Catholic  union  of  Boston.  He  was
an  editor  of  the  BootOU  "  Medical  and  Surgical
Journal  "  in  l873-'8.  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
at  the  Lowell  institute  in  1884  on  the  "  Mechanics
of  Bone  and  Muscle,"  and  has  published  "Anatomy
of  the  Head  "  (Mo-toll, lSTli); "  Fro/en Sections  of

a  Child"  (New  York.  1881);  and  various jwpers.

HWK.II  I.  Timothy, educator,  b.  in  Northamp-
ton.  Mass..  It  May.  17.V2;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
11  Jan.,  1H17.  He  was  the  great-grandson  of  Na-
thaniel, who  was  brother  to  Capt.  Henry  Dwight.
of  Hatfield  (see  Dwujht,  Joan). His  father.  Hal

Timothy  Dwight  (Vale,  1744),  was  a  lawyer  by
education,  and  became  a  prosperous  merchant  of
Northampton;  his  mother  was  Mary,  third  daugh-
ter of  the  Rev.  Jonathan  Kd  wards,  a  lady  of  great
mental  ability  and  force  of  character.  During  the
boy's  earlier  years  she  devoted  herself  to  his  edu-
cation. At  twelve  he  was  sent  to  the  Rev.  Enoch
Huntingdon's  school  in  Middletown,  where  he  was
fitted  for  college,  matriculating  at  Yale  in 1786,

He  was  gradu-
ated in  1709,  hav-
ing but  one  rival
in  scholarship,
Nathan Strong.

After  leaving  col-
lege he  was  prin-
cipal of  the  Hop-
kins grammar-
school  in  New
Haven  for  two
years.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1771  he
was  given  the
post  of  tutor  in
his  alma  mater,
and  in  the  same
year  began  his
ambitions  epic,
"The Conquest

of  Canaan."  lb-
was  made  M.  A.  in  1772,  and  on  taking  his  decree
delivered  a  dissertation  on  the  "History,  Ek>
inenee,  and  Poetry  of  the  Bible,"  which  attracted
much  attention.  While  a  tutor,  be  studied  law,
with  the  intention  of  adopting  it  as  a  profession;
but  in  \~~,i.  there  being  a  great  dearth  of  chaplains
in  the  Continental  army,  he  wa-  licensed  to  preach,
and  soon  afterward  became  chaplain  in  Paraons's
brigade, f  that  '>>nnecticut  line.  While  holding  thi-


^^^^p^^yO/


ofBoa  he  wr  stirring  pattiotie.  songs,  one

of  which,  "Columbia,"  became  a  general  f«
His  father's  sudden  death  in  177''  recalled  htm  to
re  of  his  widowed  mother  and  her  family.
with  whom  he  remaiiie.l  at  Northampton,  Mavl.,
the  year-,  tilling  the  farm  and  preaching  occa-
sionally in  the  neighboring  churches,  lie  also
kept  a  d*y*anhool  for  botn  ansa,  b  which  Joel
Barlow,  the  poet,  mm  i  taaaher;  and  after  the
capture  of  N,w  Haven  by  the  British  ha  had  un-
der his  care  several  of  the  llnrtailtl  "f  Yale.  In
I  Ml  he  WSJ  a  Dsamber  of  the  Massachuftetts  legis-
lature, iiut  refused  a  nominatloa  to  <ongmw.  Re-
ceiving a  call  from  the  church  at  I  Hill,  a
beauttfnl  rural  parish  in  Fairfield.  CtSJIL,  In-  re-
moved thither  in  17*3;  nnd  shortly  afterward  he
established  an  academy,  which  soon"ac<piired  a  na-
tional reputation,  student-  being  attracted  from  all
iiart-  of  the  country  and  from  the  We-t  fndlon
In  this  school  Dr.  Dwight  became  the  pioneer  Of
higher  education  for  women,  assigning  hi-  female
students  tin- same  advanced  stiufiesas  those  pur-
sued by  the  DOJS,  and  earnestly  advocating  the
Sr.Ktice.  The  College  of  New  Jersey  gave  him  the
egree  of  S.T.  D.  in  1787,  and  Harvard  that  of
Lb.  I».  in  1810.  In  171)9  he  decUned  a  call  from
the  Dutch  Reformed  church  at  Albany.  During
this  period  he  promised  and  agitated,  until  he  se-
cured, the  union  of  the  Congregational  and  I'rvshy-

terian  churches  of  New  England. In  1785,  on  the

death  of  Dr.  Stiles,  he  was  called  b)  the  pre-idemy
of  Yale  college,  an  office  which  he  held  until  his
death  in  1817.  On  this  long  and  •ncosssfnl  ad-
minstration of the affairs of Yale college Dr.

Dwight's  claims  to  distinction  largely  re-t.  When
he  assumed  control  there  were  but  110  student-;
the  curriculum  was  still  narrow  and  pedantic  ;  the
freshmen  were  in  bondage  to  the  upper-da--  men.
and  they  in  turn  to  the  faculty.  President  Dwight
abolished  the  primary-school  system,  and  estab-
lished among  the  class-men,  and  between  them
and  the  faculty,  such  rules  as  are  usually  o"l»served
by  gentlemen  in  social  intercourse.  He  introduced
the  study  of  oratory  into  the  curriculum,  and  him-
self gave  lectures  on  style  and  composition.  He
also  abolished  the  system  of  fines  for  petty  of-
fences. At  his  death  the  number  Of  students  had
increased  to  313.  In  politics  be  was  a  federalist  of
the  Hamilton  school,  and  be  earnestly  depn
the  introduction  of  French  ideas  01  education.
His  published  works  fill  thirteen  large  octavo
volumes,  and  his  unpublished  nianu-cripts  would
fill  almost  as  many  more,  While  he  was  a  tutor  in
college,  imprudence  in  the  use  of  his  eye-  had  so
weakened  them  that  he  could  use  them  neither  for
study  nor  writing,  and  he  was  afterward  obliged
to  employ  an  amanuensis  very  frequently.  His
nio-t  ambitious  work  was  hi-  epic,  "The  Conquest
of  Canaan."  A  critic,  writing  in  the"  North  Ameri-
can Review  "(vii..  847),  said  it-  author  had  invented

a  medium  between  absolute  barbarian  ami  mod-
ern refinement.  "There  is  little  that  is  really  dis-
tinctive, little  that  Is  truly  oriental.  al«»ut  any  of  his
persons  or  scenes.  ...  It  i- occasionally  animated,
and  in  description  sometime-  pietoreSQUe  and  po-

etical." Hi- pectoral  poem,  "Greenfield Hill"

(1784),  in  which  was  introduced  a  vivid  description
of  the  burning  of  Fairfield  by  the  British  in  177'.».
WM  much  more  popular.  In  1800  he  r
Watt-'-  Psalms,  adding  translations  of  hi-  own. and
a  selection  of  hymn-.  both  of  which  wire  adopted
bv  the  general  assembly  of  the  I're-byterian
church. The  In-t known  of  then  M  the  VStsion

of  the  187th  Psalm,  beginning:  "I  love  thy  king-
dom. Lord, the house of thine abode.'' Hi-


282


DWIGHT


DWIGHT


"  Travels  in  New  England  and  New  York "  (4
vols.,  New  Haven,  1681  :  London,  1N23)  was  pro-
nounced by  Robert  Southey  the  most  important  of
his  works.  His  "Theology  Explained  and  De-
fended in  a  Course  of  173  Sermons" (5  vols.,  Mid-
dletown,  Conn.,  1818;  London,  1819;  new  ed.,
with  memoir  by  his  son.  Rev.  Sereno  E.  Dwight,
New  York,  1840)  has  gone  through  a  score  of
editions  in  this  country  and  at  least  one  hundred
abroad,  and  on  it  rests  his  reputation  as  a  theolo-
gian. Besides  these  works  and  numerous  dis-
courses he  published  "  America,  a  Poem"  (1772);
"The  Genuineness  and  Authenticity  of  the  New
Testament"  (1793);  "Triumph  of  Infidelity,  a
Satire"  (1797);  "Discourse  on  the  Character  of
Washington "  (1800) ;  "  Observations  on  Lan-
guage "  (1816) ;  and  "  Essay  on  Light "  (1816).  See,
besides,  the  memoir  by  his  son,  and  the  life  in  vol.
xiv.  of  Sparks's  "American  Biography,"  by  Rev.
William  B.  Sprague.  Dr.  Dwight  married,  in
March,  1777,  Mary,  daughter  of  Benjamin  Wool-
sey,  of  Long  Island,  who  bore  him  eight  sons. — His
brother,  Theodore,  journalist,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  15  Dec,  1764 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  June,
1846,  studied  law  in  New  Haven  with  his  cousin,
Judge  Pierrepont  Edwards,  and  began  practice  at
Had  da  m.  Conn.,  but  removed  to  Hartford  in  1791,
and  became  eminent  in  hi:?  profession.  He  at  one
time  removed  to  New  York  to  become  the  law-
partner  of  his  cousin,  Aaron  Burr,  but  disagreed
with  the  latter's  political  opinions  and  returned  to
Hartford,  where  he  edited  the  "  Courant "  and  the
"  Connecticut  Mirror,"  the  organ,  in  that  state,  of
the  Federal  partv,  in  which  he  had  become  promi-
nent. He  was  also  an  active  member  of  a  club  of
young  poets  known  as  "  the  Hartford  wits,"  and  is
said  to  have  been  a  principal  contributor  to  the
"  Political  Greenhouse "  and  the  "  Echo."  In
1806  he  was  chosen  to  congress  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  John  Cotton  Smith's  resignation,  serv-
ing till  3  March,  1807,  and  declining  a  renomina-
tion.  While  in  congress  he  had  several  sharp
passages  of  wit  with  John  Randolph.  lie  was  a
member  of  the  state  council  in  1809-'15,  and  secre-
tary of  the  celebrated  "  Hartford  Convention  "  of
1814.  In  1815  he  removed  to  Albany  and  estab-
lished the  "  Daily  Advertiser,"  but  relinquished  it
after  two  years,  to  found  the  New  York  "  Daily
Advertiser,"  a  journal  which  he  conducted  until
1836,  when,  retiring  from  active  life,  he  removed  to
Hartford,  but  returned  to  New  York  three  years
before  his  death.  Mr.  Dwight  was  a  brilliant
writer  as  well  as  able  debater.  Although  he  wrote
too  much  and  too  rapidly  for  lasting  fame,  his
political  articles  were  bright  and  spicy,  and  his
satirical  and  sketchy  "  New  Year's  Verses,"  in  the
"  Mirror,"  were  always  looked  for  with  eagerness.
Mr.  Dwight  was  a  man  of  unflinching  integrity
and  an  outspoken  opponent  of  slavery.  In  person
he  was  tall  and  fine-looking.  He  published  a
'■  1 1  Lstory  of  the  Hartford  Convention  "  (New  York,
1833),  and  "  Character  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  as  ex-
hibited in  his  own  Writings  "  (Boston,  1839).  The
latter  is  written  with  a  strong  Federal  bias.  An
outline  of  this  "  Life  and  Writings"  was  published
by  the  New  York  historical  society  (1840),  and  a
sketch  of  his  character  by  Dr.  Francis  ap-
peared subsequently  under  its  auspices.  —  His
son,  Theodore,  author,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
3  March,  1796 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16  Oct.,  1866,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1814,  and  began  to  study
theology  with  his  uncle,  President  Dwight,  but  ill-
ness forced  him  to  abandon  it  in  1818,  and  he  vis-
ited Europe  for  his  health.  He  removed  to  Brook-
lyn in  1833,  and  engaged  in  various  public  and


philanthropic  enterprises,  becoming  a  director  of
many  religious  anil  educational  societies,  and  l>eing
active  from  1896  till  l s.">4  in  multiplying  and  per-
fecting Sunday-schools.  In  is.yi-'s  he  engaged
with  George  Walter  in  a  systematic  effort  to  send
free-soil  set  tiers  to  Kansas,  and  it  i-  estimated  that,
directly  or  indirectly,  they  induced  9,000  penooa
to  go  thither.  Mr.  Dwight  was  a  prolific  writer,
and  at  various  times  wa-  <>n  the  editorial  staff  of
the  New  York  "Daily  Advertiser,"  his  father-  pa-
per, the  "  American  Magazine,"  the  "  Family  Visit-
or," the  "Protestant  Vindicator,"  the  "Christian
Alliance,"  the  "  Israelite  Indeed,"  and  the
York  Presbyterian."  of  which  he  was  at  one  time
chief  editor  and  publisher.  In  his  later  years  he
was  employed  in  the  New  York  custom-house.  Mr.
Dwight  was  familiar  with  six  or  eight  languages.
At  the  time  of  his  death,  which  was  the  result  of  a
railroad  accident,  he  was  translating  educational
works  into  Spanish,  for  introduction  into  the  Span-
ish-American countries.  He  published  "A  Tour
in  Italy  in  1821 "  (New  York,  1824) ;  "  New  Gazet-
teer of  the  United  States,"  with  William  Darby
(Hartford,  1833) ;  "  President  Dwight's  Decisions
of  Questions  discussed  by  the  Senior  Class  in  Yale
College  in  1813-'4"  (New  York,  1833);  "History
of  Connecticut"  and  "The  Northern  Traveller
(1841);  "Summer  Tour  of  New  England"  (1847);
"The  Roman  Republic  of  1849"  (1851);  "The
Kansas  War ;  or  the  Exploits  of  Chivalry  in  the
19th  Century  "  (1859) ;  and  the  "  Autobiography  of
Gen.  Garibaldi,"  edited  (1859).  He  was  also  the
author  of  numerous  educational  works. — Nathan-
iel, physician,  another  brother  of  President  Dwight,
b.  in  Northampton.  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1770;  d.  in  Os-
wego, N.  Y.,  11  June.  1831,  studied  medicine  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  and  after  practising  there  became
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  was  sta-
tioned at  Governor's  Island,  New  York  harbor.  He
afterward  practised  in  Westfield,  Mass.,  and  New
London  and  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  but  in  1812  en-
tered the  ministry,  and  was  settled  at  Westchester,
Conn.,  till  1820. He  then  resumed  the  medical

Srofession,  practising  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  and
'orwich,  Conn.  Dr.  Dwight  was  one  of  the  first,
probably  the  first,  to  propose  the  present  system  of
retreats  for  the  insane.  As  early  as  1812,  when  de-
mented persons  were  still  confined  in  cellars,  and
exhibited  like  wild  beasts,  he  proposed,  in  a  com-
munication to  the  Connecticut  medical  society,  the
establishment  of  "  a  hospital  for  lunatics.'  He
prepared  a  school  geography,  the  first  published  in
this  country,  and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Great
Question  Answered"  and  a " Compendious  History
of  the  Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence. '
— President  Timothy  Dwight's  eldest  son,  Timo-
thy, b.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  29  March,  1778;  d.  13
June,  1844,  was  for  over  forty  years  a  merchant  in
New  Haven,  and  gave  $5,000  to  endow  the  '•  Dwight

Srofessorship  of  didactic  theology  "  at  Yale. —  1  'i •>  -i-
ent  Dwight's  second  son,  Benjamin  Woolsey,
Shvsician,  b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1780;
.  in  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  18  May,  1850,  was  fitted  for  col-
lege by  his  father  and  graduated  at  Yale  in  1799.
He  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia  under  Dr.
Rush  and  Dr.  Physic,  and  practised  in  Catskill,  N.
Y.,  in  1803-'5,  but  left  the  profession  on  account
of  his  health,  and  became  a  merchant  in  New  York
and  afterward  in  Catskill.  He  retired  to  a  farm
in  Clinton.  N.  Y.,  in  1831,  and  lived  there  till  his
death.  He  was  treasurer  of  Hamilton  college  in
1831-50.  Dr.  Dwight  published,  in  the  "  Memoirs
of  the  Connecticut  Academy"  for  1811,  the  first
article  ever  published  in  this  country  on  "Chronic
Debility  of  the  Stomach,"  which  waS  highly  praised


mvuiiiT


DWHillT


ami  republished  in  Kuglaml.— Benjamin  v

■on,  Benjamin  » Ibrldge,  educator,  b.  in

ii.i\.ii.  < "oini..  .">  April, 1816,  m  graduated  el
Hamilton  college,  Clinton,  v  ,1  at

Yale  theologies!  seminary  in 18JW. He  wax  tutor
Mt  Hamilton  ;  •.  founded  the  i-t  Congre-

gational church  at  Jottst*  III.,  in  1K4-1.  htit  mi  up
pastoral  work  on  account  «>f  failing  health,  ami
established  a  private  school  in  Brooklyn,  which
be  remored  in  1808  t"  Clinton,  N.  Y..  and  in
Mr.  Dwight  removed  to  New  York  city.  In  (861
h<-  ntur 1  to  Clinton  ami  devoted  1 1  i  1 1 1  -•  ■  1  f  to  lit-
erary work,  having  edu< -at «•<!  over  x*.<mm>  pupils,
For the months in 1*72 he  was editor  of the

Obieago  "  interior." He  raoeired  the  decree  of

I'h.  I>.  fn.ni New York  university  in 1808, I>r.

Dwighl  hee  oontributed  largely  to  the  literature

of  education.  theology,  philology,  ami  genealogy,
ami  has  published  "  Burner  Christian  Education"
(New  York.  lMo!>);  "Modem  Philology  "  {'2  vols.,
l^'.J':  ••  History  of  the  Strong  Family"  (2  vols.,
Albany.  1M7D;  ami  "  History  of  the  Dwighl  Fam-
ily" i2  viiN.,  New  York,  1*7-1);  ami  has  ready  for
publication  (1887)  "Higher  Culture  of  Woman"
and  "•The  True  Doctrine  of  Divine  Providence." —
Another  son  of  Benjamin  Woolsev.  Theodore
William,  jurist.  1).  in  Cntskill,  N.  Y.,  18  July,
1896.  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college,  Clinton,
N.  Y.,  in  1840,  and  studied  at  Yale  law-school  in
lK41-'2.  He  was  tutor  at  Hamilton  in  1842-X  and
in  1846-'58  held  there  the  chair  of  law.  history,
civil  polity,  and  political  economy.  In  connection
with  his  professorship  he  also  established  a  depart-
ment of  law,  and  in  1858  was  elected  professor  of
municipal  law  in  Columbia  college,  New  York.  On
the  organization  of  Columbia  law-school,  he  became
its  warden.  Prof.  Dwight  has  made  a  reputation
as  one  of  the  most  successful  living  teachers  of  law.
Ha  has  siren  courses  of  lectures  on  law  at  Cornell
in  186»-"71.  and  at  Amherst  in  1870-'2.  He  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
1867  and  of  its  judiciary  committee,  vice-president
of  the  State  board  of  public  charities  in  1878,  presi-
dent of  the  State  prison  association  in  1874,  and
an  active  member  of  the  New  York  "  Committee
of  Seventy."  <  >n  :10  Dec,  1873,  Gov,  Dix  appoint-
ed him  a  member  of  the  commission  of  appeals,
which  in  1874-'5  aided  the  court  of  appeals  to
clear  its  docket. He  is  an  associate  editor  of  the

"  American  Law
Register,"  pub-
Usned  In  Philadel-
phia, and  several
of  his  contribu-
tions have  been
published  sepa-
rately, including
"Trial  bv  Im-
peachmcnt''(1867).
In  1886  he  was
counsel  for  five
professors  <>f  An*

dovcr  theological
seminary,  against
whom  complaints
Of  heterodoxy  had

bean  made  before

the iH.ard of vis-
.  and his argument was published  (Boston,
. He  has  also  published  "Charitable  I  -
embodying  his  researches in the Hose  will

Xed  iii New  York  in lxW  (S  vols.,  ls'tt>.  and
r  legal arguments,  and  wrote  the  first
re|M,rt  of  the  State  board  of  charities,  ex-
hibiting the  abuses  of the  poor-law  •ystem  at


tfiUrS**  <&"<&>*


"CslCl—y


</**«,  t/y jf*\  fL


that time  in fore. JJ,. is  author  of  a  pamphlet
on  th.-  "Influence  of  the  Writing
ringtOO  OH  American Political li
ton,  1887),  and  has  edited  Henry  Sumner  Maine's
"Ancient Law" (New York. \m\).  —  President
Pwight's  third  w»n.  James  (17H4-1868).  was  a  suc-
cessful merchant  ; and  his  *,,!,,  Timolln.  educa-
tor.!., in  Norwich,  Conn..  16  N'o\
ated  at Yale  in 1H4»,  studied  th.-oloirr  there  in

S.wai  a  tu-
tor in  the  college
in lHol-7). an.l

studied  at  Bonn

and  Berlin,  (i.-r-
manv.  in  lKi6-
X  In  the  lat-
ter year  he  was
chosen  professor
of  sacred  litera-
ture and
Testament  Greek
in  Yale  theo-
logical seminary.
He  hits  taken
an  active  inter-
est in  the  affairs
of  Yale  universi-
ty, and  its  finan-
cial  growth  has

been  largely  due  to  his  |M-rsonal  efforts.  In  1886
he  was  chosen  the  successor  of  Noah  Porter  as
president,  and  was  formally  installed  into  the
office  on  1  Julv,  delivering  an  inaugural  address,
which  was  published,  with  an  account  of  the  cere-
monies at  nis  induction,  in  pamphlet-form  (New
Haven.  1886). President  Dwighl  baa  been  one  of

th litors  of  the  "New Kiiglander"  since 1866,

and  in  1870-'l  published  a  series  of  articles  in  it
on  "The  True  Ideal  of  an  American  I'nivcrsity."
which  was  afterward  issued  separately,  and  at-
tracted much  attention.  He  was  a  member
of  the  American  committee  for  the  rerjsjoa  "f
the  English  version  of  the  Bible,  from  1N7N  till
its  completion  in  1HHT».  —  The  elder  President
Dwight'i  fifth  son.  Serene  Edwards,  educator,
b.  in  Greenfield  Hill.  Conn.,  is  May.  17m;  :  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  Nov.,  1850,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1H03,  and  after  teaching  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  and  acting  as  his  father's  amanuensis,
was  tutor  at  Yale  in  lstMU'lt).  He  studied  law  at
the  same  time,  and  practised  in  New  Haven  with
success  in  1N10-'16.  In  1M12.  a  dose  of  mercury,
given  him  during  a  fever,  paused  a  painful  erujn
tion,  from  which  he  suffered  all  his  life.  Deriding
to  become  ■  clergyman,  he  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1816,  and  was  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  senate  in
1816-'7. He  was  then  ordained  pastor  of  the  Park

street  church.  Boston,  and  continued  there  till  i*2<».

when  he  resigned  on  account  of  failing  health  and
returned  to  New  Haven,  where  he  engaged  in  liter-
ary work,  and  conducted,  with  his  brother  Henry,
In  1896-71,  the  New  Haven  gymnasium,  a  board-
ing-school for  Ixiys.  He  WW  chosen  president  of
Hamilton  OOUege,  Clinton.  N.  Y..  in  OSS*  but  ill-
ness and  psenjuarj  considerations  forced  him  to
resign  in  \X1~>.  He  was  agent  for  the  Pennsylvania
colonization  society  in  1888,  and  in  the  sen
removed  to  New  York,  where  he  sjient  his  remain-
imr  fean  "among  book*  by  day,  ami  in  a  lonely
lH>arding-hous4-  by  night,"  a  prey  to  tin-  distressing
maladj  that  finally  ended  his  life.  Yale  gave  him
ree  of  D.  D.  in  1885.  Dr.  Dwight  published
••I.ifeof  David  Brainerd"(18SS);  "  Life  and  Works
of  Jonathan  Edwards,"  his  great-grandfathi
York.  n»  i  ;  "The  Hebrew  Wife,"


di-


i>S4


DWYKU


DYE


signed  to  show  the  unlawfulness  of  marrying  a
deceased  wife's  sister  (New  York.  \K\(\;  republished
in  England):  a  memoir  <>f  his  father.  President
Dwight,  prefixed  to  the  latter's  "Theologv";  ami
various  sermons  and  addresses.  His  "Select  Dis-
oonraes,"  with  a  memoir  by  his  brother,  the  Rev.
William  T.  Dwight,  D.  D.,  appeared  after  his  death
(Boston,  1851).— His  wife,  Susan  Edwards  (1788-
1839),  daughter  of  David  Daggett,  of  Now  Haven,
aided  her  husband  in  preparing  the  works  of  Jona-
tli.ui  Kdwards.  and  published  an  "Abridgment  of
the  Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Susan  Huntington." — A  sev-
enth son  of  President  Timothy  Dwight(the  first  of
the  name),  William  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.  in
Greenfield  Hill,  Conn.,  15  June,  1795;  d.  in  An-
dover,  Mass.,  22  Oct.,  1865,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813.  He  was  his  father's  amanuensis  for  a  year,
and  was  a  tutor  at  Yale  in  1817-19.  He  then  stud-
ied law  with  Charles  Chauncey,  of  Philadelphia,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821,  and  practised  un-
til L881,  when  he  decided  to  enter  the  ministry,  and
in  1832  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  3d  Congrega-
tional church  of  Portland,  Me.,  where  he  remained
till  the  year  before  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the
most  prominent  and  influential  clergyman  in  the
state,  and  a  popular  preacher.  Bowdoin  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1840,  and  he  was  for  some
time  one  of  its  board  of  overseers.  Dr.  Dwight  was
frequently  moderator  of  ecclesiastical  councds,  and
a  member  of  many  charitable  and  religious  associa-
tions. He  published  sermons  and  addresses,  be-
sides the  memoir  of  his  brother  Sereno,  mentioned
above. — An  eighth  son,  Henry  Edwin,  author,  b.
in  New  Haven,*19  April,  1797;  d.  there,  11  Aug.,
1832,  was  graduated  at  Y'ale  in  1815,  and  after
serving  as  clerk  in  the  stores  of  his  brothers  Ben-
jamin in  Catskill,  and  Timothy  in  New  Haven,
studied  divinity  at  Andover  in  1823-'4.  Feeble
health  induced  him  to  give  up  the  idea  of  entering
the  ministry,  and,  after  studying  at  the  University
of  Gottingen  in  1824-'8,  he  returned  and  estab-
lished, with  Rev.  Cornelius  Tuthill  and  Nathaniel
Chauncey,  a  weekly  magazine  called  the  "  Micro-
scope," to  which  James  G.  Percival,  Prof.  Fisher,
and  President  Dwight  were  occasional  contributors,
but  which  was  soon  discontinued  from  want  of  pe-
cuniary support.  In  1828-'31,  with  his  brother
Sereno,  he  conducted  a  boarding-school  called  the
"New  Haven  Gymnasium."  Mr.  Dwight  lectured
in  New  York  and  Philadelphia  on  his  European
experiences,  and  just  before  his  death  declined  a
professorship  in  the  New  York  university.  He
published  "  Travels  in  the  North  of  Germany "
(New  York,  1826).

DWYER,  John  H.,  actor,  b.  in  Ireland;  d.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  15  Dec,  1843.  He  was  the  son  of
an  Irian  gentleman  who  intended  him  for  the  law,
but,  disliking  that  profession,  he  made  his  first
appearance,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  his  friends,
at  the  Theatre  royal,  Dublin,  and  met  with  a  suc-
cess that  confirmed  him  in  his  love  for  the  stage.
After  playing  in  various  provincial  theatres  he  ap-
peared at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  London,  1  May,  1802,
as  Belcour  in  "  The  West  Indian,"  with  great  ap-

firobation,  and  was  immediately  engaged  as  the
ight  comedian  of  the  theatre.  He  held  this  situ-
ation for  three  years,  then  gave  it  up,  and  in  1810
came  to  this  country,  where  he  made  his  first  ap-
pearance at  the  Park  theatre.  New  York,  as  Bel-
cour, meeting  with  great  success.  He  made  his
last  appearance  on  the  stage  at  the  National  opera-
house,  on  the  corner  of  Leonard  and  Church  st  net  <,
80  May,  1839,  in  the  character  of  Sir  John  Falstaff.
DYAR,  or  DYER,  Mary  A.,  Quaker,  d.  in  Bos-
ton, 1  June,  1680. She  was  the  wife  of  William


Dyar,  who  removed  to  Rhode  Island  in  1638.  In
September,  1689,  of  four  |>ersons  ordered  to  depart
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  colony  of  Riaasacho-
setts  on  pain  of  death,  Mrs.  Dyar,  who  was  a  fol-
lower of  Anne  Hutchinson  and  had  shared  her
exile,  obeyed.  In  October  she  returned  on  purpose
to  offer  up  her  life.  She  and  others  were  a-
»ent  to  prison,  and  were  arraigned  under  a  law
banishing  Quakers  from  the  colony  on  pain  of
death.  When  the  sentence  was  pronounced  she  ex-
claimed: "The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done."  and  re-
turned to  the  prison  "  full  of  joy."  Three  were
led  forth  to  execution.  Mary  Dyar  was  reprieved ;
yet  not  till  the  rope  had  been  fastened  round  her
neck  and  she  had  prepared ,  herself  for  death.
Transported  with  enthusiasm,  she  exclaimed:
"  Let  me  suffer  as  mv  brethren  unless  you  annul
your  wicked  law."  Her  reprieve  had  been  granted
at  the  request  of  her  son,  and  on  condition  that
she  should  depart  in  forty-eight  hours  and  should
not  return.  Against  her  wiU  she  was  again  con-
veyed out  of  the  colony,  but  returned,  and  was
hanged  on  Boston  common  on  the  charge  of  "  re-
bellious sedition  and  obtruding  herself  after  ban-
ishment upon  pain  of  death."

DYCKMAN,  Garrett  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  21  May,  1868.  He  be-
gan his  military  career  in  the  Mexican  war,  enter-
ing the  army  as  a  captain,  and  participating  in  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  the  battles  of  National  Bridge,
Contreras,  and  Cerro  Gordo,  where  he  was  severely
wounded,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  bre vetted  colonel
for  bravery  and  meritorious  conduct,  and  on  his
return  was  elected  register  of  the  county  of  New
York.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  1st  New  York  regiment,  and
afterward  became  its  colonel.  He  was  a  candidate,
in  August,  1859,  for  the  gold  snuff-box  in  which
the  freedom  of  the  city  of  New  York  had  been
officially  given  to  Andrew  Jackson  forty  years  be-
fore. See  Burnett,  Ward  Benjamin.

DYE,  William  McEntyre,  soldier,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Pa.,  26  Jan.,  1831.  He  was  appointed  to
the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1853,  served  in  the  8th  infantry  on  fron-
tier and  garrison  duty,  was  promoted  1st  lieuten-
ant in  1856,  and  captain,  14  May,  1861.  After
being  employed  on  mustering  and  recruiting  ser-
vice ne  became  colonel  of  the  20th  Iowa  regiment,
25  Aug.,  1862,  served  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas  in
1862-'3,  receiving  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallantry
at  Vicksburg,  and  led  a  brigade  in  the  Red  river
campaign  of  1864,  for  which  he  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel  on  28  May.  He  commanded  a
brigade  at  Mobile  bay  in  September,  and,  after
taking  part  in  several  expeditions,  was  acting  as-
sistant provost-marshal-general  of  Kansas,  Ne-
braska, Colorado,  and  Dakota  in  1865.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  13
March,  1865,  for  services  during  the  war,  and
colonel  in  the  regular  army  on  9  April  for  gal-
lantry in  the  Mobile  campaign.  He  was  promoted
major  of  the  4th  infantry,  14  Jan.,  1866,  served  in
various  garrisons,  and  on  30  Sept.,  1870,  was  hon-
orably discharged  at  his  own  request.  He  entered
the  Egyptian  service  late  in  1873,  and  served  as
assistant  to  the  chief  of  staff  in  the  Abyssinian  ex-
pedition, where  he  was  wounded.  He  returned  to
this  country  in  1879,  was  chief  of  police  of  the
District  of  Columbia  in  1883-'6,  and  is  now  (1887)
chief  of  the  special  examination  division  of  the
pension  office  in  Washington.  He  has  published
"Moslem  Egypt  and  Christian  Abyssinia;  or.
Military  Service  under  the  Khedive  "  (1880).


dykr


DYKR


no


\  l'.  S.  army,  he  was  placed in  charge  <>f  tin-
■MM  luirt-an  in  Washington,  D.  ('.,  with  the


l»\  I  i: \i.  \. in. 1. 1  Bridle ildier.b.  in  BJch-

nx'tnl,  \'»..  i<i  .lan..  1816;  a.  in  Washington,  !'
90  Sliiv  i"7 1. II'  was  graduated  at  the  U.S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1887,  served  in  garrison  at For-
tress \  a.,  in  thi"  Florida  warof  I837-*8,and
uly  at  various  arsenal-' in l888-'46,

chief  of  ordnance  of  the  army  Invading
Iforioo  in  l846-*8,  daring  a  |>art  of  which  time  he
was  on  the  staff  of  Oen.  Sterling  Price,  and  was
engaged  at  <  anada,  Taos,  where  In-  WW  woim<lc<l
M7.  ami  Santa  Cruz  >\<-  Rosalcs,  Mexico,
receiving  for  his  services  the  brevets  of  |a|  lieu-
tenant ami  captain.  He  WM  afterward  in  com-
mand of  North  Carolina  arsenal.  At  the  begin-
uing  of  the  civil  war  (apt.  Dyer  was  active  in
promoting  the  effloienOTOI  the  ordnance  depart-
ment, lie  invented  the  Dyer  projectile  for  cannon.
He  was  in  command  of  the  Springfield  armory  in
1861  '4.  and  greatly  extended  the  manufacture  of
small-arms  for  the  army.  In  1864  »s  ehief  of  ord-
nance, r

ordnance  bureau  in  Washington,
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  he  retained  this
OfBos  till  his  death.  In  March,  1865,  he  was  brc-
vett.-d  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  faithful,
meritorious,  and  distinguished  services.

D\  Kit,  Charles  (ilfford,  artist.  b>  in  Chicago  in
1846.  He  was  graduated  at  the  C  S.  naval  acade-
my, then  in  Newport,  It.  I„  and  saw  some  service
in  the  civil  war,  hut  resigned  his  commission  on
account  of  Impelled  health,  went  to  Kurope,  and
.studied  art  in  Paris  under  Jacquesson  de  la  Chev-
reu-e.  He  entered  the  Royal  academy  at  Munich
in  1871,  and  has  sj>ent  most  of  his  professional  life
then-  and  in  Paris,  with  the  exception  of  six  winters
in  Rome,  four  summers  in  Venice,  and  prolonged
working-tours  in  Egypt  and  Syria.  Among  tdfl
more  important  works  are  "St.  Mark's,  Venice,
with  Armenian  Chapel,"  "On  Linden  when  the
Sun  was  Low."  "  Venice  at  Birth  of  Day,"  "  Morn-
ing on  the  Riva.  Venice."  ••  Historical  Still-Life  of
the  Seventeenth  Century,"  and  "  Among  the
Domes  of  St.  Mark's."

DYKR,  Charles  Volney,  Abolitionist,  b.  in
Clarendon.  Vt..  12  June,  1808;  d.  at  Lake  View,
near  Chicago,  24  April,  1878.  He  was  graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  Middleburv  college
in  I860,  and  U-gan  practice  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in
1831,  but  removed  in  1835  to  Chicago,  and  soon
became  acting  surgeon  in  Fort  Dearborn.  He  was
successful  in  his  practice  and  business  adventures,
retiring  bom  the  former  in  1854,  and  becoming
agent  for  the  "underground  railroad"  in  Chicago.
One  instance  illustrates  the  courage  of  Dr.  Dyer:
In  1846  a  fugitive  from  Kentucky  was  caught  in
Chicago  by  his  master  and  an  armed  posse,  bound
tightly  with  ropes,  and  guarded  while  a  man  went
for  a  blacksmith  to  rivet  the  manacles  that  w.  re
to  be  put  uixm  him.  Dr.  Dyer,  hearing  of  the
arrest,  went  hurriedly  to  the  Mansion  house  and
to  the  room  where  the  victim  was  confined,  hurst
Open  the  door,  cut  the  cords,  and  told  the  fugitive
to  go,  which  he  did  before  his  captors  recovered
from  their  surprise  and  bewilderment  at  Midi  un-
•  ted  and  summary  proceedings.  A  bully,  with
brandishing  Bowie-knife,  rushed  toward  the  doc-
tor, who  stood  his  ground  and  knocked  down  his
assailant with  his  cane. Sympathising  Mends

subsequently  presented the  doctor  a  gold-headed

hickory  cane  of  gigantic  proportions, appropriately
Ineoribed,  which  is  now  m  the  library  of  the  Chi-
cago historical  society.  At  an  anti-slavery  conven-
tion in  l*4«i  at  Chicago.  Dr.  Dyer  wet  chairman  of

the  committee  for  establishing  the  "National  Km"
at  Washington,  an  organ  of  the  Abolition  i>arty,


established  7  Jan., 1*17. Dr. Dyer  had  a  genial

nature,  which  manifested  Itself  In  reedy  witticisms

and  pleasant  conversation,  except  when  !

un-  in  contact  with  -hams,  impostor*. Off  BJpO-
trite*,  for  which  he  had  a  most  profound  contempt
and  abundant  words  tOeXpfSM  In*  detestation.  In
recognition  of  Dr.  Dyer's  sterling  int  I  the

great  service  he  had  rendered  the  oaase  of  sjHI*

President  Lincoln,  who  knew  hfsj  w.  II.
appointed  him  In  1*M  judge  of  the  mixed  curt
at  Sierra  Leone,  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-
trade,  after  which  ap|M»intuient  he  passed  two
yiir*  travelling  in  Europe,

DYKR,  David  Patterson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bsnry
county.  Va..  12  Feb..  ISC}*.  Be  removed  to  Missouri
in  1K41.  and  was  educated  at  the  common  schools
and  at  St.  Charles  college,  studied  law  at Bowling

Green,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  March,  1866;

He was elected district prosecuting  attorney  in

ihim),  and  in  1866-mB  was  i  member  of  the  legfehv-

turc.  He  recruited  ami  couimandcd  the  l!'i
mint  of  Missouri  rolttntesr  infantry  during  a  part
of  the  civil  war,  participated  in  the  campaigns
against  Mobile  in  1805.  and  in  1866  was  chosen
secretary  of  the  state  senate.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Chicago  national  Republican  convention  in
1868,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  to  congress
from  Missouri,  earring  <>n  the  committees  on  ter-
ritories and  agriculture,  and  was  l'.  S.  attorney
for  the  eastern  district  of  Missouri  in  lN75-'6.

DYER,  Kliphalet,  jurist,  h.  in  Windham,
Conn.,  2*  Sept,  1721  :  d.  there.  18  May,  1N07.  lb-
was  graduated  at  Vale  in  1740.  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  in  1746,  after  which  he
was  town  clerk  and  justice  of  the  peace  in  Wind-
ham. He  was  many  times  member  of  the  legis-
islature  between  1747  and  17<i2.  and  was  the  origi-
nal promoter  of  the  project  to  establish  a  Connecti-
cut colony  in  the  valley  of  the  Susquehanna.  In
1753  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  to  pur-
chase the  title  to  the  land  selected  for  the  promised
colony  at  Wyoming,  and  in  1755  was  agent  to  j>e-
titioii  the  general  assembly  in  its  behalf.  The
French  and  Indian  wars  interrupted  the  plan,  and
in  August,  1785,  Mr.  Dyer  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
a  regiment  sent  to  reduce  Crown  Point.  He  was
colonel  of  a  regiment  sent  against  Canada  in  175*.
and  in  1702-'84  was  annually  elected  an  assist-
ant. As  an  active  member  of  the  Susquehanna
land  company,  he  was  sent  as  their  agent,  in  17»*1,
to  England,  but  failed  in  his  effort  to  obtain  con-
firmation from  the  crown  of  the  title  t<>  tin  Wyo-
ming region.  «»n  his  return  he  became  comptroller
of  the  port  of  New  London,  and  in  September,
176'i,  he  was  the  first  of  the  commissioners  sent  to
the  stamp-act  congress  from  Connecticut.  After-
ward, with  a  majority  of  the  Connecticut  assist-
ants, he  withdrew  from  the  governor's  house  rather
than  assist  in  his  taking  the  oath  to  carry  out the

provisions  of  the  act. CoL  Dyer  wee  elected  Judge
of  the  superior  court  in  1766,  and  held  that  oflea

till 17'.t:(.  serving during the last four ft
chief  justice. He  was  a  delegate  to  the 1  st Conti-
nental congress  in  1744,  and  was  re^essoted  to  each
succeeding  congress,  with  the  exception  of  those  of

1776  and  1 77:». Be  beoameaaeambsrof  the  stats

committee  of  safety  on  its  formation  in  May.  1775,
ami  in  December,  1776.  declined  an  appomtaent

as brigadier-general  of militia. Vale gave him
nee  of  D.  D.  In  1787. John  Adams  sjiid  of

him:  "  Dyer  is  long-winded  and  roundabout. OP-
Miire  and  cloudy,  very  talkative  ami  very  tedious,
bonost  worthy  man;  means  and  judges
well."  He  published  a  jwmphlet  entitled  "Re-
markson  Dr.  Gale's  Letter"  t Philadelphia,  1769).


386


DYEB


DZIER0ZYNSK1X


DYER,  Ilenian,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shaftsbury,
Vt.,  24  Sept.,  1M 10.  II,.  was  graduated  ut  Ken-
yon  in  is:!:{,  having  supported  himself  by  taking
charge  of  the  preparatory  depart  incut,  ami  after-
ward entered  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry.
He  taught  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1840-'3,  and  then
WM  made  professor  in  the  Western  university  of
Pennsylvania  there,  becoming  its  pioident  in
1844  lie  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  184!)  in  the
service  of  the  American  Sunday-school  union,  and
afterward  became  secretary  and  general  manager
of  the  Evangel  ical-knowledge  society.  He  became
editor  of  the  "Episcopal  Quarterly  Review"  in
New  York  in  1854,  and  in  1862  declined  the  bish-
opric of  Kansas.  He  was  made  a  member  of  the
board  of  missions  in  1868,  and  in  1871  of  its  In-
dian and  Freedman's  committees.  In  1875  he
made  a  tour  through  Mexico  with  Bishop  Lee,
which  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a  bishopric
there.  In  1880  he  was  forced  by  failing  health  to
retire  from  active  work.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Trinity  in  1843.  Dr.  Dyer  has  pub-
lished "  Voice  of  the  Lord  upon  the  Waters  "  (New
York,  1870),  and  "  Records  of  an  Active  Life,"  an
autobiography  (1886),  and  edited  a  series  of  evan-

f-elicai  biographies. — His  wife,  Catherine  Corne-
ia.  author,  b.  in  Ludlowville,  N.  Y.,  is  the  daugh-
ter of  Arad  Joy.  She  has  been  actively  engaged
in  philanthropic  work,  has  travelled  widely  with
her  husband,  and  contributed  much  to  current  lit-
erature. She  has  published  "  Henry  and  the  Bird's
Nest "  (Philadelphia,  1852) ;  "  Sunny  Days  Abroad,
or  the  Old  World  seen  with  Young  Eyes"  (New
York,  1870) ;  "  Brief  History  of  the  Joy  Family "
(1876);  "Records  of  the  Dyer  Family"  (1884);
and,  with  Marcia  A.  Hall,  "  Christmas  at  Fern
Lodge  "  (1860).  She  has  also  edited  her  husband's
autobiography,  noticed  above.

DYER,  Sidney,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cambridge,
N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1814.  He  was  chiefly  self-taught,
but  studied  for  a  time  in  the  Amity  street  classical
school  in  New  York  city.  At  an  early  age  he  was
thrown  upon  his  own  exertions,  and,  after  serving
in  the  army  in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  became,  in
1836,  a  student  of  theology.  He  was  ordained  as  a
Baptist  clergyman  in  1842,  and  shortly  afterward
served  as  a  missionary  among  the  Choctaws,  soon
becoming  secretary  of  the  Indian  mission  Iward  in
Louisville,  Ky.  He  removed  to  Indianapolis  in
1852,  and  in  1859  was  called  to  Philadelphia  as
district  secretary  of  the  American  Baptist  publica-
tion society,  which  office  he  has  since  retained.
Mr.  Dyer  has  travelled  extensively  in  the  United
States  and  Canada,  and  is  a  voluminous  writer.
His  earlier  poems,  which  appeared  in  various
magazines,  were  collected  into  a  volume  entitled
"Voices  of  Nature"  (Louisville,  1850).  He  has
also  published,  beside  occasional  sermons,  "  Psalm-
ist for  the  use  of  Baptist  Churches  "(1854) ;  "  Songs
and  Ballads"  (New  York,  1&57);  "The  Drunkard's
Child  "  (1866) ;  "  Great  Wonders  in  Little  Things  "
(Philadelphia,  1871);  "Black  Diamonds"  (1873);
"  Home  and  Abroad  "  (1874) ;  "  Hoofs  and  Claws  "
(1875);  "Ocean  Gardens  and  Palaces"  (1877);
"Elmdale  Lyceum"  (1879),  and  other  works.  He
is  also  the  author  of  several  cantatas,  including
"  Ruth "  and  "  The  Winter  Entertainment.
Among  his  popular  verses  are  "The  Beautiful
Ladder,"  "  The  Songs  my  Mother  Sung,"  and
"  The  Grave  of  Ben  Bolt." — His  daughter,  Mat  tic,
author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  23  Nov.,  1842,  was
educated  at  a  female  seminary  in  Indianapolis,


Ind.,  and  was  afterward  a  teacher  in  the  Ladoga
female  seminary.  In  I860  she  married  James  H.
Britts,  of  Ladoga,  Ind.  she  began  to  write  tan
various  literary  journals  at  an  early  age,  and  has
published  "Edward  Lee"  (Philadelphia,  1865);
"Harrv  Henderson"  (1880);  "Honest  and  Earn-
est "  (1881) ;  "  Boys  and  Girls  of  Deep  Glen  "  (1882) ;
u Better  than  Gold"  (1883):  "Earl  Armstrong"
(1885);  "  Chrissie  "  (1886) ;  "Marcia,  an  American
Girl  "  (Chicago,  1886) ;  "  Nobody's  Bov  "  ( 1  -

DTMOND,  Alfred  Hutchinson,  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Crovden,  Surrey,  England,  21  Aug.,
1827.  He  was  educated  at  the  Friends'  school  m
Croyden,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in
early  life.  In  1857  he  joined  the  staff  of  the  Lon-
don "  Morning  Star,"  ultimately  becoming  its  man-
ager, and  retaining  that  office  till  the  amalgama-
tion of  the  paper,  in  1869,  with  the  London  "  Daily
News."  In  that  year  he  came  to  Canada,  and  dur-
ing the  nine  succeeding  years  was  one  of  the  edi-
torial writers  on  the  Toronto  "  Globe."  At  the
general  election  in  1874,  following  the  downfall
of  the  Macdonald  government,  Mr.  Dymond  was
elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  North
York,  and  represented  it  until  his  defeat  in  1878.
In  1880  he  was  appointed  the  executive  officer  of
the  Ontario  agricultural  commission,  and  prepared
its  report  (5  vols.,  1881).  In  April,  1881,  he  was
appointed  by  the  Ontario  government  principal  of
the  institution  for  the  education  of  the  blind  at
Brantford,  an  office  which  he  now  (1887)  holds.
He  is  the  author  of  a  work  opposing  capital  pun-
ishment, "  The  Law  on  its  Trial "  (London,  1865).

DTOTT,  John,  actor,  b.  in  England  in  1812 ;  d.
in  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,  1876.  He  early
became  a  favorite  at  the  Theatre  royal,  York,  Eng-
land, and  made  his  first  appearance  in  this  country
on  2  Sept.,  1844,  at  the  Park  theatre,  New  York,
playing  lago  to  the  Othello  of  James  R.  Anderson,
another  English  actor.  For  the  next  quarter  of  a
century  he  did  good  work  as  leading  man,  chiefly
in  New  York  city,  appearing  there  at  the  old  Cham-
bers street  theatre,  the  Broadway  theatre,  and  Wal-
lack's  theatre  in  Broome  street.  He  was  a  fair
Shakespearean  scholar,  and  was  known  as  a  correct
reader.  Among  his  best-remembered  parts  are
lago  and  Sir  Giles  Overreach.  About  1866  he  re-
tired from  the  stage  and  assisted  his  brother  in
editing  a  newspaper  at  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  suc-
ceeding to  the  chief  editorship  on  the  death  of  the
latter.  His  wife  was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the
Wallack  theatre  company.

DZIEROZYNSK1N,  Francis,  Jesuit,  b.  in  Or-
sani,  Poland,  in  1779;  d.  in  Frederick,  Md.,  in
1850.  He  entered  the  novitiate  of  the  Society  of
Jesus  in  1794  After  his  ordination  he  was  made
professor  of  theology  in  the  University  of  Polotzk,
and  continued  there  till  1820,  when  he  was  banished
by  the  Russian  government  and  came  to  the  United
States,  where  he  landed  in  1821.  He  was  appointed
superior  of  the  Jesuits  of  the  United  States  in  1  sj:;.
and  was  active  and  successful  in  extending  the  in-
fluence of  his  order  throughout  the  country.  He
founded,  during  his  supenorship,  the  College  of  St.
John  in  Frederick,  Md.,  and  gave  great  impetus  to
education  in  this  and  in  other  ways.  On  tne  expi-
ration of  his  term,  in  1830,  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  theology  in  Georgetown  college,  and  in
1834  he  took  charge  of  the  Jesuit  novitiate  of
Frederick.  He  was  created  provincial  of  the  Jesu-
its in  1840.  and  during  his  term  of  office  founded
the  College  of  the  Holy  Cross,  Worcester,  Mass.


EtAGLB


m


E


\  Vl»v  James  Buchanan,  engineer,  b.  in  Law-
renceburg,  Itui  au,  N.  I'..

Bahama  i-lamls.  H  March,  1887.  II. •  curly  ihowtd  I
great  interest  in  machinery, and  at  the  age  of  tan
I  rooted  model*  of  saw-mil  la,  tin-,  nginea.steam-
boaia,  and  other  machines.  In  1888  he  settled  in
St.  Louis,  where.  Iiesides  Itcing  variously  employed.
ha aoonircd considerable knowledge  ox  civil  cngi-
Bearing  and  cognate  subject*.  He  constructed  a
diving-lied  boa]  in  1849  to  reooTer  the  cargoes
uf  sunken  steamers,  and  mmiii  afterward  designed
larger  boat*,  with  novel  and  powerful  machinery.
for  pumping  out  the  sand  and  water,  and  lifting
the  entire  hull  and  cargo.  Many  valuable  steamers
win-  set  afloat  and  restored  to  usefulness  by  his
method! He  disftoaed  of his  interests  in  these

inventions  in
1845.  and  then
established  in  St.
Ixmis  the  fir-t
glass-works  west
of  the  Ohio  riv-
er. In  1856  he
made  a  projK>-
Mtiun  to  Bjon-
gress  to  keep  the
channels  of  the
Mississippi,  Mis-
souri, Ohio,  and
Arkansas  rivers
clear  of  snags,
{  ^  wU' ;  wrecks,  and  ot  It-

er obstructions
for a term of
_^  years, but this

' 0 , Z<?  ,;*? j  M offer  was  not  ac-
o^2-< /c/. (0<2^£J. ccptcd. In  1861

he  was  called  to
Washington  and  consulted  by  the  president  and  his
cabinet  in  relation  to  the  practicability  of  using
light  iron-clad  vessels  on  the  Mississippi  and  its
tributaries.  Soon  afterward  he  designed  and  con-
structed eight  iron-clad  steamers,  fully  equipped,
within  100  days.  These  were  employed  in  the
capture  of  Fori  Ilenrv  in  Februarv.  1868, a  month
earlier  than  the  conflict  between  the  "  Merrimac  "
and  "  Monitor."  Subsequently,  in  18(52.  he  con-
structed numerous  other  iron-elads  and  mortar-
boat*,  which  proved  of  great  value  in  the  cam-
paign- of  Grant  and  in  the  capture  of  Mobile  by
Farragut.  From  1N(»7  till  1*74  be  was  engaged  in
the  construction  of  the  steel  arch  bridge  across  the
Mississippi  at  St.  Louis.  The  central  arch  of  this
bridge  has  a  clear  span  of  520  feet,  and  has  been
pronounced  the  finest  specimen  of  metal  arch  con-
struction in  the  World.  This  structure  ranks  among
the  noted  bridges  of  the  world.  On  the  completion
of  this  enterprise,  Mr.  Fads  turned  his  attention  to
the  deepening  Of  the  Mississippi  hy  means  of  jet-
ties. Mis  plans,  which  were  strongly  op|toscd  by
the  chief  engineers  of  the  l\  S.  army,  to  whom  the
government  naturally  looked  for  official  advice,
were  submitted  to  congress,  and  finally  I  bill  was
passed  granting  him  permission  to  attempt  the
improvement  oi  the  Sooth  Pass.  Four  vears  after
-in  work  the  V.  s.  inspecting  officer  reported
that  the  maximum  depth  proposed  had  Ix-cn  se-
cured throughout  the  jetty.  'I  his  was  a  great  tri-
umph tor  Mr.  Fads.  as  it  was  a  practical  demon-
stration of  his  tli-  -  ibeequently  he  outlined
one  of  the  grandest  plans  that  hydraulic  — »g*f  f


big  has  ever  undertaken,  having  for  it-  ol.j.ct  the
don of the >l<ep water from the <Julf of
M.\i<o  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio, into  the

heart  of  the Mississippi  valley. This  magnifi.

channel  was  to  he  made  permanent  by  practically

putting  an  end  to  the  caving  of  its'  banks,  iii
1n.no  congress  reported  in  favor  of  the  adoption  of
the  jetty  system,  as  devised  by  him.  and  appointed
a  commission,  of  which  he  was  made  a  iiiciuImt.
A  large  sum  of  money  was  appropriated  b\
grass  for  tin-  work,  and  along  |  small  BOTtlM  of
the  river  the  improvement  was  construct..!.  Con-
gress afterward  discontinued  its  appropriation.,
but  enough  had  been  done  to  establish  the  entire
practicability  of  the  plan.  More  recently  Mr.  Kads
proposed  a  ship-railway  to  In-  OOnetlVCtod  across
the  isthmus  of  lehnantopee,  and  after  failing  to
induce  the  government  to  attempt  the  execution
of  this  work,  be  formed  a  private  company,  for  the
incor  1  Miration  of  which  a  bill  was  passed  by  the  I  S.
senate  in  Inn?.  Such  an  undertaking  was  shown
by  him  to  l>e  entirety  feasible,  and  he  considered
it  far  more  economical  than  a  canal.  It  was  Mr.
Kads's  purpose  to  devote  the  remaining  enerf
of  his  life  to  the  prosecution  of  this  scheme.  He
also  examined  and  reported  Upon  the  Uir  at  the
mouth  of  the  St.  John's  river.  Fla..  the  impn.v.  -
ments  of  the  Sacramento  river,  the  harbor  of  To-
ronto, the  port  of  Vera  Cruz,  the  harborof  Tam-
pico.  the  harbor  of  Galveston,  and  the  estuary  and
port  of  the  Mersey,  in  Fngland.  Mr.  Fads  was
president  of  the  St.  L.-uis  academy  of  sgienow  for
two  terms,  and  in  1872  was  elected  a  member  of
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  apon  him  by  the  OniTeratty
of  Missouri.  In  1881  he  addressed  the  British  as-
sociation for  the  advancement  of  science  at  York
on  the  improvement  of  the  Mississippi,  and  also
u|>on  the  Tehuantejiec  ship-canal.  Three  years
later  be  received  the  Albert  medal  of  the  SooJetyof
arts  in  token  of  its  appreciation  of  the  services  he
had  rendered  to  the  science  of  engineering.  Mr.
Fads  was  the  first  citizen  of  the  United  States
upon  whom  this  medal  has  been  conferred.  Occa-
sional technical  papers  on  bridge  construction  and
the  application  of  the  jetty  system  to  rivers  were
contributed  by  him  to  engineering  journals.

K.VIil.K.  Ilenrv,  naval  officer,  l>.  in  New  York
city.  7  April.  1801;  d.  88  Nov..  1888.  His  father
was  from  Dublin.  Ireland,  and  was  major  of  an
Irish  brigade  in  New  York,  and  during  the  war  of
1812  assi^t.-d in preparing  earthworks  near  Fort

Greene.  The  sou  entered  the  nary  as  a  midship-
man on  1  .Ian..  1818,  and  was  commissioned  as  a
lieutenant  to  the  Weal  Indies  in  [887,  After  serv-
ice in  Brazil  and  on  the  Pacific  coast,  he  was  made
commander  in  1844,  and  superintended  the  con-
struction of  the  Stevens  ir.-n  battery  at  Bobofccn,
N.  .1..  to  which  he  d.  voted  several  vears.  actm.
inspector  in New  York  in 1N4<5. lie  commanded

the  bomb-Teasel  MJBtnaM  and  a  division  of  the

■quad ron  during  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  civil
and  military  governor,  and  collector  of  the  potts.

of  Tabasco.'  Mexico,  in  l847-*8.  In  Beptesnbor,
1855.  he  was  commissioned  captain.  He  was  the
bearer  Of  Important  communications  fr<>in  Brook-
lyn to  Washington  at  the  outbreak  of  the  civil
war.  volunteered  for  the  command  of  the  gun-lioat
••  Motiticello."  made  the  first  naval  attack  of  the
war.  and  silenced  the  guns  of  Se well's  Point  bat-
ten,  Y.i.. Ill Mav, 1N<51. Subsequently he  coin-


888


KAKIN


EABLE


manded  the  frigate  "Santee,"  of  the  Gulf  blockad-
ing squadron,  and  during  his  service  a  boat-exi>edi-
1  i< >m  Iran  that  vessel  captured  and  dMtlOJM  the
privateer  "  Roval  Yacht,'  in  the  harbor  of  <ial\e>-
ton.  'I'exas.  He  was  promoted  commodore  in  1862,
and  on  1  Jan.,  1863,  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.
In  1864  and  1865  he  was  engaged  as  prize  com-
missioner, and  in  that  year  became  light-house
inspector,  which  office  he  held  for  one  year.

KAKIN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  about  1742  ;  d.
in  1784.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1763,
and  ordained  by  the  Second  presbytery  of  Phila-
delphia in  1770.  From  1773  till  1777  he  had
charge  of  Penn's  Neck  Presbyterian  church  in
West  Jersey ;  but,  as  most  of  the  parishioners  were
tories,  he  was  obliged  to  withdraw  on  account  of
his  zeal  for  American  liberty.  He  was  the  idol  of
the  soldiers,  and  whenever  there  was  a  military
drill,  or  an  order  for  a  march,  he  was  present,  and
by  his  fervor  excited  the  patriotism  of  the  troops
to  the  highest  degree.  It  is  said  that  he  never  en-
tered the  pulpit  without  imploring  the  Lord  "to
teach  our  people  how  to  fight,  and  give  them
fresh  courage  and  perseverance  to  overcome  their
enemies."  He  was  said  to  be  the  most  eloquent
preacher,  after  Whitefield,  that  had  ever  been  in
this  country.

E  A  KINS,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
25  July,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  the  nigh
school  of  Philadelphia,  and  went  to  Paris,  where
he  received  his  art  education  at  L'Ecole  des  beaux
arts  under  Gerome.  He  also  studied  in  the
atelier  of  Bonnat,  and  with  the  sculptor  Dumont.
After  returning  to  Philadelphia,  he  was  appointed
demonstrator  of  anatomy,  and  afterward  professor
of  painting  and  director  of  the  Pennsylvania  acad-
emy of  fine  arts.  '  For  several  years  he  was  teacher
in  the  Brooklyn  art  guild,  and  lecturer  on  anatomy
and  perspective  in  the  art  student's  league  of  New
York.  He  is  now  professor  in  the  art  student's
league  of  Philadelphia.  He  has  painted  many
small  pictures  of  domestic  life  in  the  early  days  of
America,  of  American  sporting  and  athletic  games,
studies  of  the  American  negroes,  etc.,  which  have
been  exhibited  in  the  Paris  salons,  the  National
academy,  New  York,  the  Water-color  society,
American  art  association,  and  elsewhere.  Among
his  noted  pictures  are  "  Dr.  Gross  in  his  Clinic  " :
"  William  Rush  carving  an  Allegorical  Figure  " ;
"  A  Lady  Singing  ";  "  The  Chess-Players  ";  "  Mend-
ing the  Net 'p;  "The  Writing- Master " ;  and  "The
Zither-Player."  He  sent "  The  Chess-Players,"  sev-
eral portraits  in  oil,  and  the  water-colors  "  Whist-
ling for  Plover  "  and  "  Base-Ball "  to  the  Centen-
nial exhibition  in  1876.

EAMES,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  Braintree,
Mass.,  20  March,  1812 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
16  March,  1867.  He  was  prepared  for  college  at
Leicester  academy,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1831,  and  studied  law  in  the  Cambridge  law-school,
and  with  John  Duer  in  New  York.  But  ill  health
prevented  him  from  practising  his  profession,
and  in  1845  he  accepted  an  office  in  the  navy  de-
partment in  Washington.  A  few  months  later
he  became  associate  editor  of  the  Washington
"  Union,"  and  was  appointed  by  President  Polk  to
be  commissioner  to  the  Sandwich  islands  to  nego-
tiate a  treaty.  In  1850  he  returned  and  edited  the
Nashville  "  Union  "  for  six  months,  after  which  he
again  held  charge  of  the  Washington  "  Union."
After  several  years  of  journalism  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Venezuela  by  President  Pierce,  and  re-
mained there  until  1857,  when  he  resigned  and  re-
turned to  Washington,  where  he  practised  his
profession  until  his  death. During  the  last  five


years  of  his  life  he  attained  a  high  reputation  as  an
admiralty  lawyer  and  for  his  knowledge  of  intern**
ttonal  law.  lie  was  a  fine  linguist  and  scholar,
and  possessed  remarkable  conversational  power.

EAMES,  Jane  Anthony,  author,  1».  in  Welling-
ton (now  Dighton),  Mass.,  21  Jan..  1N16.  She  is
a  sifter  of  the  late  Henry  B.  Anthony,  ami  was
graduated  at  the  young  ladies'  high  school  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.  In  1839  she  married  the  Rev.  James
H.  Eames,  who  was  for  many  years  rector  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Concord,  X.  II.,
and  died  in  1877.  She  has  travelled  extensively  in
Europe  and  the  east,  and  has  published  "  A
Budget  of  Letters  "  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  Mv  Mother's
Jewel"  (New  York,  1850);  "The  Christmas  (lift  "
(1851);  "Sarah  Barry"  (1852);  "Home"  i
"  Another  Budget  "  (Boston,  1854),  and  •  The
Budget  Closed "  (1864) ;  and  has  compiled  memo-
rials of  her  father,  Hezekiah  Anthony  (1885),  and
of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Eames  (1878).

EARLE,  Parker,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Mt.  Hol-
ly, Vt..  in  1831.  He  is  one  of  the  largest  practi-
cal horticulturists  in  the  country.  He  was  chief  of
the  horticultural  department  of  the  International
exposition  at  New  Orleans  in  1885,  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  Illinois  state  horticultural  society,  and
is  now  president  of  the  Mississippi  valley  and  the
American  horticultural  societies.  He  has  contrib-
uted frequently  to  the  columns  of  standard  agri-
cultural periodicals.

EARLE,  Pliny,  inventor,  b.  in  Leicester,
Mass.,  17  Dec,  1762 ;  d.  there,  19  Nov.,  1832.  He
was  a  descendant  of  Ralph  Earle,  who,  with  nine-
teen others,  successfully  petitioned  Charles  I.,  in
1638,  for  a  charter  to  form  themselves  into  a  body-
politic  of  Rhode  Island.  In  1785  he  became  con-
nected with  Edmund  Snow  in  the  manufacture  of
hand-cards  for  carding  cotton  and  wool,  and  in
1786  he  established  himself  in  the  business.
Among  the  many  obstacles  encountered  by  Samuel
Slater  in  the  introduction  into  the  United  States
of  the  manufacture  of  cotton  by  machinery  was
the  difficulty  of  procuring  card-clothing  for  his
machines.  After  unsuccessful  applications  to  sev-
eral other  persons,  he  went,  in  1790,  to  Mr.  Earle,
who,  although  it  was  a  new  and  untried  work,
agreed  to  make  the  cards.  He  succeeded,  but  to
achieve  that  success  he  was  obliged  to  prick  the
holes  for  the  teeth  with  two  needles  fastened  in  a
handle.  This  led  him  to  the  invention  of  the  ma-
chine for  pricking  "  twilled  "  cards,  by  which  the
labor  of  a  man  for  fifteen  hours  could  be  per-
formed in  as  many  minutes.  This  machine  was  in
general  use  for  years,  until  it  was  superseded  by
the  machine  that  both  pricks  the  leather  and  sets
the  teeth.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and,  apart  from  his  inventive  genius,  made
extensive  attainments  in  science  and  literature. —
His  second  son,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Leicester,
Mass.,  21  April,  1796;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14
July,  1849,  was  educated  at  Leicester  academy.
In  1.817  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  en-
gaged in  mercantile  pursuits  for  a  few  years,  but
subsequently  studied  law  and  practised  his  profes-
sion. He  became  distinguished  also  as  a  journal-
ist, editing  in  succession  the  "Columbian  Ob-
server," "  Standard,"  "  Pennsylvanian,"  and  "Me-
chanics' Free  Press  and  Reform  Advocate."  In
1837  he  took  an  active  part  in  calling  the  Consti-
tutional convention  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  he
was  a  prominent  member,  and.  it  is  supposed  that
he  made  the  original  draft  of  the  new  constitution.
He  lost  his  popularity  with  the  Democratic  party
by  advocating  the  extension  of  the  right  of  suf-
frage to  negroes. He  was  the  candidate  of  the


i:m;i.i:


EARLY


liU-rty party BOC vice-president in 1*40. but the
nomination was  repudiated l.v  the  abolitioi
win. in  that party  WSJ  supposed to  represent. Mr.

ibaequently  took little part in pffHtkfl
affairs, lie  devoted  hw  time  principally  to  lit
work,  and  published  an  "  Essay  on P« nal LftW j
an  "  Essay  on  the  Eights  of  States  t<>  Alter  ami  to

Annul their  Charters"; *•  Tn-.-ii  i-m-  mi i  tail  road*

ami  Internal  Communications":  1880);  and  a"  Life

<>f  Benjamin  Lundy."  At  the  time  <>f  hi*  death
h<-  was engaged in n translation of Sismondi's

dian  Republics,"  and  in  the  compilation  of  a
•'(iraiiiiuatical  Dictionary  of  the  Prenoh  and  the

rlish  Languages."-- Another  son,  Pliny,  i>liy-»i-
cian.  It.  in  Leicester.  Ma>-.,  H I><<  ..  1808. Ho  was

luated  at  the  University  <»f  Pennsylvania  In
17,  then  studied  in  the  hospitals  <>f  Paris,  and
visited  institutions  for  the  Inssnci  in  European
countries.  In  1840  he  became  resident  physician
of  the  asylum  for  the  Insane  at  Frankford.  Pa.,
where  he  reuuiined  two  years.  From  April,  1K44,
till  April,  1810.  he  was  physician  to  Bloouiingdale
a>yluin,  New  York.  He  immediately  afterward
visited  insane  hospitals  in  Europe.  In  l&W  he
was  appointed  visiting  physician  to  the  New  York
city  lunatie  asylum,  and  in  the  same  year  deliv-
ered a  course  of  lectures  on  mental  disorders  at
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New  York.
In  IhM  he  became  professor  of  materia  medica
and  psychology  in  Berkshire  medical  institute  in
Pittsfleld,  Mass.,  the  first  professorship  <»f  men-
tal diseases  ever  established  by  a  medical  college
in  the  United  States.  His  lectures  there  were
limited  to  the  one  course  of  1804,  owing  to  his
appointment  as  superintendent  and  physician-
in-chief  of  the  state  hospital  for  the  insane  in
Northampton,  Mass.  He  held  this  place  until
October,  1885.  In  1871  he  visited  forty-six  insti-
tutions for  the  insane  in  Europe.  Dr.  Bade  was,
so  far  as  known,  the  first  person  that  ever  ad-
dressed an  audience  of  the  insane  in  any  other
than  a  religious  discourse.  His  introduction  of
lectures  on  natural  philosophy  at  the  Frankford
asylum,  in  the  winter  of  1840-'41,  was  the  initiative
to  a  system  of  combined  instruction  and  enter-
tainment, which  has  been  widely  adopted,  and  is
now  considered  essential  to  the  highest  perfection
of  an  institution  for  the  insane.  In  the  winter  of
1800-'7,  at  the  hospital  in  Northampton,  he  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  on  insanity  before
audiences  in  which  the  average  number  of  insane
persons  was  about  250.  His  annual  reports  during
the  last  ten  years  of  his  superintendence  at  North-
ampton hospital  contain  a  series  of  articles  on  the
curability  of  insanity,  which  have  been  published
in  book-form,  entitled  "The  Curability  of  Insan-
ity ;  a  Series  of  Studies  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).  Dr.
E'irle  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American
medical  association,  the  New  York  academy  of
medicine,  the  Association  of  medical  superintend-
ents of  American  institutions  for  the  insane,
and  the  New  England  psychological  society,  and
has  been  president  of  the  two  last  named. He  has

? Whitened  mA  Vi-.it to  Thirteen  Asvlums  for  the
nenne in Europe "  (Philadelphia,  is4<i):  "The

History.  Description,  and  Statistics  of  the  Bloom-
Ingdale  Asylum "  (Mew  York,  1848);  M Institutions
for  the  Insane  in  Prussia,  Germany,  and  Austria"
(New  fork.  lH.*>:t);  and  "An  Examination  of  the

ice  of Blood-Letting in Mental Disorders"

(New  York.  18541  besides  frequent  contributions
to  medical  periodical  literature.  He  has  publishe  !
••  Marathon  and  other  Poems H  (Philadelphia,  i-

I VIJI.K. Italpll, artist, b.  in Leicester,  Mm,
11  May,  1751;  d.  in Bolton,  Clin.,  II  An-.  .
VOL.  II. — 19


lie  was  a  descendant  of  Ralph  Earle.  an  early  set-
tler of  Ijeioester,  ami  his  father.  Ralph,  h.  Id  •com-
mission an  captain  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  lb-
had  no collegiate  education,  but panted i-.r-

t  raits in Connecticut in 177.*». BoQSJ  after  peace

was  declared  he  went  U>  England,  studied  hlaarl

under  the  instruction  of  Rctijainin  West, and  wa«
elected  a  im-mlter  of the Itoyal  academy. He  re-
turned to  the  I'mte.i  states  in  1786^ and  continued
to  pursue  his  profusion  iii  different  |  ml f  If  si—
ehusetta,  New  York,  and  Connecticut. Am
works  are  two  portraits  of  Dr.  Dwigbl  (1777
historical  painting*.  U-lieved  to  U-  the  first  of  that
class  ever  executed  livaii  American  arti«t— "The
Battle  of  Lexington."  "  A  View  of  (..nerd."  "  The
Rattle  <>f  North Bridge.  Concord," and "A  View

of  the  South  Part  of  Lexington. These  wt

graved  and  published by  A s  Doolittle.  of  New

Haven,  Conn.  Mr.  Earle  also  painted  |x>rtraits  in
England  and  America,  several  laudosapaa  and  a
"Niagara  Falls,"  which  WUS exhibited  in  all  |»arts
of  the  country  and  subsequently  in  I/.ndon.— His
brother.  James,  artist,  b.  in  I^-ic'ester.  Mass.,  i  MaV.
1781;  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('..  7  .Sept..  1788,  had  M
collegiate  education,  and  little  is  known  of  his
early  life.  He  married  Mrs.  Caroline  (icorgiana
Pilkington  Smyth,  mother  of  Admiral  William
Henry  Smyth.  He  painted  portraits  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  and  died  suddenly  of  yellow  fever  when  he
was  preparing  to  return  to  England. —  His  son,
Augustus,  artist,  b.  in  1788,  was  admitted  as  a
student  in  the  Itoyal  academy,  London,  in  1807,
and  some  of  his  pictures  were  in  two  of  the  public
exhibitions  prior  to  thai  data.  He  had  an  in-satia-
ble love  of  adventure,  and  was  known  as  the  "  wan-
dering artist."  From  1815  till  \Ki2  he  travel  led
extensively  through  North  and  South  America,
Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  the  East  Indies.  In
Madras  he  painted  portraits  and  executed  original
drawings,  which  he  afterward  arranged  for  a  pano-
rama, and  exhibited.  His  health  failing,  he  re-
turned to  England.  When  in  New  York,  he  spent
most  of  his  time  in  the  house  with  Thomas  Cum-
inings.  the  well-known  painter  of  miniatures.  He
visited  all  parts  of  the  Mediterranean,  travelled  in
Africa,  ana  finally  sailed  on  a  four-years'  voyage
of  discovery,  from  which  he  never  returned.  "A
Narrative  of  a  Nine-Months'  Residence  in  New-
Zealand  in  1N27.  together  with  a  Journal  of  a
Residence  in  Tristan  d'Acunha,"  was  published
by  Augustus  Eerie,  draughtsman  to  his  Majesty*!
shin  "The  Beagle"  (London,  1*12).— Ralph s  son,
Ralph,  artist,  d.  in  New  Orleans.  La.,  studied  in
London  in  1808-10,  and  after  his  return  t<>  the
United  States  married  a  niece  of  Andrew  Jackson,
and  painted  a  full-length  [x.rtrait  of  the  general.

EARLY. John, M.  E.  bishop,  »..  in Bedford
OOUnty,  Va.,  l  Jan.,  17s<>:  d.  in Lynchburg,  Ya.,  5
Nov.,  1873. He  joined  the  Methodist  oonfl
of  his  state  in  the  revival  of  lMOl-'U,  and  became
an  itinerant  preacher  about  1807. Be  soon  at-

BUOted  attention  by  his  fervor  ami  eloquence,  and
was  specially  successful  in  conducting  religious
exercises in  a revival. He  successively  filled  the

offices  of  laoretaryof  the  conference  and  presiding

elder,  and  was  repeatedly  a  delegate  to  the  quad-
rennial general  conference.  In  the  agitation  that
resulted,  in  1*44.  in  the  division  of  his  denomina-
tion into  the Methodist church  north  and  south.

Mr.  Early  took  an  active  i>art.  and  was  alseted
the  lirst  book-agent  of  the  latter. Though

. he  was  elected bishop i:
and  served  his  church  with  great  zeal  ami  fidelity
for  nineteen  years. He  was  largely  instrumental
in  founding  Randolph-Macon  college,  Ya. Bishop


290


EARLY


I-.  A  STUCK  N


Early,  though  n  vigorous  writer,  published  only  a
lew  Mini,  mis,  addresses,  and  occasional  pamphlets,
some  of  tlu'in  relating  to  the  disruption  contro-
\.  nj, He  revived  the  degree  of  I).  1).

EARLY,  John,  clergyman,  l>.  in  theCounty  Fer-
managli.  Inland,  in  1814;  d.  in  Georgetown,  I).
('.,  in  1874  He  came  to  the  United  owes  when
eighteen  years  of  age,  and  entered  St.  Mary's  col-
lege, Emmettsburg,  Md.,  as  a  student,  finished  his
studies  in  Georgetown  college,  and  in  1834  entered
the  Society  of  Jesus.  He  was  ordained  priest  in
1844,  and,  after  passing  some  time  in  Georgetown
college  as  professor  of  belles-lettres,  was  sent  to
Philadelphia  on  his  first  mission.  He  was  next  ap-
pointed president  of  Worcester  college,  Mass.,
where  he  remained  several  years.  In  1852  he  went
to  Baltimore  and  built  the  fine  college  and  church
of  St.  Ignatius.  Subsequently  he  was  transferred
to  the  presidency  of  Georgetown  college.  During
the  civil  war  he  converted  the  college  and  its
grounds  into  a  hospital  and  camp  for  National
soldiers,  but  without  a  day's  interruption  of  the
course  of  study.

EARLY,  Jtibal  Anderson,  soldier,  b.  in  Frank-
lin county,  Va.,  3  Nov.,  1816.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1837,  appointed  a
lieutenant  of  artillery,  and  assigned  to  duty  at
Port  -Monroe,  Va.  He  served  in  the  Florida  war  in
1837-8,  resigned  from  the  army  in  July,  1838,  and
began  the  practice  of  law  in  Virginia,  ne  served
in  the  legislature  in  1841-'2,  and  was  commonwealth
attorney  in  1842-'7,  and  again  in  1848-'52.  Dur-
ing the  Mexican  war  he  was  major  of  a  regiment
of  Virginia  volunteers,  serving  from  January,  1847,
till  August,  1848,  was  acting  governor  of  Monte-
rey in  May  and  June,  1847,  and  after  the  disband-
ing of  the  army  returned  to  the  practice  of  law.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the
Confederate  service  as  a  colonel,  commanded  a
brigade  at  Bull  Run,  and  in  the  battle  of  Williams-
burg, 5  May,  1862,  was  supposed  to  be  mortally
wounded.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-general,
and  in  May,  1863,  commanded  the  division  that
held  the  lines  at  Fredericksburg,  while  Lee  was
fighting  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville.  He  also
commanded  a  division  at  Gettysburg. In  1864

he  was  ordered
to  the  valley  of
the  Shenandoah,
where  his  opera-
tions were  at  first
successful.  InJu-
lv  he  crossed  the
Potomac,  gained
the  battle  of
Monocacy,  and
threatened  Wash-
ington, but  was
obliged  to  retreat.
Toward  the  end  of
the  month  a  por-
tion of  his  caval-
ry advanced  into
Pennsylvania  as
far  as  Chambers-
burg,  which,  by
his  orders,  they
burned.  He  was
afterward,  19  Sept.,  defeated  by  Sheridan  on  the
Opequan,  and  again  at  Fisher's  Hill  three  days  later.
On  19  Oct.,  Gen.  Early  surprised  the  National  forces
at  Cedar  ( 'reek  in  the  absence  of  Gen.  Sheridan ;  but
the  latter,  having  arrived  in  the  afternoon,  rallied
his  army  and  gained  a  decisive  victory,  Gen.  Early
losing  the  greater  part  of  his  artillery  and  trains.


\


^jhv<z>"^j>


In  March,  1865,  he  was  totally  mated  by  (Jen.  Cus-
ter at  Waynesboro,  and  a  f»-w  days  hit. t  be  ww
relieved  bj  Lee  from  the  command  in  the  valley;
that  general  saying  in  his  letter,  ISO  March,
"  Your  reverses  in  the  valley,  of  which  the  public
and  the  army  judge  chiefly  by  the  results,  hare,  1
fear,  impaired  your  influence  both  with  the  peopk
and  the  soldiers,  and  would  greatly  add  to  the
difficulties  which  will,  under  any  circumstances,
attend  our  military  operations  iii  S.  W.  Virginia.
While  my  own  confidence  in  your  ability.  zei:l,  and
devotion  to  the  cause  is  unimpaired,  1  bare  never-
theless felt  that  I  could  not  oppose  what  seems  to
be  the  current  opinion  without  injustice  to  pout
reputation  and  injury  to  the  service."  After  t  In-
close of  the  war  he  spent  some  time  in  Europe,
and  on  his  return  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in
Richmond.  He  subsequently  toolc  up  his  residence
in  New  Orleans  (alternately  with  Lynchburg),
where,  with  Gen.  Beauregard,  he  became  a  man-
ager of  the  Louisiana  state  lottery.  He  is  presi-
dent of  the  Southern  historical  society,  ana  has
Cublished  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  A  Memoir  of  the
ast  Year  of  the  War  for  Independence  in  the
Confederate  States"  (Lynchburg,  1867).

EARLY,  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in  Madison  county,
Va.,  in  June,  1773;  d.  in  Greene  county,  Ga.,  15
Aug.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1792,  and  with  his  father  settled  in  Georgia  in
1795.  He  studied  law  in  Philadelphia,  and  prac-
tised successfully  at  the  Georgia  bar.  He  served
in  congress  in  l$03-'7,  where  he  opposed  the  Afri-
can slave-trade,  and  was  prominent  in  the  trial  of
Samuel  Chase,  one  of  the  judges  of  the  supreme
court,  appearing  for  the  prosecution.  In  1807  he
became  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and  re-
tired in  1813,  when  elected  governor  of  Georgia,  in
which  office  he  served  for  two  years.  He  was  after-
ward a  state  senator.

EASTBURN,  James  Wallis,  clergyman,  b.  in
London,  England,  26  Sept.,  1797 ;  d.  at  sea,  2  Dec.,
1819.  His  father  and  family  came  to  the  United
States  in  1803.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1816,  studied  theology  under  Bishop  Gris-
wold  in  Rhode  Island,  and  while  thus  engaged  un-
dertook a  new  metrical  version  of  the  Psalms,
which  he  did  not  live  to  complete.  At  the  age  of
eighteen  he  wrote  the  hymn  "0  Holy,  Holy,  Holy
Lord !  "  and  was  a  contributor  to  various  periodi-
cals. He  was  ordained,  20  Oct.,  1818,  and  went  to
St.  George's,  Accomac  co.,  Va.  After  less  than  a
year's  ministry  his  health  failed,  and  in  November,
1819,  accompanied  bv  his  mother  and  brother,
afterward  bishop  of  Massachusetts,  he  sailed  for
Vera  Cruz.  He  died  on  the  fourth  day  out,  and
was  buried  at  sea.  Mr.  Eastburn  wrote  several
fugitive  poems,  some  of  which  are  very  graceful,
and  published,  in  conjunction  with  Robert  C.
Sands,  "  Yamoyden,"  a  romantic  poem,  founded  on
the  history  of  King  Philip,  the  sachem  of  the
Wampanoags  (New  York,  1818). — His  brother,
Manton,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Leeds,  England,  9
Feb.,  1801;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1878,  «■
brought  to  the  United  States  in  infancy.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1817,  studied  theology
in  the  General  Protestant  Episcopal  theological
seminary  in  New  York,  was  ordained  in  1822,  and
for  the  next  five  years  officiated  as  assistant  minis-
ter in  Christ  church.  New  York,  whence,  in  1827,
he  removed,  to  become  rector  of  the  Church  of  the
Ascension.  On  29  Dec.,  1842,  he  was  consecrated
assistant  bishop  of  the  diocese  of  Massachusetts,
then  embracing  also  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  and
Rhode  Island,  and  two  months  later,  on  the  death
of  the  venerable  Bishop  Griswold,  became  bishop


IM  AN*


KJ


of  the  diocese.  On  his  death  In-  bequeathed  hi*
property  t..  dom<  at  in  Ifaasechu

the  endowment  of  tin-  Protestant  Episcopal  theo-
logical school  at  Cambridge,  and  to  tin-  American
i  .ii-iy. Ho  edited,  with notes,  Thornton's

'•  Family  Prayer  k.  1h:(((),  and  pabliahed

"Foot  Lectures  on  Hebrew,  Latin,  ana  English
."  delivered  before  the  New  York  AthetUBum
part  of  ii  volume  nf  ••  Essays  ami  DhnUftis*
ti-ni-  "ii  Biblical  Literature"  (1H20):  ••  Ijcctun-s  on
thr  Bpiatlci  to  the  Philippiani "  < \w.i);  and  "Ore-
tioii  at  l  In-  S'lui-lVutcunial  Anniversary  of  1'olum-
llege"  (l.^JT).
I  L8TM  VN.  (  har lea  Oamape,  poet,  b,  in  Free-
Me.,  l  June,  1nm>: <1.  in  Burlington,  Vt..
in 1881. lit-  curly  went  with his  parents  to Bar-
nanl. N't.. WSJ educated at Koyaltuii academy,

Windsor,  ami  at
Burlington,  ami
was  graduated
at  the  l'nivir>i-
ty  of  Ycrmoiit
iii  in:}?.  While
a  student  he
wrote  editorials
for  the  Burling-
ton **  Sentinel."
lie  bonded  the
'*  Lamoille  Riv-
er Express"  at
Johnson,  Vt..  in
1818;  established
the  "Spirit of  the
Age"  at  Wood-
stock, Vt.,  in
1840,  and  pur-
chased the  "Ver-
mont Patriot "'
and  removed  to
Montpelier  in  1846.  He  was  postmaster  at  Wood-
stock and  Montpelier  for  several  years,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  senate  in  1851-'2.  He  published
a  volume  of  poems  delineating  the  rural  life  of
New  England,  marked  by  a  high  degree  of  metrical
finish  (MoritjH'lier,  1848).  was  a  contributor  of
poetry  to  reviews  and  magazines,  and  read  poems
at  the  Cniversity  of  Vermont  and  at  Dartmouth
and  other  colleges.

EASTMAN,  Harvey  (iridley,  educator,  !>.  in
Marshall.  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Nov.,  lKi2;  d.  in
Denver,  Col.,  13  July.  1878.  He  opened  a  commer-
cial school  in  St.  Louis  in  1855,  and  four  years  later
the  Eastman  national  business  college  at  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.  Beginning  with  one  pupil,  the  col-
lege in  a  short  time  included  1,600  students,  occu-
pied five  large  building!,  and  employed  more  than
instructors.  In  1M?1,  and  again  in  1K?:1,  Mr.
man  was  elected  to  the  New  York  assembly,
and  he  also  served  three  terms  as  major  of  Pough-
keepsie.  Many  public  improvements  in  that  city
were  due  t<>  his  energy  and  liberality.

KASTMAN.  John  Rohie,  astronomer,  b.  in
Andover.  N.  H..  25)  .lulv.  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Chandler  scientific  department  of  Dart-
mouth in  1888,  and  in  1877  received  the  degree  of
Ph.D.  from  that  college.  In  February,  1865,  he
was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in  the
3b  navy,  with  the  relative  rank  of  commander,
and  assigned  to  astronomical  work  in  the  t\  S.  ob-
servatory in  Washington.  He  has  accompanied
various  astronomic  al  expeditions  throughout  the
Ijiited  States,  and  in  1*70  was  sent  to  Syracuse,
Sicily,  to  observe  the  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  that
took  place  on  22  Dec.  of  that  year.  Besides  lieing
a  member  of various  scientific  societies,  he  has


W**/u V. (pa


*Ob+&~r->*C*AJ


-in- ■••  1818  been  a  fellow  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  uiImhu  cim-iit  of  science,  and  waa  its
general  secretary  in  1888. The  result!  of  hi*  as-
tronomical invest itfnt ions have ap|K»an-d in
yearly volumes  of  the U.  8.  naval  obi
whi.h  from  1*72  till  lKH'J  w.r-  edited  l«v  him.

I  kOTMAN.  Julia  Arabella, author, b. fa  Ful-
ton. N.  Y..  IT  July,  LK37. She  >MvameaillOOaaBfu]

teach.r.  and,  with  In  -  .rah.  o|>ciicd  in

the  Dana  Hull  preparatory  tohool  for  student
taring Wellealey college. She  has  published  ju-
venile story-books,  among  them  "Short Con
and  Loojr  Goings'*  (Boston,  1888);  ■•  BeoJafa  Boas*
bot"  (1871);  and  "Young  Kick  d»o  many

articles  and  -liort  poems  in  m  v,

I  WI'MAN,  Macarthur  Katlmaa.  i  ipitaliM,
b.  in  Oilmanton,  N.  II..  n  .June,  1810;  d.  in  Man-

abaatar,  N.  II..  :t  Bent,  ih77. While  aMatged  in

the  manufacture  of  woollen  goods  at  Boxbury,
Ma>s.,  he  acquired  an  interest  in  a  patent  wanning
jenny,  which  he  introduced  into  England,  and  in
1856,  after  the  lic^ifining  Of  the  Crimean  war.  he
secured  the  patent  of  a  htesrih  loeillllf  WUIIttai isl
sold  it  to  the  British  government.  At  the  begfav-
alngof  the  civil  war  he  contracted  for  the  manu-
facture of  a  large  aumber  of  oarbinea,  and  nl
quently  furnished  fire-arm-  to  the  United  States
and  foreign  governments.  In  1888  he  j.lanned  t In-
direct ocean  cable,  an  enterprise  which  required  ■
capital  of  86,500,01)0  in  gold,  and  which  was  nut
from  the  first  by  a  powerful  ffltTPfiratO  opposition.
He  secured  the  needed  legislation  after  marly  five
years  of  effort,  and  the  cable  was  laid,  the  Ameri-
can end  Ix-ing  landed  at  Bye  Beach  in  July.  1*71.

EASTMAN,  Oman,  clergyman,  b.  In  Amherst.
Mass.,  27  March,  1700:  d.  in  New  York  cit\
April,  1874  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  I88L
After  completing  his  theological  studies  at  Andover
in  1824,  he  was  for  a  year  an  agent  of  the  Ameri-
can Iniard  of  coniuiis-ioiiers  for  foreign  miaMoM)
and  then  entered  the  Berries  of  the  American  tract
society  in  Boston,  where  he  remained  from  1825  to
1828.  In  the  latter  rear  he  was  transferred  t<.  New-
York,  first  as  general  agent  for  the  Mlaiillppl  val-
ley, and  from  1888 M  finance  secretary,  which  office
he  continued  to  till  till  be  retired  in  1870.

EASTMAN.  Philip,  jurist.!.,  in  Chatham.  N.  II..
in  February,  1700:  d.  in  Sac...  Mc.  7  Aug~  U
He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1880.  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  baral  Paris,  Me.,  in  Ifj
He  practised  law  at  North  Yaniiouth.  Me.,  in  1K28-
':{(!:  at Harrison,  Me.,  in  1>Ci>-'47:  and  "t Sao  in

1847-'6l). He  was  a  member  of  the  Maine  senate

in  1840-'2,  a  commissioner  to  locate  the  claims  of
settlers on the northeastern boundary  of  Maine

under  the  Washington  treaty  la  1848-^8,  and  for

five  years  ■uboeqaently  commissioner  for  luinUr-

land  county, lie  published  "ticncral  Statutes  of
Maine,"  as  chairinan  of  a  legislative  coininittee  for

that  purpose (1840), and  a  digest  of  the  first  twent>-
six  volumes  of  the  "  Maine  Ijtw  Reports"

KASTMAN,  Sanford.  phvsician.  I.,  in  Led&j
Seneca  co.,  N.  Y..  in  1S-J1  ;  d.  in  Biverside.  San
Bernanliiio  co..  Cal..  H  .Ian.,  1S7-I.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  in  1*41.  s|>cnt  a  few  years  in
teaching  and  agricultural  pursuits,  then  studied
medicine,  and  was  graduated  from  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  Cniversitv  of  Buffalo  in  Fcl.ruary,
1851.  He  began  tO  practise  in  Buffalo,  ami  was  in
1858  appointed  to  the  professorship  of  anatomy  in
the  university,  to  which  was  added  in  1H»>7  that  of
clinical  surgery,  which  iMisitioii  he  resigned  in  lv
He  was  health-officer  of  the  city  in  lHil-'T.and  in
1*71  a  member  of  the  Board  of  state  charities.
Later  in  the  same  year  he  removed  to  California.


292


KA  ST. MAN-


EATON


EASTMAN,  Selh,  soldier,  b.  in  Brunswick.  Mc.
24  .liin..  lsos;  (1.  in  Washington.  I).  ('..  :!1  Aug..
1875.  Be  w.i>  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  ls-2!>  and  assigned  to  the  infantry.
After  frontier  and  topographical  duty  he  was  as-
sistant teacher  of  drawing  at  West  Point  from
1888  to  18*0,  served  in  tin-  Florida  war  in  1840-'l.
and  afterward  on  the  western  frontier.  From  1850
to  1855  he  was  employed  in  the  bureau  of  the  com-
missioner of  Indian  affairs  to  illustrate  the  nation-
al work  on  the  "  History,  Condition,  and  Future
Prospects  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United
States"  (Washington,  1850-'7).  He  then  returned
to  the  frontier.  lie  was  retired  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel  on  3  Dec.,  1863,  on  account  of
disability  from  exposure  in  the  line  of  duty,  and
on  9  Aug.,  1806,  was  brevotted  brigadier-general.
Gen.  Eastman  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  design  in  1838.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "Treatise  on  Topographical  Drawing"
(1837). — His  wife,  Mary  Henderson,  author,  b.  in
Warrenton,  Fauquier  co.,  Va.,  in  1818,  married
Capt.  Eastman  in  1835,  and  resided  with  him  for
many  years  at  Fort  Snelling,  Minn.,  and  at  other
frontier  stations.  Her  portrayal  of  Indian  life  is
the  fruit  of  long  observation  and  familiarity  with
the  Indian  character.  She  has  published  "  Dacotah,
or  Life  and  Legends  of  the  Sioux"  (New  York,
1849) ;  "  Romance  of  Indian  Life  "  (Philadelphia,
1852) ;  "  Aunt  Phillis's  Cabin,"  a  reply  to  Mrs.
Stowe's  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  "  (1852) ;  "  American
Aboriginal  Portfolio,"  illustrated  by  her  husband
(1853) ;  "  Chicora  and  other  Regions  of  the  Con-
querors and  the  Conquered"  (1854);  "Tales  of
Fashionable  Life"  (1856);  and  numerous  stories
and  sketches  in  magazines. — Their  son,  Robert
Langdon,  b.  in  Maryland  about  1840;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  9  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  May,  1861,  and,  being
ordered  at  once  to  the  seat  of  war,  was  engaged  in
the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  From  that  time  he  was
on  duty  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  rising  to
the  grade  of  captain,  till  he  was  prostrated  by
disease  contracted  in  the  service.  After  the  battle
of  Malvern  Hill  he  was  ordered  to  West  Point,
and,  though  suffering  from  illness,  performed  the
duty  of  assistant  professor  of  drawing  and  of
ethics  until  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  continue.

EASTON,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn. ;
d.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.  He  was  a  builder  by  trade,
and  removed  from  Litchfield,  Conn.,  to  Pittsfield
in  1763.  He  raised  a  Berkshire  regiment  in  1775,
served  at  Ticonderoga,  9  May,  1775,  and  was  the
bearer  of  the  news  of  that  contest  and  its  results
to  the  Provincial  congress.  He  was  one  of  the
earliest  to  advocate  the  invasion  of  Canada,  com-
manded a  regiment  under  Montgomery  until  1776,
and  received  the  thanks  of  congress  in  that  year.
His  further  service  in  the  army  was  prevented  by
the  enmity  of  Benedict  Arnold.  He  sacrificed  his
fortune  for  his  country,  and  died  in  poverty.

EASTON,  Langdon  Cheves,  soldier,  b.  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  10  Aug.,  1814;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29
April,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1838,  and  was  assigned  to  the  6th
infantry.  He  was  promoted  to  be  1st  lieutenant,  23
July,  1839,  and  held  the  commission  till  10  April,
1851,  becoming  assistant  quartermaster,  with  the
rank  of  captain,  3  March,  1847,  and  quartermaster,
with  the  rank  of  colonel,  2  Aug.,  1864.  He  served
in  the  Florida  and  Mexican  wars,  and  during  the
civil  war.  He  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland  from  15  Dec.,  1863,  till  4  May,
1864,  and  of  the  armies  commanded  by  Maj.-Gen.
Sherman  from  4  May,  1864,  till  27  June,"  1865,  being


pn -.nt  during  the  operations  of  the  campaign
from  OhattaDOOga  to  Atlanta,  and  subsequently  at
the  capture  of  Savannah.  On  the  inarch  from  the
latter  city  to  Goldsborouirh.  N.  ('..  and  tln-ncc  to
Washington,  D.  C,  via  Raleigh  and  Richmond,
Gen.  Baaton  acted  in  the  same  capacity.  Afterrhe
close  of  the  war  he  was  stationed  m  Mississippi  and
Missouri.  He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,
colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  17  Sept.,  1864.  "  for
di>t  bogbished  and  important  service  in  the  quarter-
master's department  in  the  campaign  terminating
in  the  capture  of  Atlanta,  Ga.,"  and  major-general,
13  March,  1865,  "  for  meritorious  service  during  the
war."  He  was  promoted  to  be  colonel  and  assist-
ant quartermaster-general,  6  June,  1872.  retiring
from  active  service,  24  Jan.,  1881.

EASTON,  Nicholas,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  1593  ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  15  Aug.,  16?:..  Be
came  from  Wales,  in  1634,  with  his  two  sons,  to
Ipswich,  Mass.,  and  afterward  lived  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  and  Hampton,  N.  H.  He  was  one  of  the
first  settlers  in  both  the  last-mentioned  towns,  and.
having  had  trouble  with  the  authorities,  removed
to  Rhode  Island  in  1638  and  built  the  first  house
in  Newport.  He  was  governor  of  the  united  colo-
nies of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  in  1650-'2. —
His  son,  John,  was  governor  of  Rhode  Island  in
1690-'5,  and  wrote  a  "  Narrative  of  the  Causes
which  led  to  Philip's  Indian  War"  of  1675-'6,
which  was  edited  and  issued  by  Franklin  B.
Hough  (Albany,  1858).

EATON,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Plaistow,  N.  H.,
25  July,  1778 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  March,  1858.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1803,  and  while
pursuing  theological  studies  officiated  for  two  or
three  years  in  Christ  church,  Boston,  as  lay  reader.
In  1805  he  went  to  New  York,  and  in  July  of  that
vear  was  admitted  to  orders  by  Bishop  Benjamin
Moore  in  Trinity  church.  He  returned  to  New
England  soon  afterward,  and  entered  zealously
upon  clerical  duties  in  connection  with  Christ
church,  Boston.  This  positron  he  resigned  in  1829.
owing  to  continued  weakness  of  voice,  and  engaged
in  the  free  church  city  mission  with  gratifying
success.  In  1837  he  became  connected  with  St.
Mary's  school,  Burlington,  N.  J.,  and  labored  there
for  four  years.  Thence  he  returned  to  Boston,
where  he  occupied  himself  in  various  church  works.
He  also  accepted  the  charge  of  Trinity  church,
Bridgewater,  which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Columbia
college  in  1828.  Dr.  Eaton's  principal  publication
was  a  "  History  of  Christ  Church,  Boston  "  (1828).

EATON,  Cjrns,  educator,  b.  in  Framingham,
Mass.,  11  Feb.,  1784;  d.  in  Warren,  Me.,  21  Jan.,
1875.  He  was  a  son  of  Benjamin  Eaton,  a  Revo-
lutionary soldier.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  studied  the  classics  by  himself,  and  re-
moved in  1804  to  Warren,  Me.,  where  he  was  for
forty  years  a  teacher.  He  served  for  thirteen  years
as  town  clerk,  and  was  five  years  in  the  Massachu-
setts legislature.  He  became  totally  blind  about
1845,  and  devoted  himself  to  literature,  with  the
aid  of  his  invalid  daughter.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  several  historical  societies,  and  received
the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Bowdoin  in  1848.  He
published  "Annals  of  Warren  "(1851);  "Woman,"
a  poem  (1854) ;  and  "  History  of  Thomaston,  Me."
(2  vols.,  Hallowell,  Me.,  1865).

EATON,  Dorman  Bridginan,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hardwick,  Caledonia  co.,  Vt,  27  June.  1823.  Ib-
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont  in
1848,  and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1850,  when
he  took  the  first  prize  for  a  legal  essay.  He  was
in  that  year  admitted  to  the  V'w  York  bar,  and


EATON


became  the  partner  <>f  Judge  William  Kent. Hi

wu  for  several  years  chairman  of  i  In*  committee

<iii  |Miiiticiil  rvf«»rm  in  th>-  Union  League  club, Mr.

11  travelled  in  Kuropc  in  lsiwi  and  in  In;1

{riving  partfeular  attention  to  the  status  and  proba-
ili-  derelopment of  the  civil  servi f  various

countries.  After  his  return  President  Grant  ap-
pointed bin  a  member  of  the  <ivil  service  oonv
■  'II,  ami  he  held  the  place  of  chairman  till  the
eommiation  expired  through  the  failure  «>f  con-
gress to  make  an  appropriation  for  its  sup|>ort.
Tie  visite<l  Kurope  in  1875j  and  in  1*77.  at  Presi-
dent M.iv.—'s  request,  went  to  Kngland  to  secure
mat. rial  for  a  historical  rejxirt  u-mui  tin-  British
civil  He  was  tin*  tir-t  .if  the  commis>ion-

■ppointed  by  President  Arthur  under  the  act
of  lHHil  re-establishing  the  civil  service  commission,
resigned  oo  88  July,  iss">.  but  was  reappointed  by
I'n-i.lent  Cleveland,  o  Nov.,  and  resigned  in  April.
I86&  Mr.  Baton  has  been  prominent  in  the  civil
•M-rvice  reform  mrmont  in  the  United  states.
The  Hr*<t  society  for  promoting  it  was  formed  at
hi>  residence  in  1878, and  he  has  contributed  largely
on  the  subject  to  periodical  literature.  .Mr.  Kat.m
delivered  the  annual  address  before  the  Yale  law-
school  in  1888.  lb'  drafted  the  law  for  creating  a
metropolitan  board  of  health  in  I860;  that  estab-
lishing the  present  New  York  police  courts;  and
also  the  national  civil  service  act  of  1883.  Mr.
ii  has  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
I'niversity  of  Vermont,  and  he  has  published  "The
Independent  Movement  in  New  York"  (New  York,
1880):  and  -Civil  Service  in  Great  Britain"  (1880)
and  edited  Kent's  "Commentaries,"  with  Judge
William  Kent  ( 1  .**.*>  1 -'2 ),  and  "Chipman  on  Con-
tracts Payable  in  BpaaJBC  Articles"  (1852).

EATON,  Edward  lhviirht.  educator,  b.  in  Lan-
caster. Wis.,  12  Jan..  1851.  He  was  graduated  at
lieloit  college.  Wis.,  in  1M72,  at  Yale  divinity  school
in  1818,  and  studied  in  the  universities  of  Leipsic
and  Heidelberg,  German v,  in  1875-'6.  He  was
pastor  of  Congregational  churches  in  Newton,
Iowa,  in  1876-'80,  and  in  Oak  Park,  111.,  in  1880-,«,
and  on  2!>  Jan.  of  the  latter  year  was  elected  presi-
dent of  lieloit  college.

EATON,  George  Washington,  clergyman,  b.
in  Henderson,  Huntington  co..  Pa.,  .1  July,  1804;
d.  in  Hamilton,  Madison  co..  N.  Y..  :.  Aug,  1879.
He  was  graduated  from  Union  college  in  1829,  and
from  1831  till  1883  was  professor  of  ancient  lan-
guages in  Georgetown  college.  Kentucky,  acting  as
president  for  six  months.  He  was  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Hamilton
literary  and  theological  institution,  Hamilton,  N.
Y.,  and  in  1887-*80  filled  the  chair  of  ecclesiastical
and  civil  history  there.  After  the  incorpornt ion
of  the  institution  as  Madison  university  I>r.  Baton
was  its  president  from  1850  till  istfi.  and  at  tin-
same  time  professor  of  systematic  theology.  He
was  also  professor  for  some  years  of  intellectual
and  moral  philosuphv.  From  1881  till  1*71  he  was
prescient of Hamilton theologioal seminary  and

Srofessor  of  hoiniletics.  He  r> ived  the  honorary
egrccs  of  I>.  I),  and  LL.  D.  I>r.  Kat.m  was  early
ordained  tothe  Baptist  ministry,  and  was  a  strik-
ingly original  and  eloquent  preacher. — His  brother,
Jaaenh  II  .iv  wood,  educator.  I».  in  Berlin,  Delaware
."..  Ohio,  10  spt.,  1813;  d.  in  Murfreeeborough,
T.nn..  12  Jan..  ls.V.t.  was  graduated  at  Hamilton
literary  and  theologioal  institution  in  1h:{7.  He
lecte.l  to  i  professorship  in  Union  university.
If urf reeaborough,  TomL,  in  1841,  and  in  1842
came  its  president,  continuing  in  thai  relation  till
his  death.  He  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister
in  1848,  and  was  a  preacher  of  uncommon  ability.


II. had  received  the  h.nioniry  degree  of  LL  I).—
Joseph  Haywood's  win,  Thomas  Tread"  <  II,
gyman,  b.  in  Uurfreesborough,  i
was  praduab-d  at  Washington
Va.,  in 1887,  and  has  served  as  pastor  of  Ba|
churches in Lebanon ami Chattanooga, T.
Petersburg.  Va..  and  bonfcviUSj  Kv. Besides  1.
ing  written  several  pamphWte, Mr.  BatOl is  the
author ..f "My Angels " i|n71i: '•  S  nnon* to
Children "(1887);  "Marriage  and  Lav

BATON,  Horace,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in
Barnard.  Vt.,  22  June.  1804  :  d.  in  MiddJebttlT,
4  July. 1S.M. He was  graduated  at Middfcbury
in 1835,  and  at  the  Castleton medical  college  in
1828. In  that year  h<*  began  to  practise  m I
bury,  and  remained  then*  until 1H4*.  when  he  was
appointed professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  his-
tory in Middlebury.  and held the  chair  till i
He  was  a  Bomber  of  the  legislature,  lieutenant-
governor in 1848  "*». sii|MTiiitcn<lent of public
schools in 1845-*50,  governor  of  the  state  from
1840  till  1849,  and  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of I

BATON,  Isaac,  ■daoator,  b.  in  Montgomery,
Pa.,  in  172-1:  <1.  1  July.  1772.  He  was  for  twenty*
six  vears  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Hopo*a*aO,
N.  .1..  and  wits  the  first  teacher  among  American
Baptists  to  openascho<il  for  the  education  of  young
men  for  the  ministry.  The  DOOM  in  which  Mr.
Baton  taught  still  stands  in  the  village  of  Hope-
wcll.  Among  his  pupils  were  many  who  subse-
quently became  eminent  as  ministers,  physicians,
and  lawyers.  One  of  these  was  the  He  v.  James
Manning,  the  first  president  of  Rhode  Island  col-
lege, now  Brown  universitv.

BATON,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Sutton.  N.  H..  5
Dec.  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1864,  was  principal  of  a  school  in  Cleveland.  Ohio,

in  iN.->4-'ii,  and  superintendent  of  schools  in  Toledo

in  1850-'9.  He  then  resigned,  studied  for  the  min-
istry at  the  Andorer  theological  seminary, and  was
ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  Mauinec,  Ohio,  on  5
.Sept.,  I80l!  Meanwhile,  in  August,  be  had  l»een
commissioned  chaplain  of  the  27th  Ohio  volun-
teers, was  made  brigade  sanitary  mspector,  and  in
November.  1868,  was  appointed  by  (Jen.  (irant
superintendent  of  contrabands.  A  month  later
he  became  general  superintendent  of  treed  men  for
Mi--issippi,  Arkansas, West  Tennessee, and  North-
ern Louisiana,  and  served  as  such till  27  May,

1866. He  was  o mitrJAntd  colonel  of  the  I'M

U.S.  colored  infantry  on  2  Oct..  1868,  and  received
the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in
March.  1866.  Subsequently  he  was  appointed  as-
sistant commissioner  of  the  bureau  of  refugees,
frcedincn.  and  abandoned  lands,  and  after  thor-
oughly organising  the  bureau  resigned  to  edit  the

"Memphis  Post,"  where  be  continued  from  :

till 1H7<>.  ■erring  M  State  superintendent  of  public

instruction  in  iso7-''.». He  was  appointed  r.  s.

nommisstnnnr flf  education  in  March.  l*7".  and  re-
mained iii  that  capacity  until  August,  lxso.  when

in-  resigned  to  aneept  the  meideney  "f  Marietta

college.  The  bur.au  of  education  at  the  time  of
In-  ap|Miintineiit  had  but  two  clerks,  not  over  a
hundred  volumes  Ulonging  SO  it,  and  no  imiviim
..f  educational  illustrations  and  appliances ;  but
when  he  resigned  shew  sssm  38  assistants  and  a
library  including  l^.tMHI  volumes  and  47,»HH»  pam-
phlet-. Gen.  Katon  represented  the  department
of  the  interior  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  held  in
Philadelphia  in  l*7»;,  he  was  .hi.f  of  the  depart-
ment >f  education  for  the  New  Orleans  exposition
and  organised  that  vast  exhibition,  wits  president
of the International congress  of education held


294


EATON


KATuN


there,  and  vice-president  of  the  International  con-
gnmot  education  held  in  Havre.  France.  Hfl  rc-
oeired  the  degree  of  Ph.  I),  from  Rutgers  in  1872,
ami  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1876.
(J.  ii.  Katon  is  a  member  of  many  learned  associa-
tions, and  has  published  numerous  addresses  and
reports  on  education  and  the  public  affairs  with
wnich  he  has  been  connected.

EATON,  John  Henry,  politician,  b.  in  Tennes-
see in  1790:  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  17  Nov..  IBB*.
He  received  a  thorough  education,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  beginning  to  practise  in
Nashville,  Tcnn.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.S.  senate
as  a  Democrat,  and  served  till  his  resignation  in
1829.  He  was  a  personal  friend  of  Andrew  Jack-
son, and  was  appointed  by  him  secretary  of  war,
holding  the  office  from  1829  till  1831.'  Three  vears
later  he  was  made  governor  of  the  territory  of  Flori-
da, and  held  the  office  till  1836,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  minister  to  Spain,  remaining  there
till  1840.  He  published  "  Life  of  Andrew  Jack-
son "  (Philadelphia,  1824). — His  wife,  Margaret  L.
O'Neill,  b.  in  1796;  d.  in  Washington,  D.C.,  8  Nov.,
1ST!),  was  the  daughter  of  William  O'Neill,  an  Irish
hotel-keeper  in  Washington.  After  the  death  of
her  first  husband.  John  B.  Timberlake,  a  purser  in
the  U.  S.  navy,  she  married  Mr.  Eaton  in  1828.  She
possessed  great  beauty  and  fascination  of  manner
united  to  a  persistent  will  and  high  ambition.  The
appointment  of  Mr.  Eaton  to  the  cabinet  gave  her
a  soeial  position  that  she  had  long  desired,  but,
owing  to  reports  unfavorable  to  her  reputation,  she
was  refused  recognition  on  equal  terms  by  the  fami-
lies of  the  other  members  of  the  cabinet.  The  feud
in  society  caused  by  this  involved  the  president,
who  warmly  supported  his  "little  friend  Peg,"  as
he  was  accustomed  to  call  her.  At  this  time  the
estrangement  between  President  Jackson  and  Vice-
President  Calhoun  had  begun,  and  a  belief  was
awakened  in  the  mind  of  the  former  that  the  latter
had  shrewdly  fomented  the  general  excitement,  and
it  was  said  took  an  active  part  in  promoting  the
crisis.  Finally  the  president  demanded  of  his  sec-
retaries the  recognition  of  the  social  status  of
Mrs.  Eaton,  and  was  refused  by  all  of  them  except-
ing Mr.  Van  Huren.  As  a  compromise  it  was  sug-
gest ei  I  that  her  public  status  should  be  conceded,
while  each  lady  should  act  as  she  chose  in  regard
to  private  recognition. Gen.  Jackson  wrote  a  very

g Iain-spoken  note  on  the  subject  to  Vice-President
alhoun,  but  only  elicited  from  him  the  diplomatic
reply  that  it  was  a  "  ladies'  quarrel,'*  with  which
men  could  not  successfully  interfere,  adding  that
"  the  laws  of  the  ladies  were  like  the  laws  of  the
Medes  and  Persians,  and  admitted  neither  of  argu-
ment nor  of  amendment."  The  quarrel  culminated
in  a  general  disruption  of  the  cabinet  in  1831.  Mrs.
Eaton  was  said  to  have  shone  with  brilliancy  in  the
court  of  Isabella  in  Spain,  and  was  a  social  favorite
in  Paris  and  London.  In  1840  she  returned  to
Washington,  where  she  resided  quietly  till  the
death  of  Mr.  Eaton.  She  was  left  with  a  large  es-
tate, and  the  custody  of  five  grandchildren.  In
1857  she  married  an  Italian,  from  whom  she  was
separated  after  losing  much  of  her  property.

EATON,  Joseph  Oriel,  artist,  b.  in  Licking
county,  Ohio,  8  Feb.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,
7  Feb.,  1875.  He  was  an  effective  genre  and  por-
trait painter,  both  in  oil  and  water-colors.  He
was  an  associate  of  the  National  academy,  and  a
member  of  the  Society  of  painters  in  water-colors,
and  of  the  Artists'  fund  society.  The  works  that
he  exhibited  at  the  National  academy  are  "  Land-
scape View  on  the  Hudson"  (1S(W);  "Moral  In-
struction" (1869) ;  portraits  of  R.  S.  Gifford  (1869)


and  of  Rev.  George  II.  Ih-pworth  (1870);  "  I 'awn-
ing Maternity"  and  MThe  Last  Chapter"  (1871);
"The  Greek  Water-(  airier  "  (1ST;.') ;  and  -  The
Lady  Godiva."  Among  his  water-colors  an-  '•  Vis-
ion of  the  Cross"  (1869);  "Little  Nell  and  her
Grandfather"  (1871);  and  "The  Two  Pets "(1874;.
In  1878  he  travelled  in  Europe.  His  "  Looking
through  the  Kaleidoscope"  and  a  portrait  of  him-
self were  exhibited  after  his  death.  His  most  suc-
cessful subjects  in  portrait-painting  were  children.

EATON,  Samuel  John  Mills, clergyman,  l>.  in
Fairview,  Erie  co.,  Pa.,  15  April,  1820.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  in  1845,  studied  theology  in
the  Western  theological  seminary,  and  entered  the
Presbyterian  ministry  in  1848.  From  that  year
till  1882  he  was  pastor  in  Franklin,  Pa.  He  has
held  the  offices  of  stated  clerk  of  the  presbytery  of
Erie  since  1853 ;  permanent  clerk  of  synod  of  Alle-
gheny from  1859  till  1870 ;  stated  clerk  of  synod
of  Erie  from  1870  till  1881 ;  trustee  of  Washington
and  Jefferson  since  1879 ;  and  director  of  Western
theological  seminary  since  1880.  In  1871  he  visited
Egypt,  Palestine,  Greece,  and  Turkey.  His  pub-
lications are  "Petroleum"  (Philadelphia,  1866);
"History  of  the  Presbytery  of  Erie"  (New  York,
1868) ;  "  History  of  Venango  County,  Pa."  (Frank-
lin, 1876);  " Lakeside " (Pittsburg,  1880) ;  "Memo-
rial of  Cyrus  Dickson,  D.  D."  (New  York,  1883) ;
"Jerusalem"  (1KH4);  >•  Palestine "  (1kn.-»;  ami
"  Memorial  of  Robert  Lamberton  "  (Franklin,  1886).
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Washington  and  Jefferson  in  1869.

EATON,  Thcoph i  1  us.  governor  of  New  Haven,
b.  in  Stony  Stratford,  Oxfordshire,  England,  about
1591 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  7  Jan.,  1658.  He
was  the  son  of  a  clergyman,  and  was  educated  for
mercantile  life.  He  was  sent  by  the  king  of  Eng-
land as  an  agent  to  the  court  of  Denmark,  where
he  remained  several  years,  and  on  his  return  to
London  became  a  merchant  of  high  reputation.  In
1637  he  accompanied  John  Davenport's  party  to
New  England  (see  Davenport,  John),  and  on  his
arrival  in  Massachusetts  was  chosen  to  be  a  magis-
trate. The  Massachusetts  planters  made  strong
efforts  to  retain  the  partv,  who  were  gentlemen  of
wealth  and  character.  The  general  court  offered
them  whatever  place  they  might  choose,  and  the
inhabitants  of  Newbury  agreed  to  give  up  that  town
to  them,  but  they  determined  to  found  a  distinct
colony.  Accordingly,  in  the  fall  of  1637,  Eaton,
with  a  few  friends,  carefully  explored  the  Connecti-
cut coast,  and  finally  selected  a  place  called  Quin-
nipiac,  where  in  March,  1638,  the  colony  was  planted.
In  November,  Eaton  was  one  of  those  who  contract-
ed with  the  Indians  for  the  sale  of  lands  including
what  are  now  seven  townships,  the  price  being  thir-
teen English  coats.  On  4  June,  1639,  he  was  one
of  the  "  seven  pillars  "  selected  to  form  a  govern-
ment for  the  colony.  He  was  chosen  its  first  gov-
ernor, and  continued  in  the  office  till  his  death.
Gov.  Eaton  was  one  of  the  commissioners  that
formed  the  "  United  colonies  of  New  England  "  in
May,  1643,  and  in  1646  he  proposed  to  the  Dutch
governor,  Kieft,  to  settle  all  differences  with  him
by  arbitration.  On  his  arrival  in  New  Haven,
Eaton  attempted  to  carry  on  his  old  mercantile

fur-uits.  but  soon  abandoned  them  for  agriculture,
n  person  he  was  handsome  and  of  commanding
figure,  and,  although  strict  and  severe  in  religious
matters,  he  was  affable  and  courteous. — His  brot  her,
Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  about  1597;  d.
in  Denton,  Lancashire,  England.  9  June.  1666,  VM
educated  at  Magdalen  college,  Cambridge,  receiv-
ing the  degree  of  li.  A.  in  1(524,  and  that  of  M.  A.
in  1628. Shortly  after  leaving  th%  university  he


EATON


BATOM


mo


took  orders  hi  the  Church  "f  England,  but  could

ii"t  i ■•■ns»'J4-i it  inii-.lv  conform  toil*  IHMH,  and  came

Kngland  with  his  brother  Theophilu*  in

..  becoming  assistant  pastor  with  John  I»hmh-

jMirt  at  N.-w  liiivni. H«-  differed  front hit oolleagns

in  res|H«ct  to  tin-  principles. ,f  Oil  il  pWDBMBti  ami
returned to Kngland hi 104<>,  with tin-  design  of

1  fathering  11  company  t<>  settle  TobohsJ  (afterward
. fonh,  <>f  which  arrant  ha<l  Im-«-h  made  t<>  him.
After  leaving  New  Haven  he  preached  for  some
time  in  Boston,  where  an  unsuccessful  attempt  was
made  to  secure  In-  sen  ices  |H-rinanently.  <  Mi  reach-
Bngland  he  (bund  soon  an  improvement  in  Un-
civil ami  ecclesiastical  Condition  <>f  tin-  country
that  In-  remained  there  till  his  death,  holding  vari-
ous pastoratea.  In  UW2  he  was  silenced  by  the  act
of  uniformity.  His  pubUoatioOJ  included  "  Defence
of  Sundry  Positions  and  Scriptures  alleged  to  jus-
tifv  the  Congregational  Way  (1045;  second  part,
IMA);  "The  Nuaterj  of  God  Incarnate"  (1650);

"  Treatise  of  the  Oath  of  Allegiance  and  Covenant  "
•  >:  and  "Human  Life"  in  seventeen  sermons
(London,  LT54V.— Another  brother,  Nathaniel,
educator,  h.  in  Kngland  abooJ  HUM);  d.  in  London
after  1000,  was  educated  at  Francker.  in  the  Neth-
erlands, and  it  is  said  that  he  entered  the  order
of  Jesuits,  He  came  to  New  Kngland  with  his
brothers,  and  in  1037  was  appointed  first  profes-
sor of  the  school  (afterward  ilarvard  college)  that
had  been  established  by  the  legislature  in  the  pre-
ceding year.  Mather  speaks  of  him  as  "a  Blade
who  marvellously  deceived  the  Expectation  of
Good  Men  concerning  him,  for  he  was  One  fitter
to  be  Master  <>f  a  Bridewell  than  a  Colledge;  and
though  his  Avarice  was  notorious,  yet  his  Cruelty
was  more  Scandalous  than  his  Avarice.  He  was
a  Rare  Scholar  himself,  and  he  made  many  more
such;  but  their  Education  truly  was  in  the  School
of  Tyrannus."  His  pupils  complained  of  bad  food
and  ill  treatment,  and  in  September,  1039,  Eaton
was  fined  100  marks  for  beating  his  usher,  Nathan-
iel Briscoe,  "with  a  cudgel,'  and  was  removed
from  his  jH.st..  He  Bad  to  Virginia,  leaving  debts
amounting  to  £1,000,  and  was  afterward  excom-
municated by  the  Cambridge  churches.  Winthrop
says  that  "in  Virginia  he  took  upon  him  to  be  a
minister,  but  was  given  up  of  God  to  extreme  pride
and  sensualitv,  U-ing  usuallv  drunken,  as  the  cus-
tom is  there."'  lb-  returned  to  Kngland  in  1045,
and  after  the  restoration  became  a  parish  minister
in  Biddeford.  Devonshire.  He  was  afterward  put
into  the  King's  bench  prison  for  debt.  *•  where."
says  Mather,  "  he  did  at  length  pay  One  Debt,
iiatnelv.  that  unto  Nature,  by  Death."

EATON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  _>:{  Feb.,  1704;  d.  in  BrimhVM,  Mass.,  1
June,  1K11.  His  father,  a  school-master  ami  farmer,
removed  to  Mansfield  about  1774.  At  the  age  of
sixteen  the  son  entered  the  Revolutionary  army,
which  he  left  in  L788,  having  attained  to  the  rank
<-t  M-rgeant.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1  790,  and  in  1701  was  chosen  clerk  of  the  house  of
delegates,  where  be  remained  until  1?!»7.  In  that
he  was  appointed  consul  to  Tunis,  and  arrived
there  in  March.  17!M».  For  several  years  he  was
engaged  in  a  series  of  negotiations  and  altercations
with  the  bey  in  reference  to  the  annual  payment

of  tribute  money, and  acted  with  a  bokmesaand
tact  that  secured  to  the  eonuneros  of  his  country
an  immunity  from  the  attacks  of  Tunisan  cruisers.
He  returned  to  tin-  I'nited  State-,  in  1N03,  am'..

iving  the  appointment  of  U.  s.  naval  agent  to
the Barliarv states, a<-coinpanie<l the American

to  the  Mediterranean  in  the  summer  of  1804

The  reigning  pacha  of  Tripoli,  JttSSUf  Caramalli,


A ^


had  gained  the  thn>m- by  InaajBM  his  brother

Haunt.  on  learning  that  the  latter  had  taken
refuge  in  Egypt,  Kat-.n  sought  him  out,  and  with
the  sanction  of  the  government  pr..|«**d  to  rein-
-tat.-  him.  In  tin-  early  part  of  1N05  he  assembled
a  force  of  about 500  im-n.  four  fifth- ..f  wh..m

Aral«s,  the  re-
mainder !>cing<ireeks
and  a  few  Americans.
After  securing  the  <••>-
o|M-ration  of  tin-  Cni-
ted  States  squadn >n.
this  small  army,  un-
der the  command  of
Ccn.  Baton,  marched
000  miles  across  the

Libyan desert to

Derm-,  tin-  capital  of
the  richest  province
of  TrijM)li.  On  sev-
eral occasions  the  inu-

tinous  disposition  of

the  Arab  sheiks  and
the  irre-nlutioti  of
Hainet  Imperilled  the
safety  of  the  few-
Christians  belonging
to  the  expedition,  but
the  forces  were  tinallv  brought  to  Bomba,  where
the  "Argus"  and  "Hornet,"  under  command  of
Isaac  Hull,  were  in  waiting.  On  17  April.  1808,
fire  was  opened  upon  the  town  and  lotteries.
After  a  bombardment  of  an  hour,  which  drove
the  enemv  from  their  guns,  the  land  force,  num-
bering about  1.2<M),  carried  the  works  by  storm,
and  Commander  Hull  raised  the  United  States
flag,  which  floated  for  the  first  time  over  a  forti-
fication on  that  side  of  the  Atlantic.  The  guns
were  turned  upon  the  town,  which  capitulated
after  a  furious  assault  from  tin-  other  side,  in
which  Eaton  was  severely  wounded.  A  few  days
later  an  army  of  several  thousand  TripoUtana,  de-
spatched by  the  bey,  approached  tin-  town,  and
for  several  wicks  sharp  skirmishes  took  place  be-
tween the  opposing  forces.  At  the  moment  when
Eaton  was  preparing  to  fall  upon  TriiM.li  by  a
rapid  march,  intelligence  arrived  that  Tobias  I^*r,
the  F.  S.  consul-general  at  Algiers,  had  negotiated
with  the  reigning  bey  a  treaty,  among  whose  pn>-
visi.ms  was  that  $00,000  should  be  paid  for  the
ransom  <>f  the  American  captives.  Haunt  retired
to  Syracuse,  ami  the  pacha  retained  custody  of  his
wife'  and  children.  Eaton  accused  CoL  Lear  of
treachery,  and  of  betraying  the  interests  of  the
government.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States,
(Jen.  Eaton  was  well  received,  and  honorably  men-
tioned in  the  president's  message,  but  failed  to
obtain  QOmpOMation  from  the  government  for  his
pecuniary  losses,  or  such  recognition  as  bt
Slassachusetts,  "desirous  to  perpetuate  a  remem-
brance of  heroic  enterprise."  granted  him  IOjOQO
acres  of  land,  and  in  acknowledgment  of  his
release  of  tin-  Danish  captives  he  was  presented
with  a  gold  box  by  the  king  of  Denmark.  In  1806
Aaron Burr endeavored im-fTiitually to enlist

Baton  in  hta oonapiraey* and  on  his  trial  in  Rich-
mond the  latter  was  one  of  the  nrnst  ini]N»rtant .
witnesses  against  him.  Eaton's  last  years  were
spent  in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  which  town  he  repre-
sented in  the  legislatii!  Life  of  QeO.
Eaton  "  bv  Festus  Foster  (Brookfleld.  1M:»>.  and  a
memoir  I. v  President  Cornelius  C.  Feltoii  inSnarks's
"American  Biographies."— His  son.  Nathaniel
Johnson,  d.  in  Alton.  III..  20  March.  I***,  was
graduated  at  the  V.  S.  military  academy  in If


396


EATON


KHI'.Ii  LB


but  left  the  armv  in  1837,  and  was  port  warden  of
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  from  1850  till  1877.— William"-  tir>t
cousin,  Amos,  lx>tanist,  b.  in  Clint  ham.  N.  Y.,  17
May.  1778;  <L  in  Troy,  N.  V..  8  -May,  1842,  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1799,  studied  law  under
Elisha  Williams  and  Joseah  O.  Hoffman,  was  ad-
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1808,  and  afterward  In-camc
agent  and  surveyor  of  the  Livingston  estates  on
tiic  Hudson  river.  He  studied  chemist ry,  miner-
alogy, and  botany,  in  1810  delivered  at  Catskill  a
popular  course  of  lectures  on  botany,  and  began
lecturing  on  the  natural  sciences  at  Williams  col-
lege in  1817.  His  lectures  were  also  delivered  in
several  New  England  cities,  and  in  1818,  by  request
of  Gov.  Clinton,  were  repeated  before  the  legisla-
ture of  New  York.  As  a  result  of  his  suggestion
at  Albany,  "The  Natural  History  of  New  York"
was  published.  In  1820  Gen.  Stephen  Van  .Rens-
selaer employed  him  to  make  a  geological  and
agricultural  survey  of  several  counties  and  of  the
regions  through  which  the  Erie  canal  afterward
passed,  and  it  was  the  initiation  of  such  surveys
in  this  country,  reports  of  which  were  published.
Also  in  1820  he  was  elected  professor  of  natural
history  in  the  medical  college  at  Castleton,  Vt.
When  Van  Rensselaer  established  the  Polytechnic
institute  at  Troy  in  1824,  Mr.  Eaton  became  its
principal  and  senior  professor.  He  was  author  of
numerous  works,  including  "  Manual  of  the  Botany
of  North  America,"  the  first  popular  text-book  on
that  science  published  in  the  United  States  (1817) ;
an  "  Index  to  the  Geology  of  the  Northern  States  "
(Albany,  1818) ;  "  Geological  and  Agricultural  Sur-
vey of  the  District  adjoining  the  Erie  Canal"
(1824);  "The  Philosophical  Instructor"  (1824);
and  a  "  Treatise  on  Engineering  and  Surveying  "
(New  York,  1838). — His  son,  Amos  Beebe,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1806;  d.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  21  Feb.,  1877,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1826.  He  took  part  in
the  Seminole  war,  was  appointed  chief  commissary
of  subsistence  of  Gen.  Taylor's  army  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  brevetted  major
after  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.  He  was  depot
purchasing  commissary  in  New  York  from  1861
till  1864,  when  he  was  appointed  commissary-gen-
eral of  the  subsistence  bureau  in  Washington,  D.  C.
After  being  promoted  successively  to  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-general,
he  was  brevetted  major-general  in  1865,  and  was
placed  on  the  retired  list  in  1874. — Amos  Beebe's
son,  Daniel  Cady,  botanist,  b.  at  Fort  Gratiot,
Michigan,  12  Sept.,  1834,'  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1857,  and  studied  botany  at  Harvard  in  1860.
He  became  professor  of  botany  at  Yale  in  1864.
He  is  the  author  of  that  part  of  Chapman's  "  Flora
of  the  Southern  States  "  (1860)  that  treats  of  ferns,
and  the  corresponding  part  of  "  Grav's  Manual"
(5th  ed.,  1867),  and  has  published  "  The  Ferns  of
North  America  "  (Boston,  1879-'80)),  and  various
scientific  papers. — Amos  Beebe's  nephew,  Daniel
Cady,  b.  in  Johnstown,  Fulton  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  June,
1837,  was  educated  at  Gottingen  gymnasium,  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1860,  and  the  University
of  Berlin.  He  was  professor  of  the  history  of  art
in  Yale  from  1869  till  1876,  and  is  the  author  of
a  "  Hand-Book  of  Greek  and  Roman  Sculpture "
(Boston.  8d  ed.,  1K86),  and  numerous  pamphjnts  on
art  and  education,  including  one  on  "  Yale  College
in  1883,"  published  anonymously,  which  attracted
much  attention  (New  Haven,  1888).

EATON,  William  Wallace,  senator,  b.  in  Tol-
land, Conn.,  11  Oct.,  1816.  He  was  educated  by
private  tutors  and  in  the  public  schools,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837. He


soon  became  prominent  in  toed  polities,  was  elected
to  the  Connecticut  house  of  representative-  in  |  -
and  1848.  ami  to  the  state  senate  in  1850.  Shortly
afterward  he  removed  to  Hartford,  and  frequently
represented  that  city  in  the  legislature  from  1858
till  1875.  He  was  clerk  of  the  superior  and  supreme
courts  of  Tolland  and  Hart  font  counties,  and  [of
several  years  one  of  the  judges  of  the  Hart  ford  city
court.  For  four  years  he  was  a  recorder  of  Hart-
ford. During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  pronounced
"  peace  democrat."  In  1875  he  succeeded  William
A.  Buckingham  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  till
1881.  In  1883-'5  he  was  a  representative  in  congress.

EATON,  Wyatt,  artist,  b.  in  Phillipsburg,  Can-
ada, 6  May,  1849.  After  studying  at  the  National
academy,  New  York,  and  under  Joseph  0.  Raton,
he  was  a  pupil  of  G£rome  in  Paris.  In  1872  he
studied  and  sketched  in  England  and  France.  For
several  years  his  studio  was  in  New  York  city,
where  he  painted  portraits  and  landscapes  with
figures.  He  was  the  first  secretary  of  the  Society
of  American  artists.  His  works  include  "Farm-
er's Boy"  (1870);  "Reverie"  (1875);  "Harvesters
at  Rest"  (1876);  "Bov  Whittling";  "  Portrait  of
William  Cullen  Brvant"  (1879);  and  "Grand-
mother and  Child  "  (i880).

EBELINO,  Christoph  Daniel,  German  scholar,
b.  near  Hildesheim,  Hanover,  in  1741 ;  d.  in  Ham-
burg, 30  June,  1817.  He  studied  theology  at  G5ttin-
gen,  but  devoted  himself  to  geographical  studies,
and  held  for  thirty-three  years  the  chair  of  history
and  Greek  in  the  Hamburg  gymnasium.  He  was
also  superintendent  of  the  Hamburg  library,  and
collected  about  10,000  maps  and  nearly  4,000  books
relating  to  America.  His  collection  was  bought  by
Israel  Thorndike  in  the  year  after  Ebeling's  death,
and  given  by  him  to  Harvard.  Ebeling's  great  work
was  a  "  Geography  and  History  cf  North  America  "
(5  vols.,  Hamburg,  1796-1816),  forming  a  continu-
ation of  Biisching's  "General  Geography."  He
received  a  vote  of  thanks  from  the  congress  of  the
United  States  for  this  work.

EBERLE,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  Pa.,  10  Dec,  1787 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,
2  Feb.,  1838.  He  studied  medicine  in  Lancaster
and  Philadelphia,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1809.  He  began  to
practise  in  Manheim,  Pa.,  and,  after  living  for  a
short  time  in  Lancaster,  accepted  a  commission
as  surgeon  of  militia,  serving  at  the  battle  at
Baltimore  in  1814.  He  then  removed  to  Philadel-
phia, where  he  was  appointed  physician  to  the
poor.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Jefferson
medical  college  in  1822,  and  was  given  the  chair  of
physic  there  in  1825,  being  transferred  in  1830  to
that  of  materia  medica,  and  lecturing  at  the  same
time  on  obstetrics.  He  removed  in  1831  to  Cincin-
nati, where  he  held  the  professorship  of  materia
medica  in  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio  till  1837,
and  was  next  called  to  the  chair  of  the  practice  of
medicine  in  the  medical  department  of  Transyl-
vania university,  Lexington,  Ky.,  where  he  con-
tinued till  his  death.  lie  was  a  member  of  many
medical  and  scientific  societies.  Dr.  Eberle  was
one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Western  Medical  Ga-
zette" and  the  "Ohio  Medical  Lyceum,"  as  well  as
of  the  Philadelphia  "Medical  Reconler."  which  he
conducted  from  1818  till  1823.  His  works  include
"  Botanical  Terminology  "  (1818) ;  "  Treatise  on  the
Diseases  and  Physical  Education  of  Children"
(Philadelphia,  1819);  "Treatise  on  Therapeutics
sad  Materia  Medica"  (2  vols.,  1822;  5th  ed..  1847);
and  -  Note-  of  Lector—  on  the  Theory  and  Prac-
tice of  Medicine"  (2  vols.,  1844).  Some  of  these
works  have  been  translated  into  German.


El  HI


wan


ECCLl  &  Henry,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in  Bath,

England,  in 1*17;  d. in  Toronto,
II. was  educated  in  Canada  by  In-  father,  a  retired
British  officer,  studied  law,  and  was  celled  t<>  Un-
bar in  1848, lb-  MM  llM  ■  t  ■  -<•  1  I  hcm-hcr  of  the  Ijaw
:.  and  appointed  qneenli  counsel  in
He  beoame  v.rv  prommonl  la  his  profession,
was  noted  fur  the  clearm-s  ami  ahnpHoti y  of  Mi
.  ami  was  also  famous  f<>r  his  power  of  eztOlt>
in);  tM  tmtfa  from  witnesses.

I  (  (  LEMON,  Samuel,  li.  C.  archbishop,  »>.  in
Kent  county.  M<1..  in  1N01  ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  |).
('..  in  1861.  He  entered  St.  Mary's  college,  Balti-
im>re.  and  while  there  boOBJM  I  Roman  Catholic.
Pursuing  his  studies  in  the  theological  seminary
there,  he  was  ordained  in  1886,  and  afterward
took  a  course  in  the  Ecclesiastical  college  of  Issv,
near  Paris.  < >n  hi-  return  he  successively  tilled
the  offices  of  vice-president  and  president  of  St.
Mary's  college. In  \K\4  he  was  consecrated  coad-

J'utor  archbishop  of  Halt  imore.  and  succeeded  Areh-
lishop  Whit  field  in  the  MOM  year.  Several  new
academics  for  the  education  of  girls  were  built  un-
der his  care  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  nuns  of
the  Visitation,  and  the  Christian  Btothen  estab-
lished a  novitiate  and  t rain iug-sclu >ol  of  their  or-
der under  his  auspices.  1'arochial  schools  were
multiplied  and  placed  Under  the  care  of  the  Broth-
ers of  St.  Patrick,  and  (Jennan  parishes  were  or-
Sinized  under  tin-  direction  of  the  Hedemptorists.
r.  Ecclcson  founded  the  College  of  St.  Charles  in
1850.  and  shortly  afterward  introduced  the  Lazar-
ists  into  his  diocese.  He  presided  over  five  pro-
vincial councils,  and  took  the  initiative  in  impor-
tant legislation,  including  the  law  passed  by  the
council  of  18401  providing  for  the  transmission  of
church  property  from  a  bishop  to  his  BUOCeasor,
and  that  of  1848,  excommunicating  Roman  Catho-
lics who  should  marry  after  being  divorced  bv  the
state.  During  the  exile  of  Pius  IX.  in  1849  he
was  invited  by  Archbishop  Eccleson  to  visit  Balti-
timore  and  preside  over  the  provincial  council.

It  II  AVE,  Baltasar  de  (ey-ohah'-vay),  Spanish-
Mexican  artist,  b.  in  Zuinava,  (iuipuzcoa,  Spain,  in
the  latter  part  of  the  16th  century;  d.  in  Mexico
about  the  middle  of  the  17th  century.  He  is  gen-
erally called  Echave  the  elder,  as  there  was  anot  her
fainter  of  the  same  name,  supjtosed  to  have  lieen
is  son.  He  came,  when  very  young.  t>  the  New
World,  and,  although  he  had  prolmbly  begun  his
artistic  studies  in  Spain,  he  finished  them  in  Mexico.
In  the"  Profess"  church  of  Mexico  t  here  are  several
lent  paintings  of  his.  including  "  Saint  Isaln-1
of  Portugal,'*  but  his  I>est  paintings  are  in  the  Na-
tional academy  of  San  Carlos.  Among  these  last,
which  recall  the  manner  of  Queroino,  are  -  The
Visitation."  "  The  Adoration  of  the  Three  Magi-
cians," and  the  "  Adoration  in  the  Garden,"  Tin-
latter  has  been  compared  by  some  artists  to  the
best  productions  of  Overlieck.  especially  as  re-
gards correct  composition.  In  Bondage  Tmlteloloo
there were  fifteen altar panels  on wood  by  him,

dated  lfitw,  soma  of  them  very  mod,  bsl  far  Infe-
rior to  those  a4  the  Prof eSS.  He  aNo  painted  some
smaller  pictures,  the  best  representing  the  conver-
sation of  Saint  Antonio  AImkI  with  Saint  Paul,  the
tir-t  hermit,  which.  Itcsides  the  merits  of  the  larger
paintings,  baa  an  extraordinary  delicacy  of  execu-
tion. All  his  works  are  more  aotabla  for  correct-
ness of  design  than  for  richness  of  color,  hut  gen-
erally his  later  work-,  painted  in  I6S  far

rior  to  his  earlier  pictures,  dated  from  160
1618, Behave  was  alao notable as a philologist
and  author. His  best-known  work  is  a  treatise  on
the  ..rigin  of  the  Hiscayan  language,  ••  Autigucdad


de  la  lengua  de  Cantal.ria,"  which  has  been  fji
ably  noticed  bj  the  learned  I-arrumrndi  ami  A»-
tarloaf  Mexico,  1681%

MIM\MH\. Manuel (ay-clmy-an-dc'-ah).
South  American  statesman,  b.  in  Uuaranda,  Ecua-
dor, m  i:^{:  ,i.  it,  Oenoaa.Yeneaaeli
went  to  Spain  in  1>U  and  entered  the  (..Megs  of
Vergara. He  became  clerk  in  the  n.val
at  Caracas  in 1HH>.  ami l.v  HWCiaalu  piUUlut
rose  to  chief  clerk in 1810,  but resigned  in  that
year  to  job  the  revolulioin-t*. He  Bamd  f|,,
pultlic in many important poaBJOfM till I
when  ho  WW  comptroller  of  the  treasury. Thcdi*-
a-lersof  that v.-ar  ohHsofl  him  to  emigrate  with
the  army,  and  lie  served  in  the  batUai  whi-h  fol-
lowed, lie  hecame  captain  of  the  guard  of  Carta-
gena, and  afterward  adjutant  -major. In 1818  the
republicans  wen-  ohUgad U)  surn-nder  Cartagi-na.

and  Bnheandia  went  to  the  West  indies  to  Jon
theexpedition  preparing  to  invade  VeneanehVi He

arrive«l  too  late,  but  followed  with  mppliei  in  I *- !«..
Hearing  of  the  diaaaten  which  had  befallen  the  in-
vaders, he  sbipintl  at  the  island  of  Curazao,  where

ha  suffered  from  a  long  rintnam and  the  privation-
of  extreme  poverty,  the  Spaniards  having  confis-
cated his  posaessioni  in  venasnela,  He  rejoined
the  republican  army  in  Qnayana  in  1818,  wa-  made

commissary-general,  and  accompanied  the  army  of
Bolivar  in  the  victorious  campaign  of  1819, becom-
ing quartermaster  and  afterward  Colonel  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  organization  of  the  treat
of  Venezuela  in  1X50.  and  in  the  passage  of  fiscal
laws.  In  1842  the  government  accorded  him  a
pension  in  consideration  of  his  important  services.
E(  HEMOIE,  Jose  Kuflno  (ay-ehay-ne'-kayl
Peruvian  soldier.  1».  in  Puiio,  Peru.  M  Feb..  1806;  0
In  Arequipa,  18  Oct,  1870.  He  entered  the  Peru-
vian army  as  a  cadet  in  1821,  took  part  in  the  cam-
paign of  Internicdios  in  1H'J:<.  and  fought  at  the
battle  of  Oochabamba,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner
and  sent  to  the  island  of  E-te\e-.  in  Lake  Tit icaca.
After  the  battle  of  Ayaciicho.  !)  I »•-« -..  1884,  he  was
art  at  liberty,  rejoined  his  battalion,  ami  in  daily
battles  contributed  to  the  pacification  of  Punas  de

[quicha,  which  was  held  by  the  royaueta  lb-
twice  fought  against  the  fortressm  of  Csllao,  which
rebelled  on  14  Nov..  lsao.  and  on  IS  .Ian..  1881,  be
retreated  to  the  Andes  and  occupied  Cerro  Pasco.
In  March  of  the  same  year  Bchoniqnc  fought  at
Junin  against  (Jen.  Miller,  and  on  80  .Ian.  defend*
ed  the  bridge  of  Jobero  with  fourteen  foUoe
against  1<X>  men  under  the  same  general.  He  was
promoted  colonel  on  510  April,  1888.  When  (Jen.
Santa  Cruz  occupied  Peru  in  1888,  Bcheniqne  in-
fused to  join  him  ;  but  in  1848,  during  the  admin-
istration of  Vivauoo,  be  again  entered  the  army,
and  was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  Lima.
In  that  vear  the  civil  war  was  devastating  the  coun-
try, and  Echeniqoe  left  Lima  at  the  head  of  a
small  army,  with  which  he  occupied  .lunin  and
Ayaciicho.  and  later,  together  with  (Jen.  Castillo,
checked  the  second  revolution  headed  by  DoB
Elias.  whom  they  forced to  submit. <>n 14 Id-c,

1846,  Bchenique  was  promoted  general.  He  wss
elected  deputy,  senator,  ami  nminaallof  of  -tatc.
and  from  1*46  till  1881  was  rice-president  of  the
republic.  He  wa-  sleeted  president  in  1888.  Inir-
ing  his  administration  he  fostered  the  material  as
well  as  the  moral  progress  and  development  of  his
country.  In  1S.VI  he  established  the  navigation  of
the  up|M-r  Amazon,  which  proved  beneficial  to  the
town-  along  its  course.  In  1864,  Elias  and  Castillo
revolted  against  him.  and  he  was  defeated  in  the
itiuggla  thai  followed,  afterward  going  abroad.

where  he  remained for  Sivaa  years, lb-  returned


208


ECHEVERRfA


Ec'KFELDT


to  Peru  in  1862,  and  in  1864  was  elected  to  con-
gress. He  was  president  of  the  lower  house,  after-
ward senator,  and  twice  president  of  the  latter
body.  On  May  2, 1866,  he  took  part  in  the  combat
of  Callao  against  the  Spanish  squadron.  Gen.
Kchcniciue  was  decorated  with  several  foreign  or-
ders.— His  son,  Juan  Martin,  b.  in  Lima  in  1841,
was  educated  in  Spain,  and  since  1850  he  has  taken
active  part  in  the  politics  of  Peru.  When  in  1884
the  Spanish  fleet  took  the  Chinchas  islands,  although
seriously  ill,  he  sailed  from  Europe  to  offer  his
services  to  his  country,  and  at  his  request  was
placed  on  board  of  a  Peruvian  ship,  where  he  re-
mained till  the  Vivanco-Pareia  treaty.  When  Gen.
Pezet's  government  was  overthrown  and  war  against
Spain  declared,  Echenique  again  entered  the  ser-
vice as  captain,  embarking  in  the  sloop-of-war
"  Union,"  and  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  Chiloe
and  the  combat  of  Abtao.  Soon  afterward  he
was  sent  to  Europe  to  witness  the  Austro-Prussian
war.  He  was  one  of  the  principal  authors  of  the
project  to  abolish  the  sale  of  guano  on  consign-
ment, and  was  sent  as  an  agent  by  his-government
to  Europe  in  1869,  where  he  negotiated  the  Dreyfus
treaty.  He  has  lately  dedicated  himself  exclusively
to  economic  studies,  and  holds  a  prominent  place
among  the  statesmen  of  his  country.

ECHEVERR1A,  I  Mr  ban  (ay-tche-ver-re'-ah),
South  American  poet,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  Argen-
tine Republic,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Montevideo,  Uruguay,
in  1851.  He  began  publishing  poems  at  the  age  of
twenty,  spent  some  time  in  study  in  France,  and,
on  his  return  to  his  native  land,  issued  "  Elvira  6
la  novia  del  Plata,"  which  was  unworthy  of  his
talent  and  not  well  received.  He  afterward  pub-
lished a  volume  of  short  poems  entitled  "  Consue-
los  "  (1834),  which  established  his  reputation  as  a
poet.  He  wrote  several  poems  narrating  the  he-
roic deeds  of  those  who  risked  their  lives  in  de-
fending their  country  against  the  tyrant  Rosas,
and  in  consequence  was  obliged  to  go  into  exile.
His  best-known  works  are  "  La  Cautiva,"  contain-
ing exquisite  descriptions  of  the  pampas  and  the
Argentine  people,  and  "Rimas"  (1837);  "La  Gui-
tarra,"  "  Angel  caido,"  "  Avellaneda,"  and  "  La  in-
surrection del-Sud  "  (Montevideo,  1849).

ECHEVERRIA,  Manuel  Mariano,  South
American  missionary,  b.  at  Quito  about  1730 ;  d.
there  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th  century.  In
1767  he  was  appointed  superior  of  the  missions  of
Mainas  and  those  on  the  banks  of  the  Maraflon,
and  on  2  Jan.,  1768,  at  the  head  of  twenty-
eight  priests,  he  set  out  for  his  post.  He  worked
with  ardor,  and  did  much  to  improve  the  moral
and  material  condition  of  the  wild  Indian  tribes.
On  his  return  from  the  missions  he  was  appoint-
ed prebendary  to  the  Cathedral  of  Quito,  but  died
soon  after.  Echeverria  wrote  "Descripci6n  de
Mainas"  (1784),  a  work  which  has  remained  un-
edited, but  is  valuable  for  the  information  it  con-
tains about  the  villages  of  the  province  of  Mai-
nas, including  Napo  and  Canelos,  the  number  of
their  inhabitants,  their  exact  positions,  and  their
natural  and  industrial  products.

ECKARD,  James  Read,  missionary,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Nov.,  1805.  He  was  gradu-
ated from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  Wk%
and  practised  law  in  1826-'30,  was  a  director  of\
public  schools  in  Philadelphia  in  1828,  but  after-
ward studied  for  the  ministry  and  was  ordained  as
a  Presbyterian  evangelist  on  21  July,  1833.  He
was  a  missionary  in  the  island  of  Ceylon,  residence
in  Jaffna,  1833-'5,  in  Madura,  Hindostan,  1835-'6,
again  in  Jaffna  from  1836  till  1843,  agent  of  the
American  board  in  Georgia  in  1844,  missionary


and  principal  of  the  Chatham  academy.  Savannah,
(in.,  in  1844-'6,  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1848-'58,  and  at  Asburv.
N.  J.,  in  1860-7.  Ptom  1868  till  1*72  he  was  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  and  history  in  Lafavette  college,
Pennsylvania.  When  in  Ceylon,  Dr.  Eckard  pub-
lished, in  the  Tamil  language,  an  essay  on  "  Faith
and  Justification"  (Jaffna,  Ceylon,  1834),  also,  in
English  and  Tamil,  the  "  Hindoo  Traveller"  (Jaff-
na. 1888),  designed  for  natives  educated  to  read
English.  On  his  return  he  issued  a  narrative  of
some  of  the  missionary  operations  in  India  (Phila-
delphia, 1844),  and  "An  Outline  of  English  Law
from  Blackstone."  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Lafayette  college,  Easton,  Pa. — His
wife,  Margaret  Esther  Bayard,  b.  on  Cumber-
land Island,  Ga.,  18  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  Sumter
county,  S.  C,  29  Feb.,  1872.  She  was  second  di-
rectress of  the  Washington,  D.  C,  Protestant  or-
phan asylum  in  1858,  and  gave  her  husband  much
assistance  in  his  missionary  work  in  Ceylon  and
Madura,  Hindostan.

KCKERT,  Thomas  Thompson,  telegrapher,  b.
in  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  23  April,  1825.  In  1849  he
was  appointed  postmaster  at  Wooster,  Ohio,  and
as  he  had  learned  telegraphy,  the  wires  were
brought  into  his  office.  In  1852  he  supervised  the
construction  of  the  telegraph  line  between  Pitts-
burg and  Chicago,  over  the  Fort  Wayne  route,  and
was  offered  the  superintendency.  When  the  lines
under  his  management  were  made  a  part  of  the
Western  Union  telegraph  company,  his  jurisdiction
became  largely  extended.  In  1859  he  left  this  to
superintend  the  affairs  of  a  gold-mining  company
in  Montgomery  county,  N.  C„  where  he  remained
until  the  civil  war  began,  when  he  removed  to
Cincinnati.  He  was  called  to  take  charge  of  the
military  telegraph  office  at  the  headquarters  of
Gen.  McClellan,  and  in  1862  accompanied  that
officer  to  the  peninsula  as  superintendent  of  the
military  telegraph,  Department  of  the  Potomac,
with  the  rank  of  captain  and  assistant  quarter-
master. In  September  he  was  called  to  Washing-
ton to  establish  the  military  telegraph  headquar-
ters in  the  war  department  buildings,  and  was
promoted  to  the  rank  of  major.  From  this  time
till  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  on  intimate  terms
with  President  Lincoln  and  Sec.  Stanton.  In  1864
he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  afterward
brigadier-general.  The  same  year  he  was  appoint-
ed assistant  secretary  of  war,  retaining  the  office
till  1866,  when  he  resigned  and  became  general
superintendent  of  the  eastern  division  of  the  lines
of  the  Western  Union  telegraph  company.  In  1875
he  became  president  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific
telegraph  company,  and  in  1880  president  of  the
American  Union  telegraph  company.  On  the  con-
solidation of  these  companies  with  the  Western
Union  telegraph  company,  in  1881,  he  returned
to  the  service  of  the  latter  company  as  vice-presi-
dent and  general  manager.

ECKFELDT,  Jacob  Reese,  assayer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  March,  1803 ;  d.  there,  9  Aug.,
1872.  He  earl v  entered  the  U.  S.  mint,  when  his
father  was  chief  coiner,  and  by  his  capabilities
rapidly  rose  until  he  was  made  chief  assayer.  Dur-
ing his  term  of  office  some  English  sovereigns  were
sent  to  the  mint  for  recoinage,  and  they  w<
ported  bv  him  as  below  the  standard  claimed.  This
was  confidently  denied  by  the  English  authorities,
who  said,  "It  is  impossible;  the  London  mint
makes  no  mistakes."  Mr.  Eckfeldt  maintained
that  he  was  right,  and  subsequently  an  i 1 1 %  •
tion  showed  that  he  was.  The  excitement  in  mone-
tary circles  that  followed  resulted  yi  a  parliann-n-


"|;|,


KDDY


MO


x^  k^£*


tarv  law  ordering  the  closest  poasiUc  examination
of  the  weight  and  fincneaa  of  nil  t !■«-  «-. »i r »—  in  the
world. It whs  found that thoSS  <>f lbs  United

States  were  more  uniform  tlmn  the  coins  of  other

nations,  hii>1  thenceforth  Mr.  Bckfeldt'e  reputation
ss  an  awarer  was  world-wide.  The  ofttM  So  wliich
he  was  appointed  « 1  ii ri titT  Andrew  Jackson's  BJI  -1-
dencr  he  held  until  his  death.

H  KKOKII.  Henry,  naval  architect,  b.  in  Ir-
v  in.-. S-otlaud. II March.  1778;  d. in  Constanti-
nople. 1J  Nov..  1888. In  his  sixteenth  year  In-  was
placed  with  a  naval  constructor  at  Guanas,  an<l  in
moved to  New  York,  where he  introduced

hraortant  changes  in  the  art  of  ship-building,  and
took  the  lead  in  this  business,  his  vessels  proving
superior  in  strength  and  spatd.  In  the  second
war  with  (treat  Britain,  1818-15,  he  was  employed
l>y  the  government
toconstruct  ships-of-
war  on  the  lakes,  ami
filled  the  contract
with  expedition  and
skill.  After  the  war
he  built  the  steam-
er "  Robert  Fulton,"
which,  in  \H'2'2,  made
the  first  successful
voyage  by  steam  to
New  Orleans  and  Ha-
vana. When  after-
ward ripped  into  a
sailing-vessel  she  be-
anie the  fastest  and
most  efficient  sloop-
of-war  in  the  Brazil-
ian navy.  Mr.  Bok-
ford  was  appointed
naval  constructor  at
Brook Ivn  in  1820.  Six  ships-of-t  he-line,  of  which
the  "Ohio"  was  the  first,  were  built  after  his  models.
The  "Ohio,"  which  was  one  of  the  old  line-of-hattle
shins,  was  in  her  day  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world,
and  Mr.  Kckford  distinguished  himself  in  design-
ing and  building  these  ships-of-war.  The  "  Ohio  "
was  three  times  in  special  government  service;
twice  a  flag-ship;  and.  Anally,  as  a  receiving-ship
in  Boston  in  1800.  was  the  scene  of  many  brilliant
festive  occasions,  being  visited  by  thousands  from
all  parts  of  the  world.  He  left  the  government
service  in  consequence  of  disagreement  between
the  naval  commissioners,  and  liegan  building  war-
vessels  for  European  and  South  American  powers.
President  Jackson  requested  him  to  submit  a  plan
for  the  reorganization  of  the  navy,  which  lie  did.
and  he  was  about  to  establish  a  profess.. rship  of
naval  architecture  for  Columbia  college,  by  giv-
ing $20,000  to  it,  having  engaged  the  first  pro-
fessor, when  a  disastrous  affair  swept  away  his
large  fortune.  In  1H.'U  he  built  a  sloop-of-war  for
Sultan  Malunoud,  of  the  Ottoman  empire,  and  was
solicited  to  enter  his  service  sj  chief  naval  con-
structor for  the  empire.  This  led  him  to  visit
Turkey,  where  lie  established  a  navy-yard,  and
there  died.  Mr.  Bokford'l  house  in  "Love  Lane,"
now  We-t  'Jiith  street.  New  York,  was  the  resort  of

the  friends  and  i»oets  Bejjjaoh  lin,i  Drake  and  l>r.

Ds  Kay,  two  ,,f  erhoa  bsnaUM  his  sons-in-law. lb-
was  a  man  greatly  beloved  for  a  diameter  both
forceful  and  beautifoL
!  <  K  LET,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b,  in  England  in

1780;  d.  in  the  I  nite.l  States  iM 1811. He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1778,  and  ordained
tor  of  th,.  old  S.uth  chunh.  Boston,  in  ITT!*. lb-
was  an  original  member  of  the  Society  for  propa-
gating the  gosjxd  among  the  Indian- in  17*7.  and


-  he  Boston  aaaociation

of  ministers  of  Congregational  churches  whi
foruie.l  mily  one  association.  In  I80rt  he  d.
the Dudlclan lecture, which was published. Me

als..  pnbHshed  ■sreral  urinuna  between  1788  and
1*10. The  degree  of I).  I>.  wa-  I u|*»n

bin  by  Prinoeton  In  1798.

KCh.MAN. Julius journalist, b. in R
Prussia,  in  1808;  d.  in  San  Pratt  ".  Julv.

I  le  st  udied  at  Berlin,  and.  after  teach
a  few  years,  came  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  I-
noentfy  he  oflktktod  in  New  Orleans,  Charleston.
San  Pranoisoo/and Portland, Oregon.  l»r.  Kckman

established  the  "(ileaner"  (now  the  ••  llebr-
server  "i  in  BtUI  Francis,.,,  ami  worked  wsloil
arouse  the  religious  sentiment  of  the  couimunitv.

lb-  belonged  to  the  strict  oonaarfatiTs  aahooL  ami

was  noted  for  his  scholarship.

KIUHS.  William,  loyalist,  b.  in  Fngland  ab.ut
171"). Hi-  came  to  this  country  in  1788,  and  settled

at Annapolis,  under  the  protection  of  SirBobarl

Bden,  governor  of  Maryland. He  held  the  office  of

surveyor  of  customs,  and  was  intimately  acquainted
with  prominent  men  of  all  parties  "until  the  un-
fortunate misunderstanding  which  arose  t»
the  parent  state  and  the  colonies  rendered  it  im-
possible for  every  one  like  him.  sincerely  and
steadily  attached  to  the  f.iriner.  to  continue  in  the
country."  On  4  June.  177»»,  Kddis.  with  others,
was  summoned  to  apjH-ar  l(ef«»n-  the  patriot  •-. «. in-
tuit tee  <>f  observation."  and  on  ll  June,  refusing
to  give  bonds  for  his  conduct,  he  was  ordered  to
leave  the  country  before  1  Aug.  He  was  allowed
to  remain  and  hold  his  office,  however,  till  April,
1777.  when  he  mads  his  way  to  a  British  man-of-
war  and  returned  to  Fngland.  He  published  an
Interesting  collection  of  his  •■  Letters  from  Ameri-
ca" (London,  l?i>2).

KDDY,  Ansel  Doan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Williams-
town.  Ma>s..  |0  oit.,  iT'.is;  (i.  in  Lanaingburg,
N.  Y..  7  Feb.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1817,  at  Andover  theological  seminarv  in  1888,
and  held  pastorates  at  < 'anandaigua.  N.  Y..  Newark.
N.  J.,  where  he  organized  the  Park  Presbyterian
church.  Chicago,  Wilmington,  111.,  and  Seneca
Falls.  N.  Y.  From  'KW  till  1*70  he  was  agent  of
the  American  and  foreign  Christian  union  at  I.an-
singburg.  N.  Y.  He  published  "The  Christian
Citizen  "(New  York)  ami "  Addresses  on  the  Duties,
Dangers,  and  Securities  of  Youth  "  (1888).

EDDY,  Daniel  Clarke,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass..  81  May.  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  New
Hampton  theological  institution.  N.  ||.,  in  1*45, and
in  January.  i*4t>.  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  as

pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church,  I/owell.  Mass..  in
which  relation  be  continued  for  ten  years. In  1*50

he  made  a  visit  to  Europe.  In  1854  he  was  elected
by  the  American  or  "Know-nothing"  party  feo  a
seat  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and  on  the
organization  of  the  house  was  chosen,  unite  unex-
pectedly to  himself,  to  he  its  speaker.  In  1856  he
resigned  the  charge  of  the  church  in  Lowell,  and
in  tin-  interval  between  that  vear  and  the  present
has  been  pastor  in  Boston,  Fall  Rrrer,  Philadelphia,

and  Brooklyn.  In  1HS1  he  removed  to  the  last-
named  plane,  where  bs  u  now  (1887)  jiastor  <tf  a
Baptist  church.  In  lM(il  be  again  went  abroad.
extending  his  trip  to  Palestine  and  Turkev.  Madi-
son university  Conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of
I>.  D.  in  lN-Vi.  Dr.  Kddy  has  published  MxOUng
Man's  Friend  "i  1st  scries,  Lowell,  l*4;t;  •_>,!
Boston.  L808)j  "The  Burman  ApOStle"  (Low*
alL  1880);  ••  Kuroiia,"  a  b.ok  of  words  (1861);
"The  Petvv  Faniilv"  (5  vols.,  1852):  "Walter's
TOUT  in  the  Bast  "  (8 Vols..  Boston.  1H451  I  ; ••  Ibn-


300


EDDY


EDDY


ines  of  the  Missionary  Enterprise  "  (1854) ;  "  Angel
Whispers"  (Lowell,"  1858);  "City  Side"  (1854);
"  Young  Woman's  Friend"  (1855);  and  "Waiting
at  the  Cross"  (Boston,  1M59).

EDDY,  Edward,  actor,  b.  in  Troy,  X.  Y..  la
1821;  d.  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  19  Dec.  1875.  His
real  name  was  Overocker,  and  he  was  at  first  a
carpenter  in  Troy.  He  made  his  first  appearance
in  that  citv,  then  played  in  Baltimore,  and  in
1847-8  in  Boston,  lie  came  to  New  York  in  1851,
and  was  successively  manager  of  the  Metropoli-
tan theatre,  Burton's  Chambers  street  theatre,  the
Old  Bowery,  and  the  old  Broadway  theatre.  Al-
though he  aspired  to  personate  leading  charac-
ters, Mr.  Eddy  did  not  succeed  in  impressing  his
audiences  favorably.  His  best  efforts  were  in  melo-
drama, and  in  such  Shakespearean  parts  as  Laertes,
Edgar,  and  Macduff. — His  wife,  Mary  Mathews,
1).  in  England ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1865,  was
also  on  the  stage,  but  retired  after  her  marriage.

EDDY,  Ezra  Butler.  Canadian  capitalist,  b.
near  Bristol,  Vt.,  22  Aug.,  1827.  He -was  educated
at  the  public  school,  and  when  fifteen  years  of  age
went  to  New  York,  where  he  secured  employment
with  a  merchant.  After  a  year  he  returned  to  Ver-
mont, and  in  1851  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
friction  matches  at  Burlington.  In  1854  he  re-
moved to  Hull,  opposite  Ottawa,  Canada,  and  there
began  the  manufacture  of  matches,  adding  thereto,
in  1856,  the  manufacture  of  articles  of  wooden
ware.  In  1858  he  added  lumbering  to  his  other
enterprises,  and  the  yearly  amount  of  this  business
is  now  (1887)  nearly  $2,000,000.  Mr.  Eddy  was
elected  to  the  Quebec  legislature  in  1861,  and  was
a  representative  for  four  years.  When  the  Otta-
wa ladies'  college  was  established  he  was  made  its
president,  and  held  that  office  for  several  years.

EDDY,  Henry  Turner,  mathematician,  b.  in
Stoughton,  Mass.,  9  June,  1844.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1867,  receiving  the  mathematical  medal
in  his  senior  year,  and  then  followed  the  engineer-
ing course  in  Sheffield  scientific  school,  where  he
held  the  office  of  instructor  in  field-work  in  en-
gineering. In  1868  he  received  the  appointment
of  instructor  in  mathematics  and  Latin  in  the
University  of  East  Tennessee,  at  Knoxville,  and  in
1869  he  became  assistant  professor  of  mathematics
and  civil  engineering  in  Cornell,  where  he  received
the  degrees  of  C.  E.  and  Ph.  D.  for  advanced  studies
in  pure  and  applied  mathematics.  After  holding
the  office  of  associate  professor  in  mathematics  in
Princeton  for  a  year,  he  was  called  in  1874  to  fill
a  similar  chair  in  the  University  of  Cincinnati,
and  was  appointed  dean  of  the  faculty  in  1874-'7
and  1884-^5.  The  year  1879-80  he  spent  in  study
abroad.  Dr.  Eddy  is  a  member  of  scientific  so-
cieties, and  was  vice-president  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  of  the
section  on  mathematics  and  astronomy  in  1884.
He  has  contributed  numerous  papers  to  scientific
and  technical  journals,  and  has  published  "  Ana-
lytical Geometry "  (Philadelphia,  1874) ;  "  Re-
searches in  Graphic  Statics"  (New  York,  1878);
"  Thermodynamics  "  (1879) ;  and  "  Neue  Construc-
tionen  aus  der  graphischen  Statik  "  (Leipsic,  1880).

EDDY.  Henry  Clarence,  musician,  b.  in  Green-
field. Mass..  23  June,  1851  At  the  age  of  seven
he  began  his  musical  education,  and  at  fourteen
filled  a  place  as  organist.  He  has  legally  dropped
his  first  name.  When  sixteen  he  went  to  Hartford,
Conn.,  where  he  studied  with  Dudley  Buck,  and  at
the  age  of  seventeen  became  organist  of  Bethany
church,  Montpelier,  Vt.  Here  he  remained  about
two  years  and  a  half,  teaching  and  devoting  all  his
leisure  time  to  his  studies. In  1871  he  went  to


Berlin,  where  he  studied  the  piano  under  Loetoh*

Don  and  the  organ  under  Ilanpt.  After  making
a  concert  tour  through  Sa\i my,  Austria,  and  Switz-
erland, plaving  in  all  the  principal  churches,  he
was  invited  in  Berlin  to  play  before  the  emperor
and  many  of  the  nobility.  Passing  through  Eng-
land on  his  way  home,  he  stopped  in  London,
playing  in  the  Royal  Albert  hall  and  in  St.  Paul's
cathedral.  On  his  return  from  Europe.  Mr.  Eddv
became  organist  of  the  1st  Congregational  church
in  Chicago.  In  1876  Mr.  Eddy  oecame  general
director  of  the  Hershey  school  of  musical  art  in
Chicago.  In  the  spring  of  1877  the  music-hall
connected  with  the  school  was  finished,  capable  of
seating  1,000  persons,  and  here,  upon  a  fine  three-
manual  concert  organ,  Mr.  Eddy  began  a  series  of
recitals  unique  in  the  history  of  organ  music.
They  numbered  100  when  completed  in  1879,  and
embraced  all  the  greatest  works  for  the  organ,  of
both  ancient  and  modern  authors.  Mr.  Eddy
played  at  the  Centennial  exposition  at  Philadel-
phia, and  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  giving
concerts  and  exhibiting  many  new  organs.  Among
his  publications  are  a  prelude  and  fugue  in  A
minor ;  collections  of  organ  compositions  entitled
"  The  Church  and  Concert  Organist "  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1882-'5),  and  "  The  Organ  in  Church  "  (1887) ;
and  a  translation  of  Haupt's  "  Theory  of  Counter-
point and  Fugue"  (1876).

EDDY,  John  H.,  geographer,  b.  in  New  York
in  1782 ;  d.  22  Dec.,  1817.  He  published  a  circular
map  of  the  country  for  thirty  miles  around  New
York  (1814);  a  map  of  the  western  part  of  New
York ;  a  map  to  illustrate  the  communication  be-
tween lake  Erie  and  the  Hudson ;  and  a  map  of  the
state  of  New  York ;  and  was  engaged  on  a  general
atlas  of  America  at  the  time  of  his  death.

EDDY,  Norman,  congressman,  b.  in  Scipio,
Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec,  1810;  d.  in  Indianapo-
lis, Ind.,  28  Jan.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1835,  and  removed  in  1836  to  Mishawaka,  Ind..
where  he  practised  for  several  years,  but  finally
gave  up  his  profession  for  that  of  the  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  April,  1847,  removing  to
South  Bend,  Ind.,  in  the  same  year.  He  was
elected  state  senator  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in
1850,  and  in  1852  was  elected  to  congress  over
Schuyler  Colfax,  but  was  defeated  by  him  in  1854.
President  Pierce  appointed  Mr.  Eddy  district  at-
torney for  Minnesota  in  1855,  and  in  1856-'7  he
was  commissioner  of  the  Indian  trust  lands  in
Kansas.  In  the  autumn  of  1861  he  organized  the
48th  Indiana  regiment,  was  commissioned  its  colo-
nel, and  continued  in  command  till  July,  1863,
when  he  resigned  because  of  disability  resulting
from  wounds  received  in  the  battle  of  luka.  Miss.
In  that  engagement  the  48th  lost  119  killed  or
wounded  out  of  420  that  entered  the  fight.  Col.
Eddy  was  appointed  collector  of  internal  revenue
by  President  Johnson  in  1865,  and  in  1870  was
elected  secretary  of  state  of  Indiana,  which  office
he  held  till  his  sudden  death  from  heart  disease.

EDDY,  Richard,  author,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
21  June,  1828.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  book-
binder at  the  age  of  fifteen,  but  in  1848  went  to
Clinton,  N.  Y.,  where  he  studied  theology  and  be-
came a  Universalist  minister.  He  had  pastorates
in  Rome  and  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and
Canton,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1861-'3  was  chaplain  of  the
60th  New  York  regiment.  He  was  librarian  of  the
Pennsylvania  historical  society  in  1864-'8,  and  then
held  pastorates  in  Franklin  and  Gloucoter.  .Ma--..
Akron.  Ohio,  and  Melrose.  Ma—.,  where  he  went  in
1881. Since 1878  he  has  been  president  of  the


EDDY


Mol


DaJranalist historical  society,  nnd  Tufts  € ■« »1  l«-*c«"

him the  degree  of  S.  T.  I».  in  1881. In  July,

8,  be  beoMM  editor  "f  the  "  Universalis!  Ounr-

tcrlv." Dr.  Kddy  has  published  a  i  tin-

an. nt. New York State Volunta
(Philadelphia,  1864):  M UniTeraalkm  In  America,
amatory" (I  rofca^Boeton,  odnranl

Bona,  including  three  <>n  I*r»--i<l«nt  Lincoln,
with  the  title  -The  Martyr  t<.  Liberty  "  (1885}  He
hii^  in  press  "  Alcohol  in  History."

KDD\.  Siiiiiiiel,  Jurist,  b.  in  Johnston,  K.  I..  81
I.  in  ProTidanoa,  H.  I..  2  Feb..
Mr  whs  grad tinted  nt  Brown  in  17*7.  hikI  nulttll
law,  hut  vat  not  long  in  active  practice. He  was
c-lt-rk  of  t  ho  Rhode  Island  supreme  court  in  l?v

•  -tary  of  state  in  17!tK- 1*111,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  without
Opposition,  serving  three  terms  till  1S"J.*>.  He  was
chief  just  ice  of  the  Mate  supreme eoiirt  in  1M-J7  "■>'>.

Hrown gave  him the  degn f LL.  D. in 1*01.

.Judge  Kddv  contributed  to  the  collections  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  and  published
44 Reasons  for  My  Opinions"  (Providence.  ISIS).

KDDY.  Thomas,  philanthropist,  b,  in  Phila-
delphia, Fa..  5 Sept,  1988;  d.in  New  York  city,  16
.Sept.,  ls-j?.  His  parents,  who  were  Friends,  emi-
grated from  Ireland  about  175!}.  Thomas  received
a  limited  education,  and  in  his  thirteenth  year  was
apprenticed  to  a  tanner,  but  remained  with  him
only  two  years.  On  4  Sept.,  1779,  he  went  to  New
York,  being  resolved  to  become  a  merchant,  though
hi>  possessions  only  amounted  to  ninety-six  dollars.
and  he  was  totally  ignorant  of  business.  He  be-
gan by  buying  small  quantities  of  goods  at  auc-
tion, and  soon  established  a  trade,  Dut  failed  in
1784  through  an  unfortunate  speculation,  and
about  1790  entered  the  insurance  business,  in
which  he  made  a  large  fortune.  In  1796,  with
Philip  Schuvler  and  Ambrose  Spencer,  he  pre-
pared a  bill  /or  establishing  a  penitentiary  system,
which  was  passed.  Mr.  hddv  had  sole  charge  of
the  erection  of  the  first  building,  and  served  as  its
director  for  four  years,  substituting  cleanliness  and
discipline  for  former  abuses.  To  Mr.  Kddy  is  due
the  plan  of  providing  a  separate  cell  for  each  con-
vict, instead  of  confining  several  together.  He
was  chosen  one  of  the  governors  of  the  New  York
hospital  in  1793,  induced  the  legislature  to  make
liberal  grants  in  its  aid,  and  in  1N15  wan  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Bloomingdale  insane  asylum.  In
17!>3,  with  John  Murray,  he  was  appointed  by  the
society  of  Friends  to  visit  the  Indians  in  New  York
state,  and  did  much  to  improve  their  condition.
He  labored  earnestly  for  the  construction  of  the
Erie  canal,  being  second  only  to  De  Witt  Clinton
in  his  efforts,  and  was  also  one  of  the  originators
of  the  New  York  savings  bank  and  the  New  York
Bible  society.  His  labors  in  these  various  direc-
tions earned  for  him  the  title  of  the  "American
Howard."  He  published  a  work  on  the  "State
Prison  of  New  York  "  (1801).  See  "  Life  of  Thomas
Kddv"  by  Samuel  L  Knapp  (New  York,  1834).

KDDY',  Thomas  .Hears,  clergyman,  b.  in  New-
town, Hamilton  co.,  Ohio,  7  Sept..  1888;  d.  in  New
York  city.  7  Oct..  1N74.  He  was  educated  in
Greensborough,  Ind.,  classical  seminary,  and  in
lK42-,58wiea  Methodist  circuit  preacher  in  that
state.  He  was  agent  of  the  American  Bible  society
in  the  latter  year,  ami  presiding  elder  of  the  In-
<liana|»oiis  district  till  1808, whan  he  was  appointed

editor  of  the  "  Northwestern  Christian  AaTOOato "
in  Chicago.  He  retained  this  post  till  1868,  and,
after  holding  pastorates  in  Baltimore  and  Wash-
ington, was  aleatad  one  of  the  corresponding  aecre-

-  of  the  missionary  society  by  the  general  con-


ference ..f  1M72,  ,,f  which  he  was  a  memttcr. Dr.
Kddy  was  a  BQMQai  writer  for  the  press,  ft]
-i'l'-s occasional sermons, published
of  Illinois,"  a  history  of  the  rtate  during  tl
war  (S  vols,,  Chic

EDDY,  Zaehary,  clergyman,  l>.  in  m.* -k bridge,
Vt..  18  Dec.  1815. He  wa«  e.i  private

tutors,  ordained  as  a  minister  Of  the  Cii'uiU-rlmid
Presbyterian  church  in  1886,  and  WM  for  several
years  a  home  missionary  in  western  New  York  and

wlaoonota. He  was patter  of  Ooagree

churches  in  Warsaw.  N.  Y.,  in  lM.V>-'.*»,  and
ampton,  Mass.,  in  \*~>1 <i7.  of  the  Brooklyn  II
Dutch Reformed church in ls<;7 '71. and nfter-
wanl  of  Congregational  churches  in  <  helsea,  Mass.,
Detroit,  Mich.,  ami Augusta.  O.i..  u  h.  n-  he  is  at
present  Williams pwa him the degree

of  D.  D.  in  1*M>.  Dr.  Kd.ly  has  published  "lm-
manuel,  or  the  Life  of  Jesus  Christ  "  (Springfield.
:  and  was  the  principal  compiler  of
"  Hymns -of  the  Church  "  tlsii'.ii.  and  joint  editor  of
"Carminn  Sanctorum"  (New  York.  1*m4).

KDKN.  Charles,  goraraor  of  North  Carolina,
b.  in  1673;  d.  in  North  Carolina,  17  March,  1788,
He  was  appointed  governor  on  13  July.  1713,
and  his  administration  was  marked  bv  the  ar-
rest of  the  pirate  Kdward  Teach,  called*  "  Black-
Beard."  Eden  had  offered  Tench  the  royal  pardon
if  he  would  give  himself  up,  whereopoa  he  sur-
rendered with  twenty  of  his  followers,  and  for  a
time  occupied  himself  as  a  good  citizen,  but  soon
returned  to  his  old  habits. Rdeo  wat  even  ■ua-

Scted  of  an  intimacy  with  him,  nnd  Kdward
osely,  a  prominent  colonist,  declared  that  the
governor  could  raise  nn  armed  posse  to  arrest
honest  men,  but  could  not  raise  a  similar  force  to
apprehend  Teach.  For  his  accusations,  Mosclv
was  arretted,  fined  £100,  and  debarred  from  hold-
ing office  for  three  vears ;  and  in  1719  the  governor
gave  to  the  council  a  full  account  of  his  dealing
with  the  pirate,  which  was  approved  by  them.  An
expedition  against  Teach  was  finally  sent  out  by
the  government  of  Virginia,  and  the  pirate  was
killed  in  a  hand-to-hand  comlwt  with  its  com-
mander, Lieut.  Maynard.  In  17'20  the  town  of
Kdenton  was  named  for  the  governor.  His  tomb-
stone, which  stands  on  Salmon  creek,  Bertie  to..
N.  C,  bears  an  inscription  to  the  effect  that  "  He
brought  the  country  into  a  flourishing  condition,
and  died  much  lamented."

KDKN.  Sir  Robert,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
in  Durham.  Kngland ;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md..  2
Sept.,  17*0.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Sir  Itobert
Eden,  Bart.,  and  succeeded  Horatio  Sharpe  as
royal  governor  of  Maryland  in  170*.  He  was  more
disposed  to  moderation  than  anyof  the  other  Brit-
ish officers,  advised  the  repeal  of  the  tax  on  tea,
and,  when  the  colonels  ,,f  militia  demanded  the
arms  and  ammunition  of  the  province,  readily  gave
them  up.  His  course  had  much  to  do  with  the
attitude  of  the  Maryland  patriots,  who  IiojrhI  and
labored  for  conciliation  long  after  the  other  colo-
nies had  given  up  all  idea  of  it.  Kden  was  al-
lowed to  remain  nudist  url>cd  in  Maryland  after
his  authority  hnd  censed,  till  in  April.  177«>.  des-
patches were  intercepted  nddressed  to  him  by  Lord
Baorge  flwiMlll.  which  implicated  him  in  transac-
tions hostile  to  the  lilterty  of  the  country.  These
wen-  sent  bv  (icn.  Charles  Lee  to  congress,  and  he
also  ordered  the  Baltimore  committee  of  safety  to
arrest  Kden.  which  order  was  presently  confirmed
bv  uungiiea  Ita  execution,  however,  was  prevent-
ed by  the  provincial  council  of  safety  nt  Annnpo-
lis.  nnd  the  governor  was  nllowcd  to  embark  for
England,  where  he  was  created  a  baronet  on 1!)


302


HI  iKS


KIXJAK


Sept.,  1776.  Ho  had  married  Caroline  Calvert.
sister  and  co-heir  of  the  last  Lord  Malt imore,  and
died  while  mi  a  visit  to  Maryland  in  1?K4  "to  look
after  his  lady's  estate,"  which  he  was  entitled  to
l>v  the  treaty'of  1  ?*:!.— His  grandson.  Sir  Freder-
ick, an  officer  in  the  Mritish  arinv.  fell  at  New  Or-
leans, M  Dec,  1814.— Sir  Robert's  brother.  Will-
iam, Lord  Ai  <  kland,  b.  in  1744;  d.  28  May.  1814,
studied  law  and  became  a  barrister.  He  was  at
different  times  secretary  of  state  for  Ireland,  privy
councillor  and  ambassador  to  France,  Spain,  and
Holland,  and  in  1789  was  made  an  Irish  peer,  w  it  h
the  title  of  Baron  Auckland.  He  received  the
same  title  in  the  English  peerage  in  1  ?!»:{.  He
was  one  of  the  lords  of  trade  and  plantations  in
1776,  and  one  of  the  three  commissioners  sent  by
Lord  North  in  1788  to  treat  with  the  Americans.

EDES,  Benjamin,  journalist,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1788;  d.  in  Boston,  11  Dec,  1803.
His  great-grandfather  John  came  from  England
to  Charlestown,  Mass.,  about  1674.  Benjamin  was
educated  in  the  public  schools-  of  Charlestown,
and  in  1755  he  became,  with  John  Gill,  editor  and

Jroprietor  of  "  The  Boston  Gazette  and  Country
ournal,"  a  patriotic  sheet  that  exerted  a  powerful
influence  just  before  the  Revolution  ana  during
that  struggle.  In  its  columns  first  appeared  John
Adams's  "  Novanglus  "  letters,  and  Quincy,  Warren,
and  other  patriots  were  among  its  contributors.  Mr.
Edes,  as  one  of  the  "  Sons  of  liberty,"  took  an  act-
ive part  in  the  politics  of  his  time,  and  was  a  caus-
tic writer  on  the  political  questions  of  the  day.  In
his  house  the  patriots  comprising  the  "  Boston  tea-
party"  assembled  on  the  afternoon  of  16  Dec,
1773,  and  drank  punch  from  a  bowl  that  was  sub-
sequently given  by  Mr.  Edes's  family  to  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society,  afterward  disguising
themselves  as  Indians  in  the  "  Gazette  "  office.  Dur-
ing the  siege  of  Boston,  Mr.  Edes  escaped  to  Water-
town,  where  he  continued  the  publication  of  the
"  Gazette."  After  forty-three  years  of  editorship  he
discontinued  it  in  1798.  Andrew  Oliver,  writing
to  England  in  1768,  says,  referring  to  the  "  Gazette  ":
"The  temper  of  the  people  mav  be  surely  learned
from  that  infamous  paper " :  while  Gov.  Bernard,
in  one  of  his  letters  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,
advised  the  arrest  of  both  Edes  and  Gill  as  publish-
ers of  sedition.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  Mr.
F]des  possessed  a  comfortable  fortune,  but  after-
ward lost  it  by  the  depreciation  of  the  currency.
—His  son,  Peter,  b.  in  Boston,  17  Dec,  1756;  d.
in  Bangor,  Me.,  30  March,  1840,  was  educated  at
the  Boston  Latin-school.  Two  days  after  the  bat-
tle of  Bunker  Hill,  when  in  his  nineteenth  year,
he  was  arrested  by  Gen.  Gage  on  the  charge  of
"  having  fire-arms  concealed  in  his  house,"  and
confined  in  Boston  jail  one  hundred  and  seven
days,  in  the  same  room  with  "  Master "  James
Lo'vell  of  the  Latin-school  and  "  Master "  John
Leach.  Mr.  Edes  was  afterward  in  business  in
Boston,  and  Newport,  R.  I.,  but  removed  in  1796
to  Augusta,  Me.,  where  in  1797  he  published  the
"Kennebeck  Intelligencer."  He  afterward  lived
in  Hallowed,  Me.,  and  finally  settled  in  Bangor,
Me.,  where  he  died.  He  published  an  edition  of
the  "  Fifth  of  March  Orations,"  with  a  preface  ad-
dressed to  the  people  of  Boston  (1785),  and  an  ora-
tion on  Washington  (Hallowed,  Me.,  1800).  His
journal,  kept  during  his  imprisonment,  contain-
ing a  list  of  the  prisoners  taken  at  Bunker  Hill,
was  published  by  one  of  his  descendants  (Hangor,
Me.,  1837).  An  interesting  letter  from  Mr.  Edes
to  his  grandson  about  the  "  Boston  tea-party  "  ap-

Bsars  in  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Massachusetts
istorical  Society  "  (December,  1871).


EDES,  Henry  Herbert,  great-great-grandson
of  Benjamin's  brother  Thome*,  merchant,  b,  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  29  March,  1849.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  grammar  and  high  schools  of  his
native  town,  and  in  1865  entered  mercantile  life  in
Boston,  in  which  he  has  since  continued.  He  be-
came assistant  treasurer  of  the  "New  England
historic  genealogical  society"  in  1869,  and  since
1H?:{  has  been  a  member  of  its  publication  com-
mittee. He  fs  also  a  fellow  of  the  American  anti-
quarian society.  Mr.  Edes  has  been  a  member  of
the  executive  committee  of  the  Boston  civil-eerfioe
reform  association  since  1881,  and  of  the  Massa-
chusetts reform  club  since  1885;  and  since  1869
has  been  arranging  the  Charlestown  archives  (1629-
1847),  which  when  complete  will  fill  about  120
volumes.  He  has  in  manuscript  a  "  Genealogy  of
the  Edes  Family,"  and  is  the  author  of  "  History
of  the  Harvard  Church  at  Charlestown,  1815-'79
(Boston,  1879),  besides  many  historical  books  and
pamphlets,  including  "  Connecticut  Colonial  Docu-
ments," a  reprint  of  papers  contributed  by  him  to
the  "New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical
Register  "  in  1868-71  (privately  printed) ;  H  Me-
morial of  Josiah  Barker,  of  Charlestown  "  (privately
grinted,  Boston,  1871) ;  "  Charlestown's  Historic
bints"  (1875).  He  also  edited  and  wrote  the  in-
troduction to  Wyman's  "  Genealogies  and  Estates
of  Charlestown"  (Boston,  1879);  and  contributed
three  chapters  on  Charlestown  to  "  The  Memorial
Historv  of  Boston"  (Boston,  1880-'l).

EDES,  Richard  Sullivan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  24  April,  1810;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  sixth  in  descent
from  John  Edes.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1830,  and  at  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1834,  and
held  various  Unitarian  pastorates,  the  last  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  retiring  from  the  ministry  in  a  few
years.  He  was  active  in  public  affairs,  and  took
special  interest  in  educational  matters.  Besides
numerous  discourses  and  addresses,  he  published  a
memoir  of  Peter  Edes  in  the  "  New  England  His-
torical and  Genealogical  Register  "  (1862) ;  "  Jour-
nal and  Letters  relative  to  Two  Journeys  to  the
Ohio  Country  in  1788  and  1789  made  by  Col.  John
May,"  with  a  biographical  sketch  (Cincinnati,
1873) ;  and  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  "  A
Genealogy  of  the  Descendants  of  J  ohn  May  "  (Bos-
ton, 1878). — His  son,  Robert  Thaxter,  physician,
b.  in  Eastport,  Me.,  23  Sept.,  1838,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1858,  and  took  his  degree  in  medi-
cine there  in  1861.  In  September  following  he  was
appointed  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  navy,
in  January,  1862,  assistant  surgeon,  and  in  May,
1865,  passed  assistant  surgeon,  resigning  in  the
same  month.  Having  taken  an  extended  tour  in
Europe  he  then  practised  his  profession  at  Hing-
ham,  Mass.,  Roxbury,  and  Boston,  where  in  1872-  5
he  was  assistant  professor  of  materia  medica  at
Harvard.  He  held  the  full  professorship  from
1875  till  1884,  and  in  1884  was  Jackson  professor
of  clinical  medicine  In  1886  Dr.  Edes  removed
to  Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  for  several  years
one  of  the  visiting  physicians  at  Boston  city  hos-
pital. He  is  a  member  of  various  medical  societies,
was  a  contributor  of  many  articles  to  medical  jour-
nals, and  to  Peppers's  "  System  of  Medicine,'  and
has  published  "Nature  and  Time  in  the  Cure  of
Diseases"  (Boston,  1868),  and  "Physiology  and
Pathology  of  the  Sympathetic  Nerve  (New  York,
1869),  both  originally  prize  essays,  and  "Thera-
peutic Hand-Book  of  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia  "  (1883).
EDGAR,  Henry  Cornelius,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rah  way,  N.  J.,  11  April,  1811;  d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,
23  Dec,  1884. He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in


BDG  \i;


:m


1881,  and  nwl  law  in  New  York  city.  I>ut  illness
int.rnn.'  lies,  and,  after  travelling

U'liHivfly.  tile life, lit-  after-

ward taught  in  lUtiway.  N..I.,  and  in  1m:!7  '44  was
principal  <»f  the  L'ni  00]  <.f  the

cit\  rk. !!>•  had  taken  n  private  course

in  theology,  and  was  licensed  as  a  Presbyterian
minister En 1845. Aftrr holding a DMtOCBia at

Bridgehamptoa,  L.  L  ba  bad  charge,  from  1H.VI  till
uf  the  Reformed  church  at  Laston,  Pa.,  when
he  had  among  his  congregation  the  faculty  and
Itudantl  of  Lafayette  college.  Dr.  Kdgur  wax  an
eloquent  preacher,  and  an  outspoken  opponent  of
slavery  during  the  war.  lie  frequently  lectured  on
educational  topics,  and  in  advocacy  of  temperance.
After  liis  death  a  tablet  in  his  memory  was  placed
on  the  wall  of  his  church  at  Ka-ton.  He  contrib-
uted largely  to  religions  and  secular  magazines,
and  published  numerous  orations  ami  sermons,  in-
cluding  "  Three  Lectures  on  Slavery  "  (Kaston,  Pa..
Pour  Discourses  occasional  l>\  the  Death
of  Lincoln"  1 1st;:,,;  •■  Memorial  of  Russell  S.  Chid-
•  An  Kxj>osition  of  the  Last  Nine
Wan  : •'Christianity  our  Nation's  Wisest

Poli'  I); "A Discourse  occasioned  bv  the

Death  of  President  Garfield"  (1881);  and  "The
Relation  of  the  Pulpit  to  Politics"  (1884).

KIMiAK.  James  David,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in
Hatlev.  Quebec,  10  Aug.,  1841.  He  was  educated
by  private  tuition,  ana  at  Lenoxville  grammar-
school  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1864,  and  subsequently  practised
in  Toronto.  In  1874  he  was  sent  to  British  Colum-
bia bv  the  Dominion  government  to  arrange  terms
for  the  postponement  of  the  construction  of  the
Canada  Pacific  railway.  He  was  first  returned  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1872,  and  sat  for  two
years,  unsuccessfully  contested  Centre  Toronto  in
.'.  and  was  elected  by  acclamation  for  West
Ontario  in  August.  1884.  He  has  contributed  fre-
quently to  the  daily  press  and  to  periodicals,  and
is  the  author  of  some  spirited  lyrics.  He  has  pub-
lished "  The  Insolvent  Act  of  1864,  with  Notes  and
Forms"  (Toronto,  1864);  "An  Act  to  amend  the
Insolvent  Act  of  1864,  with  Annotations,'*  ••  Notes
of  Decisions,  etc."  (Toronto,  1865) :  a  pamphlet  on
the  "  Commercial  Independence  of  Canada  (1883) ;
and  "  White  Stone  Canoe,"  a  poem  (1885).

EDGAR,  John  Todd,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sussex
county.  Del..  18  April,  1792;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
13  Nov.,  1NI>0.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to
Kentucky  early  in  life,  and  entered  Transylvania
university,  Lexington,  but  was  not  graduated.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  theological  seminary
in  lHlti,  and  in  1817  ordained  as  a  Presbyterian.
He  was  pastor  at  Ftemhlgsburg,  and  Maysville,
Ky.,  in  1827,  and  Frankfort  in  1827-33,  where  his
preaching  attracted  much  attention.  Henry  Clay
said  of  him  :  "  If  you  want  to  hear  eloquence,  listen
to  John  T.  Edgar."  He  became  pastor  of  the  1st
Presbyterian  church  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  1833,
and  remained  there  till  his  death.  At  one  time  he
adited  the  "  American  Presbyterian,"  inililished  at
Nashville.  He  was  much  In-loved  in  Nashville  by
people  of  all  denominations,  and  on  the  day  of  his
funeral  there  was  a  general  Bus|M>nsion  of  business
in  the  city.  l>y  proclamation  of  the  mayor.

KDGRKN,  August  Hjalmar,  author,  b.  in
W.rmland.  Sweden.  18  Oct.,  1K40.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  I'niversity  of  Upsala,  and  at  the  Royal
military  school  of  Sweden  in  1H<»0,  came  to  the
Cnited'  States,  and  entered  the  08th  New  Y--rk
regiment  as  2d  lieutenant  in  January,  1862.  Be
was  promoted  to  |>t  lieutenant,  and  in  August,
1868,  was  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps. He  after-


ward joined  the  regular  army  of  Sweden,  and  served

from  Vcl.ruary,  1*14.  tdl  August,  1870,  having  been
adjutant  from  July,  1M6U.  He  waa  a  teacher  aj
language*  in  Riverviewacadcmv  in  1871 '-*.  Insl

11  French.  German,  and  Sanskrit  m  Yah-
from  1M74  till  Immj.  and  lecturer  on  Bemklit  in
tin-  University  of  Lund.  Sweden,  from  l**o  til]
1864  when  he  Ixcame  professor  of  modern  lan-
guages and  Sanskrit  in  Nebraska  university,  li-
is a  mcmU-r  of  various  learned  societies  nod  i*  the
author  of  numerous  papers  relating  lo  Sarnkrit,
Romance,  and  Germanic  philology,  and  of  value  to
scholars,  which  have  ap|H-ared  at  \nrimi*  tiroes
from  1867-X6  in  Sweden,  England,  and  the  United
States.  Among  his  numerous  publications  are  a
Swedish  translation  of  Longfellow's-  Evangeline"
(G6tel»org,  1K7*>);  a  "German  and  Kngli-h  Dic-
tionary." with  Prof.  W.  D.  White)  York
and  London.  l*77i;  a  work  in  Swedish  OBJ  ••  Th.-
Literature  of  America"  fQfltsborg,  1M7X>,  and  on

••The  PabUe  Bchoobj  and  Colleges  ,,f  the  United

State-"  fUpsala,  1«7J») ;  "Swedish  Literature  in
America"  (Sweden,  1883);  and  "American  An-
tiquities" (lKHo).

EDI80N.  Thomas  Alva,  inventor,  b.  in  Alva,
Ohio,  11  Feb.,  1K47.  His  mother,  who  had  l>ccn  a
teacher,  gave  him  the  little  schooling  he  received,
and  at  the  age  of  twelve  he  became  a  newsboy
on  the  Grand  Trunk  line  running  into  Detroit.
Whilethusengaged
he  acquired  the
habit  of  reading.
He  also  studied
qualitative  analy-
sis, and  conducted
chemical  experi-
ments  on  the  train
till  an  accident
caused  the  prohi-
bition of  further
work  of  the  kind.
Afterward  he  ob-
tained the  exclu-
sive right  of  sell-
ing newspapers  on
the  road,  and,  with
the  aid  of  four  as-
si-iants,  he  set  in
tvpe  and  printed
the  "Grand  Trunk
Ibrald,"  which  he

sold  with  his  other  pajn-rs.  The  operations  of  the
telegraph,  which  he  constantly  witnessed  in  the  sta-
tions along  the  road,  awakened  his  interest,  ami  he
improvised  rude meansof  transmitting  messages be-
t  ween  his  fat  ber*a  h<  une  in  Port  1 1  nron  end  t  be  house
ofaneighl)<>r.  Finally  a  atathm-ntsatsr,  whose  child

be  had  rescued  in  front  of  a  coming  train  at  the
risk  of  bis  own  1  i  ft-,  taught  him  telegraph  Operating.
and  he  wandered  for  several  years  over  the  Cnited
States  and  Canada,  acquiring  great  skill  in  this  art,
l.ut  frequently  m-gleeted  his  pmctual  duties  for
studies  and  experiments  in  electric  science.  At
this  time  he  invented  an  automatic  repeater,  by
means  of  which  a  message  could  bt  transferred
from  one  wire  to  another  without  the  aid  of  an
Operator,  anil  in  18t>4  conceived  the  idea  of  sending
two  messages  at  once  over  the  same  win-,  which
led  tohisex|H-riments  in  duplex  telegraphy.  I-ater
he  BJM  called  to  Huston  and  placed  in  char_
the  -crack"  New  York  win-.  While  in  that  city
he  continued  his  cx|icriments,  and  perfected
duplex  telegraph,  but  it  did  not  succeed  till  1v
lb-  came  to  New  York  in  1*71,  and  soon  afterward
became  siqicrintcndcnt  of  the  gold  and  stock  com-


304


KDMOXDS


EDMUNDS


pany.  inventing  the  printing  telegraph  for  gold
ami  slock  quotations.  For  tin-  manufact urc  of  thi>
appliance  he  established  a  large  workshop  at  New-
ark, X.  J.,  and  continued  there  till  1N?<>.  when  he-
removed  to  Mcnlo  Park,  X,  J.,  and  thenceforth  de-
voted his  whole  attention  to  inventing.  Among
his  principal  inventions  are  his  system  of  duplex
telegraphy,  which  he  subsequently  developed  into
(piadruplex  and  sextuplex  transmission ;  the  car-
ta >n  telephone  transmitter,  now  used  by  nearly  all
telephones  throughout  the  world,  in  which  the
variation  in  the  current  is  produced  by  the  variable
roist ance  of  a  solid  conductor  subjected  to  press-
ure, rendering  more  faithfully  than  any  other
telephone  the  inflections  and  changes  in  the  inten-
sity of  the  vocal  sounds  to  be  transmitted ;  the  mi-
crotasimeter,  used  for  the  detection,  on  the  same
principle,  of  small  variations  in  temperature,  and
successfully  employed  during  the  total  eclipse  of
1878  to  demonstrate  the  presence  of  heat  in  the
sun's  corona ;  the  aerphone,  which  may  be  used  to
amplify  sound  without  impairing  the  distinct-
ness oi  articulation ;  and  the  megaphone,  which,
when  inserted  in  the  ear,  so  magnifies  sounds  that
faint  whispers  may  he  heard  at  a  distance  of  1,000
feet.  The  phonograph,  which  records  sound  in
such  a  manner  that  it  may  be  reproduced  at  will,
and  the  phonometer  and  apparatus  for  measuring
the  force  of  sound-waves  produced  by  the  human
voice,  are  inventions  of  this  period.  His  attention
then  became  absorbed  in  the  problem  of  electric
lighting.  He  believed  that  the  process  of  lighting
by  the  voltaic  arc,  in  which  great  results  had  al-
ready been  achieved  by  Charles  F.  Brush,  would
never  answer  for  general  illumination,  and  so  de-
voted himself  to  the  perfection  of  the  incandescent
lamp.  After  entirely  perfecting  a  device  for  a
lamp  with  a  platinum  burner,  he  adopted  a  filament
of  carbon  inclosed  in  a  glass  chamber  from  which
the  air  was  almost  completely  exhausted.  He  also
solved  the  problem  of  the  commercial  subdivision
of  the  light  in  a  system  of  general  distribution  of
electricity,  like  gas,  and  in  December,  1879,  gave  a
public  exhibition  in  Menlo  Park  of  a  complete  sys-
tem of  electric  lighting.  This  was  the  first  instance
of  subdivision  of  the  electric  light,  and  created
great  interest  throughout  the  world,  especially  as
scientific  experts  had  testified  before  a  committee
of  the  English  house  of  commons  in  the  previous
year  that  such  a  subdivision  was  impossible.  His
system  is  now  in  general  use,  and  in  1882  Mr.  Edi-
son came  to  New  York  for  the  purpose  of  supervis-
ing its  establishment  in  that  city.  In  1878  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Union,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  was  made  a  chevalier  of  the
Legion  of  Honor  by  the  French  government.

EDMONDS,  Francis  W.,  artist,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,22  Nov.,  1806;  d.at  his  country-seat,  Bronx-
ville,  Westchester  co.,  7  Feb.,  1863.  He  showed
great  love  for  art  in  his  youth,  but  was  a  bank
cashier  in  his  native  city  and  in  New  York  city  till
1855.  During  this  time  he  studied  at  the  National
academy  of  design,  and  employed  his  leisure  with
his  pencil.  In  1835  he  sent  to  the  academy,  under
an  assumed  name,  his  first  picture,  "  Sammy  the
Tailor."  He  was  secretary  from  1860  till  1863  of
the  American  bank-note  company,  and  his  "  Barn-
Yard,"  "  Sewing-Girl,"  "  Grinding  the  Scythe,"  and
"Mechanic"  were  engraved  on  notes  printed  by
that  establishment.  He  was  elected  an  associate
of  the  National  academy  in  1838,  was  afterward
a  trustee,  and  became  an  academician  in  18«0.
After  this  he  studied  in  Europe,  and  on  his  return
aided  in  the  establishment  of  the  New  York  gal-
lery of  fine  arts. Among  the  better  known  of  his


pictures,  besides  those  named  above,  are  "Domi-
nic Sampson"  (1887);  "  The  City  ami  Country
Beaux,"  "  The  Penny  Paper"  <  L889):  "Sparkling
(1840);  "Vesuvius  and  Florence"  (1844);  "Com-
modore Trunion."  "The  Sleepy  Student  "
-Trial  of  Patience"  (1848);  '"The  Speculator"
(1862);  "Taking  the  Census"  (1854);  "The  Thirty
Drover"  (1856);  " Bargaining "  (1858) ;  and  "The
New  Bonnet "  (1859).

EDMONDS,  John  Worth,  jurist,  b.  in  Hudson,
X.  Y.,  18  March,  1799;  d.  in  Xew  York  city.  5
April,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1*K'>,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1819,  and
began  practice  in  Hudson  in  1820.  He  rose  to  the
rank  of  colonel  of  militia,  and  received  from  Gov.
De  Witt  Clinton  the  appointment  of  state  recorder.
He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  assembly  in
1831,  and  in  1832-'6  of  the  state  senate.  In  1836-'8
he  was  sent  on  special  missions  to  the  Indians  by
the  government,  and  became  familiar  with  several
Indian  languages.  In  1841  he  settled  in  New  York
city,  and  resumed  law  practice.  He  was  appointed
one  of  the  state-prison  inspectors  in  1843,  founded
a  prison  association  for  improving  the  condition
of  convicted  criminals,  and  effected  important  re-
forms in  prison  discipline.  By  his  exertions  cor-
poral punishment  was  abolished  by  the  legisla-
ture, a  series  of  rewards  for  good  conduct  was  in-
stituted, and  measures  adopted  for  obtaining  for
discharged  criminals  an  honest  livelihood.  Mr.
Edmonds  became  a  circuit  judge  in  1845,  one  of
the  judges  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1847,  and
in  1852  was  appointed  to  the  court  of  appeals,
from  which  he  afterward  retired  to  the  private
practice  of  law.  Judge  Edmonds  became  a  con-
vert to  the  doctrines  of  spiritualism  in  1851,  and
in  1853  openly  avowed  and  defended  them,  believ-
ing himself  to  be  in  almost  constant  communica-
tion with  departed  spirits.  His  peculiar  views
were  sustained  with  the  greatest  courage  and  per-
sistence, and  it  was  said  that  they  cost  him  his
place  on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court.  He  was
a  jurist  of  unquestioned  ability,  and  the  honesty
of  his  convictions  was  never  doubted.  Besides
contributions  to  periodicals  in  favor  of  his  belief,
he  published  "Spiritualism,"  in  connection  with
George  T.  Dexter,  M.  D.  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1853-'5);
"  Reports  of  Select  Law  Cases  "  (1868) ;  and  "  Let-
ters and  Tracts  on  Spiritualism  "  (London,  1874).

EDMUNDS,  George  Franklin,  statesman,  b.
in  Richmond,  Vt.,  1  Feb.,  1828.  He  was  educated
at  the  common  schools  and  by  a  private  tutor;
studied  law  at  an  early  age,  and  began  practice  in
1849,  removing  in  1851  to  Burlington,  Vt.  He
was  a  representative  in  the  Vermont  legislature  in
1854-'9,  serving  as  speaker  for  three  years,  and  in
1861-'2  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  its
president  pro  tempore.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  State  convention
that  formed  a  coalition  between  the  Republicans
and  war  Democrats,  and  drew  up  the  resolutions
adopted  there.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.
senate  in  March.  1866,  by  the  governor  of  Ver-
mont, to  fill  the  vacancy  made  by  the  death  of  Solo-
mon Foot,  and  was  then  elected,  by  the  legislature
to  fill  the  unexpired  term,  and  three  times  re-
elected. Mr.  Edmunds  was  active  in  the  impeach-
ment of  Andrew  Johnson,  sided  with  President
Grant  against  Charles  Sumner,  and  acted  an  influ-
ential part  in  the  passage  of  the  reconstruction
measures,  adopting  a  conservative  course.  In
1876-'7  he  was  one  of  the  members  of  the  electoral
commission,  having  been  previously  chairman  of
the  committee  which,  in  concert  with  a  similar
committee  of  the  house  of  representatives,  prepared


KDSOS


ED\\


KM


C^JU^<J^\A^uosj)$


ibe  bill  creating  that  commission. The  passage  Of

the  Pacific  railroad  funding  act  wai  also  largely
due  t<>  hi*  influence  and  exertions.  At  th>
tional  Republican  conventions,  bold  in  Chicago  in
I  anil  1KH4.  .Mr.  Edmunds  reoeired  thirty-four
an. I  ninety-three  rotes  respectively  for  tin-  presi-
dential  iioiniuatioii,  iwli  on  t In-  first Uilli.t. lb-

wan  elected  pre-i-
•  l'-nt  firn  tempore  of
tin-  senate  after  Mr.
Art  bur  lieeame  pres-
ident of  the  United

States.  In  the  scn-
ate  he  has  served
on  the  committees
on  commerce,  pub-
lic lands,  appropria-
tion-., pensions,  re-
trenchment, private
land  claims  the  li-
brary, and  the  judi-
ciary, and  has  served
as  chairman  of  the
last-named  commit-
tee for  several  suc-
cessive congresses.
As  a  legislator.  Sen-
ator Edmunds  is
noted  f"r  his  legal  acumen,  his  readiness  in  rep-
artee, ami  his  love  of  strictly  parliamentary  pro-
cedure. He  has  been  a  fearless  foe  of  political
jobs  and  legislative  intrigues.  He  was  the  author
of  the  act  of  H  March,  1882,  for  the  suppression  of
polygamy  in  Utah  and  the  disfranchisement  of
those  who  practise  it.  This  is  known  as  the  "Ed-
munds act, '  and  was  upheld  l>v  the  supreme  court
in  ileci>iuus  that  were  rendered  on  22  March,  1884,
in  a  series  of  five  cases.  He  was  also  the  chief
author  of  the  similar  act  passed  in  1887;  and  of
the  act  of  1886  prescribing  the  manner  in  which
electoral  votes  for  president  shall  be  counted.  In
1886  he  was  the  leader  in  the  senate  in  the  at-
tempt to  compel  President  Cleveland  to  furnish
that  body  with  all  documents  necessary  to  show
cause  for  recent  removals  from  office.

I  D80N,  Josiuh,  politician,  b.  about  1710;  d.
in  New  York  or  on  Long  Island  in  1778.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1730,  and  became  a  noted
tory  politician  in  Hridgewater,  Mass.  Hutchinson
speaks  of  him  in  1771,  when  he  was  in  the  legisla-
ture, as  one  who  would  ordinarily  have  had  great
weight  in  that  body,  but  who,  discouraged  by  the
num  Iters  of  the  opposition,  remained  inactive.  In
1774  he  was  one  of  the  "  mandamus  councillors,"
and  in  the  same  year  was  driven  from  his  house  by
a  mob,  and  compelled  to  take  refuge  in  Boston,
under  the  protection  of  British  troop*,  At  the
evacuation  of  that  city  in  1776  he  went  with  the
armv  to  Halifax,  and  then  to  New  York.  He  was
a  colonel  of  militia  and  a  deacon  of  the  church.
John  Trumbull,  in  his  satire  ••  McFingal."  alludes
to  him  as  "that  old  simplicity  of  Fd-on."

I  D80N,  Theodore,  soldier,  b.  in  Massachusetts
- 1  il.  in  Rock  Island,  III..  16  Nov..  1H?0. He
was  graduated  at the l\ S. military  academy  in
■  id  served  with  honor  in  the  civil  war,  being
chief  of  ordnance  in  Gen.  Rosecraiis's  Tcnnes>ec
campaign. He  was  brevetted  captain  OB  31 Dec.,
Wm,  fof  services  at the battle  of  Stone River.
given his  full  rank  on  3  March,  1803,  and  com-
manded various  arsenals  and ordnance depots,
•  hief of ordnance in the department f
Virginia  and  North  Carolina  in  1864-*5. He  was
promoted  to  major  in lNIi?,  and  in  1889-TO  OM
instructor  in  gunnery  at  West  Point.

TOL. II.— 20


I  l>\>  IBM \irii*tln. Chilian capital

■>..  1816;  d.  in  VeJpeieJoo,  6
Aug..  1*77.  He  vm  the  son  of  an  Kngli-.h  phv»i-
eian.  Dr.  Own  Edward*. At  an  early  age  be  be-

pm  business  life  H  H  [Mtrtner  in  a  mercantile  00O>
cern  of  BOOOMS  ami  OMNI  ac.piir.--l  ojrfttl  a  fortune
in  liankingand  mining  opsrauOM  m  OoplODO>  In
1850  he  established  at  Valparaiso  the  fiiM  bank  of
Chili,  and  afterward  contributed  to  the  foundation
of  the  Hank  of  <  K«*a,  Bank  of  Bolivia,  and  of  the
Bank  of  San  .Juan,  in  the  Argentine  Ropnbli
was  the  originator  and  principal  shareholder  of
the  railroad,  established  in  lH."il,  Utw.cn  CoWes.
and  Copiajto.  which  was  the  firM  railway  of  South
America.  Edwards  furnished  to  William  Wheel-
wright the  capital  necessary  to  establish  the  first
steamship  line  in  the  1'acitic,  or  the  Pacific  steam
navigation  company,  and.  besides  Uing  connected
with  various  .South  American  railroads,  vol  UM
originator  of  the  road  that  is  to  run  across  the  An-
des to  Buenos  Ayres.  He  is  the  owner  of  silver
mines  in  Oopiopo  ami  Ant«.fagasta,  and  of  a  manu-
factory of  nitrate  of  soda  at  Salinas.  Edwards  was
the  first  speculator  in  Chilian  copper  in  Europe.
He  was  elected  to  congress  several  times,  and  in
1870  became  senator  for  Valparaiso.  He  was  also
offered  the  port  folio  of  the  treasury,  but  he  declined
it. At  his  death  he  was  worth  $30,000,000.

EDWARDS.  Bryan,  Fnglish  author,  b.  in
W.*tl,iirv.  Wiltshire,  England.  21  May.  1743;  d.
in  Kngland.  15  July.  1800.  He  received  a  fainslu-
cat  ion  at  Bristol,  and  .•migrated  in  1788  to  Jamaica
to  live  with  a  rich  uncle,  who  gave  him  the  means
of  completing  his  education,  and  made  him  his
heir.  lie  lieeame  an  eminent  merchant  and  promi-
nent memlier  of  the  colonial  assembly,  where  he
attacked  the  restrictions  made  by  the  government
on  trade  with  the  United  States.  He  afterward
went  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  spent  several
years  in  collecting  materials  for  his  work  on  that
island.  He  then  returned  to  England,  and  from
1796  till  his  death  was  a  meml>er  of  the  house  of
commons,  where  he  was  a  zealous  defender  of  the
Creole  planters  against  Willierforce's  attacks  on
slavery  and  t  In  •  slave-trade.  II  .published  •'Thought.*
on  the  Trade  of  the  West  India  Islands  with  the
United  States"  (17H4);  "History  of  the  British
Colonies  iu  the  West  Indi.-'*  <2  \<>\-.,  London,
1793;  vol.  3,  with  plates,  18(11  ;  new  ed.,  including
two  new  volumes,  5  vols..  1H19;  abridgment  of  the
first  three  vol-..  2  vols..  17!M).  The  third  volume
contains  also  a  "  History  of  Santo  Domingo"  (first
published  in  175*1  :  2d  ed..  1797)  and  an  autobiog-
raphy. Mr.  Edwards  alto  published  "Conduct  of
the  Government  and  Colonial  Assembly  of  Jamaica
in  regard  to  Fugitive  Slaves"  (London,  1796),  and

feinted  privately  "  Proceedings  of  the  Association
or  promoting  the  DilOOTerj  of  the  Interior  Parts
of  Africa"  j  1  788),  and  a  volume  of  OOM00.

F.DWARDS.  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Norwich.
Kngland.  17  March,  17U7:  d.  in  New  York  city.  :«»
May.  1M»S8.  He  was  graduated  at  Cambridge,  re-
moved to  New  York,  practised  law.  and  wa-  for
twenty-five  years  counsel  to  the  British  consulate
in  that  citv. He  was  the  author  of "  The  Jurvman's

Guide"  (1881);  -  Parties  to  Bills  and  Other  Flood-
ing* "  (1882);  "Feathers  from  Mv  Own  Wings"
(1883):  "Reeeben  in  ObmomfmnBK

ports  of  Chancerv Cases. First New York Cir-

euit— 1881-48"  (4  role,);  "BJototy  and  Puetw

Of  Finger-Rings^  (185r»);  "Receivers  in Eiuitv''
•Referees"  (1888): "The Stamp-Act of
Old  ••  Pleasantries  alx.ut  Courts  and  Law-
yers" (lMii.".>.— His  son.  Plerrepont.  has  pool  for
many  years  British  rioOOOMBl  in  New  York.


300


EDWARDS


EDWARDS


EDWARDS.  Cyrus,  lawyer,  b,  in  Montgomery

county.  Mil.,  17  Jan,  1  ?!>.'!:  d.  in  Upper  Alton.  III.,
in  September,  1877.  In  the  early  history  of  Illinois
he  was  one  of  its  most  prominent  and  useful  citi-
zen^, lie  was  frequently  elected  to  the  legislature.
and  was  especially  conspicuous  as  a  friend  of  educa-
tion. He  was  active  in  originating  the  State  nor-
mal school  at  Bloomington,  and  was  for  thirty-five
vears  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Shurt-
lelT  college,  to  which  institution  he  gave  real  estate
valued  at  $10,000,  besides  other  generous  donations.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

EDWARDS,  Jesse,  clergyman,  b.  in  Elinira,
N.  Y„  21  Feb.,  1819;  d.  in  Clover,  Wis.,  6  Feb.,
1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1842,  and  licensed  to  preach  the  same
year.  Removing  to  Indiana,  he  was  ordained  in
1845,  and  labored  at  Delphi,  Rock  Creek,  and
Monticello  until  1847,  when  he  returned  to  New
York  and  preached  both  al  Sparta  and  Portage-
ville.  In  1850  he  went  to  Wisconsin  as  a  mission-
ary, and  engaged  in  that  work  at  Plover,  Portage
county,  Stevens  Point,  and  Grand  Rapids.  While
thus  employed  he  was  (1859)  elected  professor  of
Latin  and  Greek  at  Carroll  college,  Waukesha,
Wis.  When  that  institution  was  closed  in  1861  ho
returned  to  Plover.  Mr.  Edwards  was  distin-
guished for  his  biblical  scholarship.

EDWARDS,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1755;  d.  in  Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  in  1837.  In  1780
he  removed  to  that  portion  of  Virginia  now  com-
prised in  the  state  of  Kentucky,  ana  entered  23,000
acres.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature
from  1781  till  1785,  again  in  1795,  and  from  1796
till  1800.  He  was  a  delegate  in  the  conventions  of
1785-'7  and  '8,  called  to  set  off  the  state  of  Ken-
tucky, and  was  also  elected  to  the  convention  that
ratified  the  Federal  constitution,  and  to  that  held
in  1792,  which  framed  the  constitution  of  the  state.
He  was  a  United  States  senator  from  Kentucky
from  24  Oct.,  1791,  till  3  March,  1795.  About
1800  he  retired  from  public  life.

EDWARDS,  John,  author,  b.  in  Llanuwch-y-
lynn,  Wales,  15  April,  1806 ;  d.  near  Rome,  N.  V.,
20  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,
where  he  resided  until  the  age  of  twenty-two,  when
he  settled  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  near  which  town  he
purchased  a  farm  in  1828.  In  1834  he  removed  to
the  city  of  New  York,  where  he  remained  six  years,
and  then  returned  to  his  farm  in  Oneida  county.
In  1866  he  purchased  a  small  farm  in  the  suburbs
of  Rome,  N.  Y.,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.
In  his  native  land,  and  among  the  Welsh  inhabi-
tants of  America,  Mr.  Edwards  was  known  as  Eos
Glan  Twrch  ("  the  nightingale  of  the  Twrch  "),  his
birthplace  being  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Twrch.
He  began  to  write  at  an  early  age,  and  soon  be-
came a  successful  competitor  for  the  prizes  award-
ed at  the  "  Eisteddfodau  " — the  annual  gatherings
of  the  Welsh  people — for  the  best  songs  and  prose
essays.  His  name  was  among  the  foremost  in  con-
nection with  these  yearly  festivals,  and  he  was  an
adjudicator  in  many  of  them.  To  his  influence
and  labors  some  of  "the  earliest  Welsh  periodicals
in  America  are  indebted  for  their  successful  estab-
lishment. To  many  of  them  he  was  a  constant
contributor,  and  of  one,  "Amserai,"  published  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  he  was  editor.  His  published  poems
include  "  The  Crucifixion  "  (1853)  and  "  The  Omni-
presence of  God  "  (1859).

EDWARDS,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Jefferson  coun-
ty, Ky.,  24  Oct.,  1815.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  studied  law,  and  entered  upon
the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  of  Indiana  from  1845  till  1849,


when  he  emigrated  to  California,  and  was  at  once
made  alcaide.  He  returned  to  Indiana  in  18M,
and  wns  in  the  same  year  elected  to  the  state  mtt
ate.  Me  removed  subsequently  to  Iowa,  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention
in  1855,  and  was  in  the  legislature  from  1856  till
1860,  serving  the  last  two  years  as  speaker  of  the
house.  On  21  May,  1861, "he  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-colonel and  aide-de-camp  on  the  governor's
staff.  He  organized  and  commanded  state  trooja
until  May,  1862,  when  he  became  colonel  of  the
18th  Iowa  infantry.  On  26  Sept.,  1864,  he  was
promoted  to  be  brigadier-general  of  volunt. .
was  mustered  out  of  the  service.  15  .Ian..  1866.
After  the  close  of  the  war  he  settled  at  Fort  Smith,
Ark.,  and  was  appointed  U.  S.  assessor,  6  Aug.,
1866.  He  was  also  elected  a  memt>er  of  the  42d
congress  as  a  liberal  Republican,  but  his  election
was  successfully  contested  by  Thomas  Roles,  who
took  his  seat,  9 'Feb.,  1872.

EDWARDS,  John  Ellis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Guilford  county,  N.  C,  1  Aug.,  1814.  He  was
graduated  at  Randolph-Macon  college,  Va.,  which
also  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.
Edwards  entered  the  Methodist  ministry  in  1834,
and  has  been  continuously  engaged  in  pastoral  work
since  that  time,  with  the  exception  of  the  period
occupied  by  a  European  tour  in  1856.  He  was
stationed  for  twenty-one  years  at  Richmond,  Va.,
and  has  represented  the  Virginia  conference  in  the
quadrennial  sessions  of  the  General  conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  south  for  thirty
years.  He  also  was  present  as  a  representative  of
the  same  body  in  the  Centennial  conference  held
in  Baltimore  in  December,  1884.  Dr.  Edwards  is
the  author  of  "Travels  in  Europe"  (New  York,
1857) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  John  Wesley  Childs"  (Phila-
delphia, 1851) ;  "  The  Confederate  Soldier  "  (1868) ;
and  "Log  Meeting-House,"  etc.  (Nashville,  1884),
and  of  addresses,  tracts,  etc. — His  son,  Landon
Rrame,  physician,  b.  in  Prince  Edward  county,
Va.,  20  Sept.,  1845,  was  educated  at  Randolph-
Macon  college.  In  1863  he  enlisted  in  the  artillery
corps  of  the  Confederate  armv,  in  which  he  served
until  the  end  of  the  war.  He  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York  in  March.  1867,  and  until  Octo-
ber of  that  year  served  as  house  physician  in  the
Charity  hospital,  Blackwell's  Island,  and  then  as
assistant  physician  to  the  hospital  for  nervous  dis-
eases at  Lake  Mahopac,  N.  Y.  In  1868  he  began
to  practise  at  Lynchburg,  Va.,  and  was  largely  in-
strumental in  founding  the  Medical  society  of  Vir-
finia  in  1870,  of  which  he  is  recording  secretary,
n  1872  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  State  board
of  health,  and  the  same  year  removed  to  Rich-
mond. In  April,  1874,  he  established  the  "  Vir-
finia  Medical  Monthly,"  and  about  the  same  time
e  was  appointed  lecturer  on  anatomy  in  the  Vir-
ginia medical  college,  in  1875  lecturer  in  the  same
college  on  materia  medica  and  therapeutics,  and  in
1880  on  medico-legal  jurisprudence.  Dr.  Edwards
is  a  member  of  many  professional  societies,  and  has
contributed  frequently  to  other  medical  journals
besides  his  own.  Among  the  subjects  he  has  dis-
cussed are  "Chloral  Hydrate  in  Chronic  Gastric
Ulcer"  and  "Strychnia  in  Tremulous  Effects  of
Tobacco-Smoking." — Another  son,  William  Km-
ory,  clergyman,  d.  in  Prince  Edward  county,  Va.,
10  June,  1842,  was  graduated  at  Randolph-Macon
college  in  1862,  and  has  since  been  a  clergyman  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  south,  in  the  ter-
ritory of  the  Virginia  conference,  and  has  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  He  is  the  author  of  "John
Newsom ;  a  Tale  of  College  Life  ^(Nashville,  1883).


BDWA  RIM


EDWARDS


907


i  1  > \%  \ i: i»v  in»tiii.  naadaon

of  Bajaaa),  '»•  ii«  W— tbampton,  nsnt .  so  April.

th  Alum.  Va..2i»  July.  1858. IT

descended from Alexander Edwards, who emi-

vr>it«Ml  from  Wales,  hiiiI  resided  at N<>rtliiimpt«>ii,

Ma-  in* I  whoee  grandson,  Samm-l,

dud  m  I  7  »!•. .liiMin  was  graduated  M  William-,  in

'.  ami  in  IM11  DOSSD  at Andowr  a  ttttologfcml

v.  which  he  did  n..t  finish. Being  earnestly

biassed  i"  Im-coiiii-  |«ist«»r  <>f  tin-  "South"  parish,

oom prising  nearly  8,000  parishiooan  without  other

pous  organisation  in  the  same  town,  he  was  or-

daim-d  I  Doo,  1*12. In  1811  b*  was  slsoted  ■

tminU-r  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  New
rland  toad  society,  and  in  1881  wa«*  chosen  cor-
responding secretary.  l>y  which  the  labor  ami  ra*
aponafhility  of  superintending  tin?  press  ami  direct-
ly mauairiii;;  tin"  business  of  tlm  a.*s< *mitioii  official-
ly devolved  apoo  him.  Baity  in  \*~~>  he  united
with  tin-  Bar.  Dr.  Woods  and  fourteen  others  in
organizing  in  Boston  the  "Atnerioaa  .Society  for
the  Promotion  of  Temperance."  In  1827  he  was
one  of  several  prominent  New  York  and  New  Eng-
land clergymen  who  met  at  Lebanou  Springs,  N.
V..  to  diasasj  the  subject  of  raligioos  revivals,  ami
the  same  year  was  honored  with  the  degree  of  D.  1 ».
I >v  Vale.  About  this  time  he  applied  for  and  re-
ceived a  release  from  the  pastoral  relation,  ami  had
entered  on  his  duties  as  agent  of  the  American  tem-
perance society  when  he  decided  to  accept  a  call
from  a  new  church  in  Salem  street,  Boston.  Here
he  lain  ire.  1  so  zealously  that,  by  the  following  sum-
mer, his  failing  health  compelled  him  to  resign.  Dr.
K<  I  wards  was  now  free  to  return  to  his  temperance
work,  in  which  he  engaged  with  extraordinary  en-
ergy for  the  next  six  years  (1880-'6).  During  this
period  he  travelled  extensively,  arousing  the  public
to  the  im|H>rtance  of  the  reform,  and  wrote  a  series
of  papers  Known  as  "  Permanent  Temperance  Docu-
ments." In  1836  he  was  elected  president  of  the
Amlover  theological  seminary,  which  office  he  held
■  for  nearly  six  years.  His  attention  was  now  called
to  the  proper  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  and  when
the  American  and  foreign  Sabbath  union  was  or-
ganized in  Boston  he  became  its  secretary.  From
1848  till  1N4!»  he  was  lal>oriously  engaged  in  doing
for  the  Sabbath  what  he  had  previously  done  for
the  cause  of  temperance,  not  only  travelling  exten-
sively and  delivering  addresses  in  every  part  of  the
country,  but  writing  another  set  of  "Permanent
Documents,"  which  probably  form  the  ablest  con-
densed plea  for  the  Sabbath  that  the  language  af-
fords. The  last  four  years  of  his  life  were  chiefly
occupied  in  the  preparation  of  a  condensed  com-
mentary on  the  Scriptures  at  the  request  of  the
American  tract  society.  Be  had  completed  the
work,  so  far  as  the  New  Testament  was  concerned,
and  had  proceeded  with  the  Old  Testament  as  far
as  the  50th  Psalm.  Dr.  Kd wards  published  many
sermons  and  addresses,  and  was  the  author  of  the
following  tracts  issued  by  the  American  tract  so-
:  No.  167, "  Well-conditioned  Farm  "  (on  tem-
parance);  No.  177.  "Joy  in  Heaven  over  One  Sin-
ner that  Repenteth";  No.  179,  "The  Way  to  be
Saved";  No.  125,  "On  the  Traffic  in  Ardent  Spir-
its"; No.  582,  "The  Unction  from  the  Holy  One."
Of  the  first  four,  750,000  copies  were  printed  prior
s.->7.  Of  his  "Sabbath  Manual."  :»*:{..-,44  were
called  for;  of  the  " Temperance  Manual,"  198,085;
and  more  than  70,000  of  the  commentary  on  the
New  Testament. A  memoir  of  his  life  and  lal^r-.

5'  Rev.  Dr.  William  Hall.K-k,  was  published  h>
e  Tract  society  in  1854.— Bela  Bates,  clergy-
man, another  great-grandson  of  Samuel,  mentioned
in  the  preceding  sketch,  b.  in  Southampton,  Mass.,


1  July.  1802;  d.  in  At  I,  .'■>  April.  1888.

He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1*24.  and  at
dover  in  1880. He  was  licensed  to  preach  In  the

latter  -.ear,  but  was  DSTSf  ordained. After  m

as  tutor  at  Amharst,  in-  sotsd  as  a--
Of  the  American  education  society  in  1828-*8J1.
edited the "American Quarterly Bag
tin- "American Quarterly U
which  he  founded,  in  l888-'5;  the  "American  Bihli-
;•  ■|M.Mtory,"with  which  the  latter  was  united,  in
•  ml  the  ••  Bibliotheoa  Sacra*1  in
He  was  anwiaiad  processor  of  Bebrow  in  Aadovat

theological  seminary  in  1K(7,  received  the  decree  of
l>.  I».  from  Dartmouth  in  1844,  and  in  lsjs  was
elected  associate  professor  of  sacred  literature.  Dur-
ing Ins  twenty-four  years  of  editorial  labor  btlayajd
thirtv-one  octavo  volumes  of  the  pariodJOtJl  with
which  he  was  connected.  His  work  in  OOBOastiofJ
with  the  '•(Quarterly  Bsgistsr"  was  especially  valu-
able, lb-  OjSSJsnad  to  make  it  a  storehouse  of  facta
for  present  and  future  generations,  and  it  contains
indispensable  materials  for  the  historian.  In  tin-
pages  of  the  other  pcriodicali  named.  Dr.  Edwards's
contributions  were  chiefly  criticisms  of  current  (es-
pecially biblical)  literature  and  disquisitions  on  the
science  of  education.  While  occupied  with  In-
labors  in  this  field  he  published  Strom]  works,
among  which  are  the  "Eclectic  Header"  ftf
"Biography  of  Self-Taught  Men  "(in:il):  ••  Memoir
of  Henry  Martin,"  with  an  introductory  essay
(1881);  ""Memoirs  of  K.Cornelius"  (1KM);  a  vol-
ume on  the  "Epistle  to  the  Qalatians";  and  the
"  Missionary  Gazetteer"  (1888).  He  was  also  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  religious  press,  sad  wrote
various  pamphlets  and  the  more  important  |M.r-
tions  of  several  books  in  collaboration  with  Profs.
Sears,  Felton,  and  Park.  Among  the  latter  an-
"Selections  from  German  Literature"  and  "Clas-
sical Studies."  He  was  also  associated  with  Samuel
H.  Taylor  in  the  translation  of  "  Kuhmr's  Brash
Grammar."  In  1845  he  was  compelled  to  visit
Florida  for  his  health,  and  on  his  return  saii^l  for
Kuro(ie,  where  he  spent  a  year.  In  1851  he  was
again  compiled  to  go  south,  and  was  residing
there  the  following  winter,  w  hen  he  died.  He  was
an  ideal  editor  and  professor,  uniting  great  erudi-
tion  ami  a  sound  judgment  with  a  deep,  earnest,
and  uniform  piety.  A  selection  from  his  SBIuaSM
and  addresses,  with  a  memoir  by  Prof.  Edwards
A.  Park,  was  published  in  Boston  in  1868.

EDWARDS.  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mon-
mouthshire, Wale-.  !i  May,  1722;  d.  in  Penosdor.
Del.,  28  Jan.,  17!>.">.  He  was  educated  at  Bristol
college,  Knglaml.  and  ordained  to  the  Baptist  min-
istry in  Cork,  Ireland.  1  .lune,  17"»7.  He  came  to
this  country  in  17IS1  and  liecame  pastor  of  the  Bap-
tist church  in  Philadelphia,  but  resigned  his  charge
in  1770,  and  never  afterward  became  a  pastor,  trav-
elling widely  as  preacher  and  lecturer.  In  the
Revolutionary  struggle  Mr.  El  wards  was  the  only-
Baptist  minister  in  the  country,  with  one  |H>ssible
exception,  who  sympathised  with  the  mother  coun-
try. He  was  a  man  of  scholarly  tastes  and  attain-
ments, and  as  a  preacher  had  no  equal  in  the  Bap-
tist pulpit  of  his  day.  To  him,  more  than  to  any
one  else,  is  due  the  credit  of  founding  Rhode  Island
college,  now  Brown  university.  Besides  being  the
principal  mover  in  the  enterprise,  he  was  active  in
securing  foads  for  the  permanent  sup|M»rt  of  the
institution,  and  was  one  of  its  fellows  from  17tM
till  17*!».  Mr.  Edwards  was  the  tirst  American
Baptist  t<>  attempt  a  history  of  his  denomination
in  this  country.  In  pursuing  this  design  lie  trav-
elled from  New  Ham | »h ire  to  Georgia  eagerly  col-
lecting materials. Besides  various  published  dis-


308


EDWARDS


EDWARDS


courses,  he  was  the  author  of  "  Materials  toward  a
History  of  the  Baptists  of  Pennsylvania  "  (1778),
and  "  Materials  toward  a  History  of  the  Baptists
in  Jersey"  (1702).  He  also  left  a  large  body  of
manuscript  records,  which  have  proved  of  great
value  to  subsequent  writers.  He  received  the  fa-
me of  A.  M.  from  the  College  of  Philadelphia  in
1702,  aud  from  Rhode  Island  college  in  1709.

EDWARDS,  Niiiian,  senator,  1>.  in  Montgom-
ery county,  Md.,  in  March,  1775;  d.  in  Belleville,
111.,  20  July,  1883.  His  education  was  at  one  time
directed  by  William  Wirt,  and  was  completed  at
Dickinson  college,  Pa.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  re-
moved to  the  Green  river  district  in  Kentucky.
He  studied  both  medicine  and  law,  but,  deciding
in  favor  of  the  latter,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1798  in  Kentucky,  and  in  1799  in  Tennessee.  He
had  previously  been  elected  to  the  Kentucky  legis-
lature before  he  was  twenty-one.  .He  rose  rap-
idlv  in  his  profession,  and  was  appointed  first  clerk,
and  then  judge,  of  the  general  court  of  Kentucky,
judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  1803,  of  the  court
of  appeals  in  1800,  and  in  1808  chief  justice  of
the  state,  before  he  had  attained  his  thirty-sec-
ond year. In  1809  President  Madison  appointed

him  governor  of
Illinois,  on  the
organization  of
that  territory,
and  he  retained
the  office  till  its
admission  to  the
Union  in  1818.
Before  congress
had  adopted  any
measures  on  the
subject  of  volun-
teer rangers,  he
organized  com-
panies, supplied
them  with  arms,
built  stockade
C y  p  o forts,  and  estab-

&  ^^<^^c^  iished  a  line  of
posts  from the
mouth  of  the  Missouri  to  the  Wabash  river. He
was  thus  prepared  for  defence,  and  during  the  war
of  1812  and  the  frontier  wars  with  the  Indians,  his

frecautionary  measures  were  greatly  appreciated,
n  1810  he  was  appointed  one  of  three  commission-
ers to  treat  with  the  Indian  tribes.  He  was  one  of
the  first  two  United  States  senators  from  Illinois,
having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat,  and  serving
from  4  Dec.,  1818,  till  4  March,  1824,  when  he  re-
signed, to  accept  the  appointment  of  minister  to
Mexico.  He  had  reached  New  Orleans  on  his  way
to  his  post,  when  he  was  recalled,  in  consequence
of  charges  made  against  him  by  William  H.  Craw-
ford, then  secretary  of  the  treasury.  He  was  again
elected  governor  of  Illinois  and  served  from  1820
to  1830.  See  "History  of  Illinois  and  Life  of
Ninian  Edwards,"  by  Ninian  W.  Edwards  (1870);
and  "  The  Edwards  Papers,"  being  vol.iii.  of  theChi-
cago  historical  society  s  collections  (Chicago,  1884).
—His  son,  Ninian  Wirt,  lawyer,  b.  in  Frankfort,
Ky.,  15  April,  1809,  was  taken  by  his  father,  when
an  infant,  to  Kaskaskia,  then  the  capita)  of  Illinois
territory.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Tt'nsylvania
university,  and  at  its  law  department  in  *833.  Be-
fore his  graduation  he  was  married  to  Elizabeth  P.
Todd,  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Abraham  Lincoln.  Mr.  Ed-
wards began  the  practice  of  law  in  1833,  and  in
1834  was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Illinois,
but  resigned  in  1835,  and  removed  to  Springfield.
In  1830  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  with


^fe:


Abraham  Lincoln  and  others  was  active  in  secur-
ing the  removal  of  the  capital  to  Springfield.  .Mr.
Bdwatds  remained  a  member  of  the  Legislature
continuously  till  1«>2.  During  that  period  In-  was
also  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  t In-
state constitution  in  1848.  In  1854  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  governor  attorney  before  the  board
of  commissioners  whose  duty  it  was  to  investigate
the  claims  of  canal  contractors  against  the  state,
amounting  to  over  $1,500,000.  From  1854  till
1857  he  served  as  superintendent  of  public  instruc-
tion, and  drafted  a  bill  regarding  free  schools,
which  afterward  became  a  law.  In  August,  1861,
he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  captain
commissary  of  subsistence,  which  appointment  be
held  until  22  June,  1805.  In  the  latter  year  M  r.
Edwards  retired  almost  entirely  from  the  practice
of  his  profession.  At  the  request  of  the  State
historical  society,  he  prepared  a  volume  entitled
"The  Life  and  Times  of  Ninian  Edwards, and  His-
tory of  Illinois,"  which  is  considered  an  authority
(1870). — Another  son,  Benjamin  Stevenson,  law-
yer, b.  in  Edwardsville,  Madison  co.,  111.,  3  June,
1818 :  d.  in  Springfield,  111.,  5  Feb.,  1880.  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1838,  and  at  the  law  department
in  the  following  year.  In  politics  he  was  first  a
Whig,  and  subsequently  a  strong  Democrat,  being
several  times  chosen  to  the  state  legislature.  In
1809  he  was  elected  circuit  judge  of  Sangammon
county,  111.,  but  resigned  after  eighteen  months'
service,  preferring  the  active  practice  of  his  pro-
fession. At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  president
of  the  state  bar  association.

EDWARDS,  Oliver,  soldier,  b.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  30  Jan.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Springfield  high-school  in  1852.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  Mr.  Edwards  was  commissioned
1st  lieutenant  and  adjutant  of  the  10th  Massachu-
setts regiment,  and  in  January,  1802,  was  appointed
senior  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Darius  N.
Couch.  He  was  commissioned  major  of  the  37th
Massachusetts  on  9  Aug.,  and  was  promoted  colo-  •
nel  on  27  Aug.  On  19  Oct.,  1804,  he  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  "for  gallant  and  distinguished
services  at  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania  Court-House,
and  for  meritorious  services  at  the  battle  of  the
Opequan."  He  was  brevetted  major-general,  5  May,
1805,  "for  conspicuous  gallantry  in  the  battle  of
Sailor's  Creek,  Va.,"  and  was  made  a  full  brigadier-

feneral,  19  May,  1805.  After  serving  through  the
'eninsula  campaign  of  1802,  and  those  of  r  reder-
icksburg  and  Gettysburg,  Gen.  Edwards  was  or-
dered to  New  York  city  in  command  of  a  picked
provisional  brigade,  to  quell  the  draft  riots  in  July,

1803,  and  placed  in  command  of  Fort  Hamilton
and  Fort  Lafayette.  At  the  end  of  the  enforce-
ment of  the  draft,  Gen.  Edwards  returned  to  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Rappahannock.  During  the  second  day  of  the
battle  of  the  Wilderness,  when  in  command  of  the
4th  brigade,  2d  division,  0th  array  corps,  he  made
a  charge  at  the  head  of  the  87th  Massachusetts
regiment,  and  succeeded  in  breaking  through  the
Confederate  lines. At  Spottsylvania,  Va.,  12  May,

1804,  he  held  the  "  bloody  angle "  with  his  own
brigade  from  5  A.  M.  till  4  p.  M.  and  was  at  the  head
of  twenty  regiments  from  that  hour  untU  5  a.  m..
when  the  enemy  withdrew,  making  twenty-four
hours  of  continuous  fighting.  He  subsequently  par-
ticipated in  all  the  battles  of  the  overland  cam-
paign, and  accompanied  the  0th  corps  when  sent
to  the  defence  of  Washington  against  the  advance
of  Early.  He  was  afterward  with  Gen.  Sheridan
in  his  campaign  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Winchester,  of  which  town  he


i:|.v>  ARDS


VUUS


ra


wia  placed  in  coiihiuiikI  by  that  officer.  The  latter
offered  him  the  provost-marshal-gciicraUhip
of  the  middle  military  diriaion,  but  In-  declined
it,  preferring  a  direct  command.  In  the  final  as-
sault on  Petersburg,  Gen.  Bdwards's  brigade  cap-
tured thfl  guns  in  front  <>f  three  of  the  enemy's
brigade*,  and  he  receive*!  the  surrender  of  tin-  city

from  tin-  hands  of  its  mayor,!  April,  1865. At  the
iwttlc  of  Sailor*!  Creek,  on  •'»  April,  Qen.  Bdwarda,

with  tin'  8d l»ri>;*t«l«-  of  tin-  id  division,  captured

tit I and staff, with his entire hri-

aade,  I.icut.-Oen.  Swell  and  staff.  an<l  many  cithers.

Tie  W0J  BOftared  OVt  of  the  army  <>n  16  .Ian..  I
and has  l>een  since  engage*!  in mercantile pur-
I,  both in tin-  country  and in England, lie
invented  the  Florence  oU-etOTe.

EDWARDS,  Timothy,  clergyman.  l>.  in  Hart-
ford. Conn..  11  May.  1669;  d.  in  East  Windsor.
Conn.,  '.27  .Ian..  17-Vs.  The  Kdwards  family  is  of
-h  origin,  the  earliest  known  ancestor  licing  the
Kii  liAKii  Edwards,  who,  it  is  supposed,  left
Wales  in  the  time  of  Qfleofl  Klizalieth,  ami  tattled
in  Oxford,  or  London,  as  a  clergyman  of  the  estab-
lished church.  Hbaon,  William,  accompanied  his
mother  to  this  country,  she  having  been  left  a
widow  and  married  again,  and  took  up  his  residence
in  Hartford,  Conn.  Khiurd,  a  wealthy  merchant,
-on  of  William,  was  the  father  of  Timothy.  The
latter  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1691,  receiving
l>oth  his  degrees  the  same  day — one  in  the  morning.
the  other  in  the  afternoon,  "an  uncommon  mark
of  respect,"  say  the  East  Windsor  records,  "paid
to  his  extraordinary  proficiency  in  learning."
After  pursuing  the  usual  theological  course,  he  was
licensed  to  preach,  and  ordained  pastor  over  the
church  in  East  Windsor  in  1694,  where — with  the
exception  of  a  few  weeks'  alwence  in  1711,  when
appointed  chaplain  to  the  Connecticut  troops  in  a
military  expedition  to  Canada — he  remained  nearly
sixty-four  years.  When  he  was  eighty-six  years  of
age  an  assistant  was  given  him,  at  his  request.
His  wife,  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Solomon  Btod-
dard,  of  Northampton,  Mass..  a  woman  of  strong
Intellect  and  much  cultivation,  died  in  her  uin< i y-
ninth  year.  Mr.  Kdwards  always  preached  ex-
temporaneously, and,  until  he  was  over  seventy,
without  noting  down  the  heads  of  his  discourse.
He  is  only  known  to  have  written  out  one  sermon,
that  delivered  on  the  occasion  of  the  general  elec-
tion of  1  ?:{'.!.  He  lived  until  within  a  few  months
of  his  son's  decease,  and  the  latter  often  visited
him,  and  was  heard  in  his  father's  pulpit.  Com-
paring the  two,  it  is  said  to  have  been  customary
for  the  parishioners  to  remark  that,  "although  Mr.
Bdwarda  was,  perhaps,  the  more  learned  man,  and
more  animated  in  his  manner,  yet  ■  Mr.  Jonathan'
was  the  deejHT  preacher." — His  son,  Jonathan.
theolocian,  b.  in  East  Windsor,  Cotuk,  6  Oct..  1706;
d.  in  Princeton.  X..I..  H  March,  17.">»,  was  the  fifth
of  eleven  children  and  the  only  son.  At  a  'cry  earlv
age  his  uncommon  genius  bejBM  to  dJseOTer  itself.
At  ten  he  wrote  a  paper  ridiculing  the  idea  tlmt
the  soul  is  material,  and  at  twelve  he  sent  to  a  Eu-
ropean correspondent  of  his  father  an  account  of

"The  Wondrous  Way  of  the  Working  of  the  Spi-
der." lie  was  prepared  for  oollogs  by  his  father
and  sister,  ami  in  September,  17H>.  when  only
twelve  years  of  age.  entered  Vale,  and  was  gradu-
ated in  lT'-'O.  While  in  college  his  ••character  was
marked  with  sobriety  and  improvement  in  learn-
ing." The  l>ook  which  at  this  time  H iucxpn-soihl J
rtained  and  pleaeed  him"  was  Locke'l  "  Essay
•  >n  the  Human  [Jnderstanding."  Though  he  si
proficiency  in  all  the  studies . .f  the  oollege  oonrse,

including  natural  phOoaophy,  which  he  cultivated


to  the  end  of  his  life,  mond  philosophy  and  divin-
ity were  his  favorite  hi  Brought  up  in  a
household  and  community  (hat  wen-  eminently  re-
ligious, he  had  from  Me  childhood  "»var

oi  and  ex-
ercises aboat  his
soul."  but  found
a painful -t  u  in  -

bung-block  to  his

spiritual  progress
in "the doctrine

of (mhI's sorer-

citfiity,"  which
appeared  to  him
"a  horrilile  d<M--
trine."  At  length,
while  in  college.
how  or  by  what
means  he  could
never  tell,  his  dif-
ficult ies  vanished,
and  he  had  no
more doubts of

"  Ood'8 a  I  >solute

sovereignty  and
justice  with  re-
spect to  salvation  and  damnation."  This  change
of  condition  was  attended  with  "an  inward  sweet
delight  in  God."  His  sense  of  divine  thing!  would
often  suddenly  kindle  up  "a  sweet  burning  in  his
heart."  Having  conversed  with  his  father,  he  be*
came  satisfied  of  his  "good  state,"  united  with  the
church,  and  accepted  the  Christian  ministry  as  his
true  calling.  With  the  purpose  of  his  life  now
made  plain,  he  remained  at  college  two  years  after
his  graduation  as  a  student  of  divinity.  In  Au-
gust, 1 722,  he  was  selected  to  preach  in  a  Presby-
terian church  in  the  city  of  New  York,  where,  OB
account  of  the  smallncss  of  the  society  and  some
•pedal  dilliculties,  be  remained  only  eight  months.
While  in  New  York  he  made  a  new  and  solemn
dedication  of  himself  to  God,  rowing  "for  the  fu-
ture to  be  in  no  respect  his  own.  but  to  act  as  one
who  had  no  right  to  himself  in  any  respect,"  He
"used  frequently  to  retire  into  a  solitary  place  on
the  banks  of  Hudson's  river,  at  some  distance  from
the  city,  for  contemplation  OU  divine  things  ami
secret  converse  with  God."  In  April.  1788,  be  re-
tained to  his  father's  house  in  Bast  Windsor,  where
he  spent  the  snmmer  in  close  study.  Here  be  finished
a  series  of  seventy  resolutions  remarkable  for  the
spiritof  pure,  lofty,  and  practical  piety  that  they  em-
body. They  definitely  outline  a  theory  and  plan  of
life  which  can  only  In-  objected  to  as  perhaps  unat-
tainable- exalted.  '  They  constitute  a  manual  of
devotion  which  has  been  rety  elTectivc  in  ouicken-
tng  the  piety  of  snofwnding  generational  In  Sep-
tember, [798,  Mr.  Edwards  was  invited  by  several
uongfegetkan  to  become  their  minister,  but  he  de-
clined all  these  calls,  as  well  as  a  rcQUest  to  return
to  New  York,  preferring  to  accepi  M  position  Of
tutor in Yale college,  at that time  offered him.

Here  h ntinucd  for  two  years. In  the  summer

Of  1786  he  was  invited  to  beOOBM  the  colleague  of
his  grandfather.  Solomon  Stoddard,  in  the  pastor*
ale  of  the  church  at  Northampton.  Mass.  ]\,
OSpted  this  call,  resigned  his  tutorship  in  S-j.tem-
Int.  1798,  and  was  ordained  to  his  office  in  Febru-
ary. 17'JT.  in  the  twenty-fourth  year  of  his  age,
Ob  88  .Inly  of  the  same  year  he  married  Sarah
Pierropont,  daughter  Of  a  minister  at  New  Ha\eii.
In  1798  the  senior  pastor  ili.il.  leaving  the  young
minister  alone.  For  al>out  seventeen  rUBA  Ml
tlemeiit  at  Northampton  was  happy  and  cmineiitly
uscful. His  fame  as  a  preacher  grew  rapidly  and


310


EDWARDS


EDWARDS


was  very  great.  In  July,  1731,  he  delivered  the
Thursday  lecture  in  Boston,  and  his  discourse  was
printed  and  much  approved.  He  regarded  the
Anninian  doctrines,  then  very  prevalent,  as  dan-
gerous in  their  practical  tendency,  and  in  1?:54
preached  a  series  of  sermons  of  a  Calvinistic  char-
acter, among  which  was  an  elaborate  discourse  on
"Justification  by  Faith  alone."  SoOB  afterward  a
wonderful  religious  awakening  began  in  his  con-
gregation, exceeding  anything  that  had  been  known
in  any  part  of  the  country.  In  the  year  1740  the
Rev.  George  Whitfield  visited  Mr.  Edwards,  spend-
ing four  days  with  him,  and  preaching  several
times.  In  this  and  the  vear  following,  the  revival
extended  far  and  wide  through  New  England,  and
Mr.  Edwards*!  services  were  eagerly  sought  by
ministers  and  people  in  promoting  the  work.  His
preaching  was  attended  with  great  success,  and  one
sermon  in  particular,  entitled  "Sinners  in  the
I  lands  of  an  Angry  God."  delivered  at  Enfield,
was  attended  with  extraordinary  impressions.  To
guard  against  fanatical  excesses  he  wrote  and
published  about  this  time  "The  Distinguishing
Marks  of  a  Work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  "  Thoughts
concerning  the  Present  Revival  of  Religion,"  and
his  famous  "Treatise  on  Religious  Affections."
At  this  moment  of  general  religious  prosperity,
and  when  Mr.  Edwards  was  at  the  height  of  his
fame  and  usefulness,  a  great  reverse  came,  entail-
ing the  heaviest  trial  of  his  life.  In  1744  he  re-
ceived information  that  some  young  persons,  mem-
bers of  his  church,  had  in  their  possession  impure
books,  which  were  causing  an  alarming  demoraliza-
tion. He  sought  to  have  the  church  investigate
the  matter,  with  a  view  to  suitable  discipline.  The
church,  finding  that  a  great  scandal  was  likely  to
follow  inquiry,  refused  to  comply  with  the  pastor's
wishes,  and  let  the  matter  drop.  This  painful  af-
fair weakened  his  influence,  especially  as  it  was
connected  with  a  system  of  organization  to  which
the  Northampton  church  was  committed,  and  to
which  Mr.  Edwards  was  now  strongly  opposed.
His  predecessor  had  favored  what  was  known  as
the  "  half-way  covenant,"  and  under  his  ministry
the  church  had  practically,  though  not  formally,
adopted  it.  According  to  this  plan,  unconverted
persons  were  admitted  to  the  Lord's  supper,  and
their  children  to  the  rite  of  baptism.  This  was  a
distinct  departure  from  the  old  Congregational
rule,  which  restricted  admission  to  the  church  and
its  ordinances  to  those  who  professed  personal  re-
ligious convictions  and  aims.  When  it  was  known
that  Mr.  Edwards  desired  to  enforce  the  old  rule,  a
storm  of  opposition  rose  against  him,  and  there
was  a  general  cry  that  he  should  be  dismissed.  He
proposed  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  sub-
jects in  dispute,  but  his  request  was  refused,  and
at  length,  22  June,  1750,  after  long  and  fruitless
efforts  to  avoid  this  result,  he  was  forced  to  resign,
thus  closing  a  ministry  in  Northampton  of  nearly
twenty-four  years.  With  a  large  family  and  little
income  aside  from  his  salary,  his  situation  was
painful  in  the  extreme.  He  was  not  left,  however,
without  substantial  tokens  of  sympathy.  His
friends  in  Scotland  invited  him  to  establish  him-
self in  that  country,  and  at  once  forwarded  to  him
a  considerable  sum  of  money.  Samuel  Davies,  of
Virginia,  entreated  him  to  remove  to  that  state,
offering  to  surrender  to  him  his  own  parish,  and
not  a  few  of  the  people  of  Northampton  adhered
to  him,  and  would  have  been  glad  to  maintain  him.
had  he  consented  to  remain  in  the  town.  He  pre-
ferred to  accept  an  offer,  from  the  London  society
for  propagating  the  gospel,  to  become  a  missionary
to  the  remnant  of  the  Housatonnuck  Indians  at


Stockbridge,  whither  he  removed  in  August,  1751.
At  the  same  time  the  white  inhabitants  of  the
town  asked  him  to  become  their  pastor.  Thi-  axill
at  Stockbridge  was  not  without  its  compensations,
especially  in  the  fact  that  he  had  more  leisure  than
ever  before  to  prosecute  the  studies  that  were  dear
to  him.  His  preaching  to  the  Indians  was  without
notes,  aided  by  an  interpreter.  His  slender  income
was  slightly  augmented  by  the  delicate  handiwork
of  his  wife  and  daughters,  which  was  sent  to  Boston
to  be  sold.  While  discharging  his  duties  as  a  mis-
sionary with  fidelity,  he  was  able  in  this  period  of
retirement  to  complete  several  of  those  master-
pieces on  which  his  fame  especially  rests.  His
mind  was  filled  with  plans  of  numerous  treatises,
when  his  studies  were  interrupted  bv  the  death  of
his  son-in-law,  President  Burr,  of  Princeton  col-
lege, and  an  unexpected  call  to  succeed  him.  With
modest  reluctance  he  accepted  the  call,  and  was  in-


:MM£2*&m&*


stalled  as  president,  16  Feb.,  1758.  The  original
building,  Nassau  Hall,  is  shown  in  the  engraving.
His  brief  service  of  thirty-four  days  was  long
enough  to  excite  among  the  students  satisfaction
and  wonder.  The  small-pox  was  prevailing  in  the
neighborhood,  and  he  was  inoculated,  but  died  of
it,  leaving  as  his  last  words,  "  Trust  in  God.  and
ve  need  not  fear."  He  was  interred  at  Princeton.
In  1872  his  descendants  erected  to  his  memory  at
Stockbridge  a  monument  of  red  granite  twenty-
five  feet  high.  Edwards  as  a  pastor  and  preacher
cannot  be  considered  apart  from  Edwards  as  a
man.  His  excellence  was  of  the  kind  that  has
long  been  described  as  saintly.  The  seventy
"  Resolutions"  that  he  framed  when  a  young  man
expressed  an  extraordinary  piety  and  elevation  of
character,  and  reacted  in  consistently  maintain-
ing his  high  spiritual  tone.  His  reputation  was
without  a  blemish.  Though  grave  and  reserved,
he  was  not  austere.  His  benevolence  and  pity
for  the  poor  were  large  and  practical.  He  was
self-restrained,  and  bore  himself  with  calm  dig-
nity under  all  circumstances,  even  amid  the  bit-
ter provocations  that  attended  the  rupture  of  his
pastorate  at  Northampton.  If  somewhat  over-
stern  and  exacting  as  a  father,  he  was  far  from  be-
ing unkind.  He  was  an  eager  student,  with  a
genuine  thirst  for  knowledge.  He  read  all  the
Booka  that  came  in  his  wav,  but  studied  the  Bible
more  than  all  the  rest.  He  had  been  trained  by
his  father  to  read  with  pen  in  hand,  and  this  be-
came so  much  his  habit  that  his  pen  was  with  him,
even  in  his  solitary  walks  for  exercise,  always
ready  to  jot  down  the  thoughts  that  might  conic  to
him.  If  not  an  eloquent  preacher,  he  was  certainly
a  most  powerful  and  effective  one.  He  was  tall
and  slender,  a  little  more  than  six  feet  in  stature,
and  had  a  countenance  expressive  of  intelligence


EDWAKDS


BDWARDtt


'Ml


and Utii^nity. With  a  feeble  constitution.
.  though <iear,  wan  m»t  strong. Bansad  little

gesture,  and iwocttd  t uif  <>f  the  arts  of the

..nitnr. Still,  his setBOM  were  so scriptural in
matter,  x>  strong  and lucid  in  thought.  10  marked
bj  deep  knowledge  of  limnun  nature,  l»y  simplicity
and  the  alweuce  of  all  self-consciousness,  so  glow-
ing with  the  central  heat  <>f  intense  earnestness,
that  they  held  the  closest  attention,  and  often  po-
ll great effects. They  an-  Mill  read  with  the
dnpsot  Interest,  while  those  of  Whitfield  are  for-
gotten. It  is  esjM'cially  on  his  character  as  a  theo-
logian and  metaphysician  that  Mr.  Edwards's  fame
rests. He  was  not by  any  means  a  merely  "dry
and old thinker."  hut his  highest  strength  un-
doubtedly lay  in  the  region  of  pure  thought, lie
was  emphatically  an  original  thinker. He  was  not
widely  learned,  and  with  slender  op|x>rtunities  of
acquaintance with the works of contem|M>rary
writer*, it is clear that he  drew his materials
almost  entirely  from his  own reflections  and  re-
sources. Though the best impulse to  his  mind
was  early  given  by  Locke,  he  was  far  from  accept-
ing that great  man  as  his  intellectual  master, lie
explicitly  rejected  many  of  Locke's  ideas,  and  in-
clined rather  to  that  system  which  in Europe  had
found  its  representatives  in  Malebranehe and  Leib-
nitz. His  attachment to  the  system known as
Calvinism  was  intense,  and  in  the  defence  of  this
system  he  produced  his  greatest  works. His  im-
mortal  treaties  "On  the  Freedom  of  the  Will"
(17&4) aimed  at  a  conclusive  settlement  of  the  main
points  in  controversy  between  the  Calvinists  and
Anninians. He  here maintains  that  the  law  of
causality  extends  to  every  action. Lilierty  con-
sists in  the  power  of  doing  what  one  wills,  not  in
any  power  of  willing  without  a  motive. The  will
always follows  the  greatest seeming  good,  and
what  shall  seem  to  a  man  the  greatest  good  de-
pends on  the  state  of  his  soul. Liberty  is  not  in  the
-  act  but  in  the  man,  and,  if  a  depraved  nature  is  to
abstain  from  sin,  it  can  only  be  effected  by  a  change
of  heart. Whatever  may  oe  thought  of  the  con-
clusions of  this  treatise,  there  have  never  been  two
opinions  as  to  its  extraordinary  ability. Edwards's
definition  of  virtue,  in  his  treatise  on  that  subject,
as  "  the  love  of  being,"  has  provoked  dissent  on  the
part  of  many  who  have  in  general  accepted  him  as  a
guide. The  estimate  of  Edwards  by  competent
judges  puts  him  in  the  front  rank  of  great  men.
Dr.  Chalmers  says  that  "on  the  arena  of  metaphy-
sicians he  stood  highest  of  all  his  contemporaries."
Sir  .lames  Mackintosh  spoke  of  him  as  "a  most
extraordinary  man,  who,  in  a  metaphysical  age  or
country, would  certainly have been deemed  as
much  the  boast  of  America  as  his  great  contempo-
rary, Franklin." Again  he  calls  nim,  bv  way  of
eminence,  "the  metaphysician of  America,"  and
expresses the  opinion that  "in  power  of  subtle
argument he was perhaps unmatched,  certainly
unsurpassed,  among  men." Dugald Stewart de-
clared "there  is,  however,  one  metaphysician  of
whom  America  has  to  boast,  who,  in  logical  acute-
ness  and  subtlety,  docs  not  yield  to  any  disputant
bnd  In  the  universities  of  Kurope. I  need  not  say
that  I  allude  to  Jonathan Edwards." The influ-
ence of Edwards  was  very  gnat  in  the  spiritual
history  of  England  and  this  country,  especially  of
New  England,  whose  leading  minds,  in  the  hn  fol-
lowing him,  snowed  his  moulding  hand. Bellamy
and  Hopkins  were  his  pupils; Dwight  was  hi-  ex-
positor; Smalley,  Emmons,  and many  other-
his followers. Through Hopkins his Influence
reached Kirkland. and assisted in forming the
character  of  ('banning. Edwards  sums  up  the  old


the!  w  England,  and  is  the fountain-

head  of  the  new. Besides  works  mentioned  sjb
Edwards  published  ** Treatise  Concerning  th.
Ugious Affections'1  (1746); ••  Inquiry int.. the
Qualifications  f'.r  Free  Communion  in  the  church  "

I  :  "Original  Sin"  (1737):  -True  Natun
christian  Virtue'1  (1788);  "Dissertation  concern-
ing the End for  which God  cr.-at.-d the World"

l  :  "Thoughts  ..n  the Revival  of  Religion";
"History  "f  toe  Bademptkm";  and  a  -Life  of

David  Brain. -rd." Then-  have  been  twoeditioi
his  works  in  England,  one  in  eight  rolumei
and  one  in  two  comixu-t  volumes. The  American
editions  are  to  be  preferred. They  include  that  edit-
ed  by  Samuel Austin  (H  vols., Worcester, Mass.,
1809);  that  by8ereno  K.  Dwight.  with  a  meraou

vols.,  New  York,  1KJ0);  and  a  later  one  in  a  more
convenient  form  (4  vols.,  LgftfA,  Then-  are  several
lives  of  Jonathan  Edwards;  the  nio-t  interesting  is
that  by  Samuel  Hopkins,  who  was  his  pupil  ;  the
fullest  i>  that  bySereno  Edwards  Dwight.  in  the
edition  of  his  works  mentioned  aU.ve.  There  is
also  a  memoir  by  Dr.  Samuel  Miller  in  Sparks's
"  American  Biography,"  ami  another  in  "Lives
of  Eminent  Literary  and  .Scientific  Men  of  Ameri-
ca" (New  York,  lMo(l).— Timothy,  judge,  eldest
son  of  Jonathan,  b.  in  Northampton.  Ma--..  "J".  Jul  v.
173*;  ,1.  in  Stookbridge.  Mass..  27  Oct..  1813.  lie
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  17">7.  and  began
business  as  a  merchant  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.  He  re-
moved to  Stockbridge  al*>ut  177<>.  where  he  was  a
leading  citizen  for  forty-three  years,  and  sat  as
judge  of  prolmte  for  Berkshire  county,  lb-  had
fifteen  children. —  His  son,  William,  inventor,
b.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  11  Nov.,  177<»:  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  Dec.,  1851,  introduced  the  sys-
tem, now  employed  in  nearly  all  American  tan-
neries, by  which  leather  is  made  in  ab.ut  one
fourth  of  the  time  required  by  the  old  Euro)
processes.  His  first  tannery  was  built  at  North-
ampton, Mass.,  and  the  first  leather  made  in  it
was  sent  to  Boston  in  1794.  Having  exhaust. -d
the  supply  of  hemlock-bark  in  the  Connecticut
valley,  he  "removed,  in  lsi  7.  to  Hunter,  (ireeneco.,
N.  Y.,  and  erected  a  model  tannery  on  Schoharie
creek.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  the  hemlock  forests
of  the  Catskill  mountains,  on  an  estate  of  twelve
hundred  acres.  In  1*2:2  the  Messrs.  Edwards  (he
was  assisted  in  business  bv  his  s<>in.  in  connection
with  Jacob  Lorillard,  purchased  the  real  estate  of
the  companv  (an  act  of  incorporation  baring  ben
granted),  which  had  been  onsuooesa ful,  greatly
enlarged  the  business,  and  made  many  impr
ments  in  the  machinery.  Prom  this  establishment
alxmt  10.000  sides  of  sole-leather  were  sent  to  the
city  of  New  York  annually.  Mr.  Edwards  not
only  invented  several  machines,  but  adapted  many
devices  previously  used  f<>r  other  purpoSM  to  the
art  of  tanning,  thus  largely  substituting  water-
power  for  manual  labor.  His  rolling  machine  was
considered  especially  valuable,  is  -.till  in  use  in
nearly  its  original  form,  and  gives  to  leather  the
smoothness  ..f  surface  and  solidity  of  texture  |hi-u1-
iar  to  the  hammered  article. — Jonathan,  Jr.,  theo-
logian, second  son  of  Jonathan.  Sr.,  b.  in  North-
ampton. Mass..  -ji;  Mav,  17l">;  d.  in  Schenectady,
N.  V..  1  Aug.,  1801.  When  he  was  six  years  old  the
family  removed  to  St.xkbridge,  at  that  time  almost
solely  inhabited  by  Indians.  Here  he  I «  came  so
proficient  in  the  Indian  language  as  to  siir|«ss  in
the  thoroughness  <>f  his  scholarship  all  other  Anglo-
Americans  of  that  day.  As  it  was  his  father-  wish
that  In-  should  U-coine  a  missionary  t>>the  aborigi-
nes, he  was  sent,  in  178ft, to  the  Hev.  Gideon  Haw-
l.-y.  who  WM  stationed  M  the  Susquehanna  ri\er,


312


EDWARDS


EDWARDS


to  learn  the  dialect  of  the  Oneidas.  In  conse-
quence of  the  breaking  out  of  war  between  England
and  Frame,  In  which  the  colonies  were  in \< >1  red,
young  Edwards  remained  there  only  six  months,
and  acquired  but  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the
language.  The  death  of  his  father,  soon  followed
by  that  of  his  mother,  and  their  removal  to  Prince-
ton, N.  J.,  materially  changed  his  plans.  Although
left  with  insufficient  means  to  complete  his  educa-
tion, he  determined  to  go  forward,  and,  with  the
aid  of  friends,  entered  the  grammar-school  at
Princeton  in  February,  1760.  The  following  year
he  matriculated  at  the  College  of  New  Jersey,  at
which  institution  he  was  graduated  in  1765.  He
began  the  study  of  theology  under  the  Rev.  Joseph
Bellamy,  D.  D.,  and  received  a  licence  to  preach
from  the  Association  of  Litchfield  county,  Conn.,
in  1766.  In  1767  he  was  appointed  tutor  at  Prince-
ton, where  he  remained  for  two  years,  till  he  be-
came, in  January,  1769,  pastor  of  the  society  at
White  Haven,  Conn.  Several  members  of  his
church  were  advocates  of  the  M  half-way  covenant,"
while  he,  like  his  father,  decidedly  opposed  it.  His
pastorate  was  also  disturbed  by  the  reaction  among
the  New  England  churches  that  followed  the  ex-
travagances that  accompanied  the  "  great  awaken-
ing" of  1740-'2,  and  by  the  demoralizing  influences
of  the  Revolutionary  war.  The  result  of  these  un-
toward circumstances  was  a  dismissal  from  his
charge,  19  May,  1795,  for  the  ostensible  reason  that
the  society  was  unable  to  support  a  minister.  In
1796  he  was  called  to  the  church  in  Colebrook,
Litchfield  co.,  Conn.  Here,  in  a  retired  country
parish,  he  found  opportunity  to  pursue  his  favorite
theological  and  metaphysical  inquiries,  and  would
have  been  willing  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his
days  there ;  but  ne  was  called,  in  the  summer  of
1799,  to  the  presidency  of  the  then  recently  estab-
lished college  at  Schenectady,  N.  Y.  He  was
warmly  welcomed  by  both  students  and  citizens,
and  the  talent  for  government  that  he  subsequently
displayed  surprised  even  those  who  knew  him  best,
his  discipline  being  mild  and  affectionately  parent-
al ;  but  he  died  the  second  summer  after  nis  in-
auguration. He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  College  of  New  Jersey  in  1785.  His  career  re-
sembled that  of  his  distinguished  father  in  so
many  particulars  that  the  coincidence  has  at-
tracted universal  attention.  They  bore  the  same
name,  and  were  distinguished  scholars  and  divines.
Both  were  tutors  for  equal  periods  in  the  colleges
where  they  were  respectively  educated.  Both,
after  being  settled  in  the  ministry,  were  dismissed
on  account  of  their  doctrinal  opinions,  and  were
again  settled  in  retired  places,  where  they  had
leisure  to  prepare  and  publish  their  works.  Both
were  called  from  the  discharge  of  these  duties  to
be  presidents  of  colleges,  and  both  died  shortly
after  inauguration,  one  in  the  fifty-fifth  and  the
other  in  the  fifty-seventh  year  of  his  age,  each  hav-
ing preached  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  the  year  from
the  text,  "  This  year  thou  shalt  die."  Nor  was  this
resemblance  confined  merely  to  outward  circum-
stances; intellectually  the  two  men  were  much
alike.  Dr.  Emmons  is  reported  to  have  said  that
"  the  father  had  more  reason  than  the  son ;  yet  the
son  was  a  better  reasoner  than  the  father  ;  and
Dr.  Samuel  Miller,  of  Princeton,  remarked  that
"  the  son  greatly  resembled  his  venerable  father  in
metaphysical  acuteness,  ardent  piety,  and  the  pur-
est exemplariness  of  Christ  inn  deportment."  The
frounger  Edwards  devoted  a  large  portion  of  his
ife  to  the  study  and  interpretation  of  his  father's
writings.  He  was  thus  well  fitted  to  edit  the
latter's  works,  and  did  prepare  for  the  press  the


"  History  of  the  Work  of  Redemption,"  two  vol-
umes of  sermons,  and  two  volumes  of  "Miaoal*
laneous  Observations  on  Important  Theological
Subjects."  In  1797  Dr.  Ed wards  published  "A
Dissertation  concerning  Liberty  and  Necessity,"
which  is,  perhaps,  the  fairest  exposition  extant  of
the  father  s  "  theory  of  the  will.  He  also  printed
numerous  articles  in  the  "  New  York  Theological
Magazine,"  under  the  signatures  "  1 "  and  "  O,  and
many  sermons  in  which  his  views  were  carefully
elaborated.  Among  the  latter  may  be  mentioned
three  discourses  "On  the  Necessity  of  the  Atone-
ment and  its  Consistency  with  Free  Grace  in  l'< >r-
giveness"  (1785).  They  have  been  frequently  re-
published, and  form  the  basis  of  what  is  now
known  as  the  "Edwardean  theory  of  the  atone-
ment." Dr.  Edwards  also  ranked  high  as  a  phi-
lologist, and  his  "  Observations  on  the  Language
of  the  Muhhekaneew  Indians,"  etc.,  elicited  the  en-
thusiastic praises  of  Humboldt.  Nearly  all  his  pub-
lished writings  were  reprinted  in  two  octavo  vol-
umes, edited,  with  a  memoir,  by  Tryon  Edwards
(Andover,  1842). — Jonathan  Walter,  lawyer,  only
son  of  the  second  Jonathan,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
5  Jan.,  1772 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  3  April,  1831,  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1789,  and  was  afterward  a  tutor
there.  On  taking  his  second  degree,  he  delivered  an
oration  in  which  he  vigorously  attacked  the  then
existing  state  law  by  which  the  eldest  son  received
a  double  portion  of  his  father's  property  in  case
the  latter  died  intestate,  and  the  obnoxious  statute
was  repealed  in  the  following  year,  1792.  He
studied  law  at  Litchfield,  settled  in  Hartford,  and
soon  took  high  rank  in  his  profession.  He  was
gifted  with  quick  perceptive  powers,  great  acute-
ness in  reasoning,  and  an  unfailing  flow  of  lan-
guage. Unremitting  devotion  to  his  legal  studies
and  pursuits  finally  undermined  his  health,  and
led  to  his  early  retirement  from  the  more  en-
grossing duties  of  his  profession ;  his  remaining
years  were  mainly  devoted  to  his  family  and  to
looking  after  his  large  inherited  landed  interests.
Chief -Justice  Williams  has  written  a  sketch  of  Mr.
Edwards,  which  is  contained  in  an  appendix  to
the  "Connecticut  Reports." — Jonathan,  son  of
Jonathan  Walter,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  7  Sept.,
1798;  d.  in  New  Haven,  23  Aug.,  1875,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1819,  and  studied  in  the  law-school
of  Judge  Gould  at  Litchfield,  Conn.  He  practised
for  many  years  in  Hartford,  where  he  neld  the
office  of  judge  of  probate.  About  1840  he  removed
to  Troy,  N.  Y.,  of  which  city  he  was  subsequently
chosen  mayor.  He  was  also  several  times  elected
to  the  legislature. — Tryon,  clergyman,  another
son  of  Jonathan  Walter,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
7  Aug.,  1809,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1828,
studied  law  in  New  York,  and  theology  at  Prince-
ton, and  accepted  a  pastoral  call  to  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  in  1834,  whence  he  removed  to  New  London,
Conn.,  in  1845.  He  was  subsequently  called  to
Hagerstown,  Md.  (1867),  and  from  there  went  to
Gouverneur,  St.  Lawrence  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1880,
which  charge  he  was  obliged  to  relinquish  in  1886
on  account  of  failing  health.  While  settled  at  Ha-
gerstown he  was  largely  influential  in  originating
and  organizing  Wilson  college,  of  which  institution
he  was  chosen  the  first  president.  In  1832  a  prize
tract  on  Sunday-schools  appeared  from  his  }  >«n.
and  soon  afterward  "Christianity  a  Philosophy  of
Principles."  He  has  since  contributed  largely  to
the  religious  literature  of  the  time  in  both  peri-
odical and  book-form.  He  is  the  author  of  "  S-lf-
Cultivation"  (New  York,  1835),  and  "  Light  for
the  Day,  or  Heavenly  Thoughts  for  Earthly  Guid-
ance"  (Philadelphia, 1879), partly,  original and


EDWARDS


813


partly  selected, fa  tdtttd  the  worl

randfather,  and in  1850  tho f  the  Rev.  I>r.

Bellamy  (I  \ < . I-..  dndovnrl He  baa  prepared  for

the  preatM  Select  Poetry  for  Children  ana  Youth"

k,  ls'th ;  [or  t!i«'  Hoanhold  "

The  World's  Leoonioe"  (New

York.  1869);  -  Wooden  of  the  World "  (Hartford.

I  ;  and  "  Anecdotes  for  the  Family."  s-veral
of  the  foregoing  have  passed  through  many  editions,
hiiiI  I n-.-ii  ri ■  j •  r i 1 1 1 « •<  1  in  England.  Me  has  also
edited  "Chanty  mid  its  Fruits "  from  the  manu-
scripts of  the  elder  President  Edwards,  ami  for
years  ha<l  sdltorisJ  charge  of  ••  The  Family  Chris-
tian Almanac." — Pierrepont,  lawyer,  youngest
son  of  Jonathan,  Sr.,  b.  n  Northampton,  Mass.,

priL  1750;  d.  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  5  April,
1886.  From  the  fact  that  his  father  whs  a  mis-
sionary to  tin'  Stockbridge.  Mas-;.,  Indians,  he  early
became  so  proficient  in  their  language  that  he  was
wont  to  say  that  he  "thought  in  Indian."  He  was
graduated  at Princeton in 1768,  and began  the

J  practice  of  law  in  New  Haven  in  1771.  He  was
requently  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  was  ap-
pointed administrator  of  the  estate  of  Benedict
Arnold  at  the  time  of  his  treason.  He  took  an
earlv  stand  in  favor  of  independence,  and  served  in
the  Revolutionary  army,  talcing  part  in  two  hard-
fought  battles.  Hi'  wih  a  memDer  of  the  Conti-
nental congress  of  1787-'8,  and  an  able  advocate  of
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  in  the  con-
vention held  to  ratify  it  He  was  the  founder  of  the
Toleration  party  in  Connecticut,  and  by  his  ability
and  iKTseverance  drew  upon  himself  the  animosity
of  the  Calvinists,  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court.  —  Henry
Wagguman,  senator,  son  of  Pierrepont,  b.  in  New
Haven.  Conn.,  in  177!»:  d.  there,  22  July,  1847,  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  New  Jersey  in  1797,
and  studied  at  the  Litchfield  law-school.  He
settled  in  New  Haven,  and  was  twice  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  6  Dec.,  1819,
till  3  March,  1823.  He  Was  appointed  U.  S.  senator
to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  subsequently  elected  for  a
term,  serving  from  1  Dec.,  1823,  till" 4  March,  1827.
He  was  afterward  elected  a  member  of  the  state
senate  1 1  887  -'!>),  and  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives, of  which  he  was  chosen  speaker  in  1830.  In
1838  he  was  elected  governor  of  Connecticut,  and
again  in  1835  and  1838.  In  1833  he  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale.  During  his  term  of
office  as  governor  he  recommended  a  geological
survey  of  the  state,  which  was  accordingly  made.
—Henry  Pierrepont,  lawyer,  son  of"  Henry
Waggiiman,  b.  in  1H09 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24
F> ■!>.,  1855,  was  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
New  York  for  oyer  seven  years,  and  sustained  a
high  reputation  for  independence  and  legal  ability.
— Ogden,  lawyer,  brother  of  Henry  Waggaraan,  b.
in  Connecticut  in  1781 ;  d.  on  Staten  Island,  1
April,  1862,  removed  to  New  York  city  in  the  early
part  of  the  century,  and  served  for  many  years  as
surrogate.  He  was  afterward  a  member  of  tin-
legislature,  and  in  1821  sat  in  the  convention  called
to  revise  the  constitution  of  the  state.  He  was
subsequently  appointed  circuit  judge  of  Ihe  su-
preme court,  and  continued  in  that  office  until
m  1K41  he  reached  the  age  when  he  was  no  longer
eligible.  He  was  at  one  time  candidate  of  the
Whig  party  for  governor.

EDWABD8,  WeUoa  Nathaniel,  politician, b,
in Warren  comity,  N.  C.  in  i?sm;  d.  then.  is

Dee*.  1*7:'.. lie  received  an  academical  education,
studied law,  was admitted to the luir in 1*H>.

and  settled  a<  Warreadon,  N.  c He  was  ■  mem-
ber of  the  state  house  of  commons  in  1814-'15,


and  was  then  elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,
and  rs  alerted  Bra  times,  serving  from  7 1

to  :t  March.  1887.  lb-  was  chom-n  to  the  »tat««
senate  in  I8B8,  successively  racketed  until  U
and  again  eleeted  m  |gn  when  he  was  chosen
president  of  that  body.  Be  wits  a  ajaajabai  of  the
North  Cttfolma constitutional  convention  in  1885,
and  president  of  the  State  convention  that  passed
the  ordinance  of  secession  in  1H«!1.

EDWIN,  David,  engraver,  b.  in  Bath,  Kugland,
in  Daoambar,  l T7«> ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  l'a..  M
Fell.,  1K41.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Edwin,  a
comedian.  David  was  apprenticed  to  Jossi,  a
Dutch  engraver  residing  in  kugland,  wh>
turned  to  Holland,  taking  his  apprentice  with  him
to  Amsterdam.  Master  and  Qoj  did  not  long
agree,  and  the  latter  left  before  his  term  of  appren-
ticeship had  expired.  Finding  himself  aloM  in  a
foreign  land,  without  either  money  or  friends,  he
abJpped  as  a  sailor  on  an  American  vessel  InuumI
for  Philadelphia,  hoping  eventually  to  reach  Lon*
don.  He  laudeil  in  1'hiladelphia  in  Deeesabar,
1 7!»7,  obtained  employment  from  T.  B.  Freeman,
an  English  publisher,  and  was  also  employed  by
Edward  Savage,  the  painter.  He  devoted  himself
to  the  engraving  or  portraits,  and  succeeded  in
doing  the  Boat  work  that  had  been  produced  in  this
country  up  to  that  time.  His  copies  of  the  j>or-
traits  of  Gilbert  Stuart  were  especially  good.  He
engraved  the  pictures  of  Washington,  by  Stuart
and  Peale,  ana  made  copies  of  the  |>ortraits  of
prominent  men  of  the  day  painted  by  those  artiste
and  by  Waldo,  Wood,  Jarvis,  Sully,  and  N eagle.
After  twenty  years  of  steady  application  his
sight  failed,  and  he  was  compelled  to  resort  to
various  methods  to  obtain  a  livelihood.  He  also
possessed  considerable  taste  and  skill  as  a  musician.
A  list  of  Edwin's  principal  works  will  lie  found  in
"American  Engravers"  (Philadelphia,  1875).

KG  AN,  Maurice  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  24  May,  1852.  He  was  graduated
from  La  Salle  college,  and  in  1878  became  professor
of  English  literature  in  Georgetown  college.  On
leaving  Georgetown  he  studied  law  for  a  time,  but
finally  lieeame  a  journalist  He  edited  "  MeGee's
Illustrated  Weekly,"  which,  while  under  his  man-
agement, was  highly  successful.  After  his  connec-
tion with  this  newspaper  had  ceased  he  travelled
through  the  western  and  southern  states  and  Mex-
ico, and  embodied  his  observations  of  those  coun-
tries in  magazine  articles  and  letters  to  the  press.
On  his  return  he  became  an  editor  of  the  "Catho-
lic Review,"  and  in  1881  of  the  "  Freeman's  Jour-
nal," of  which  he  is  now  editor-in-chief  (18871  Be
has  published  "That  Girl  of  Mine,"  and  several  other
anonymous  novels  (187!»):  "  Preludes,"  a  collection
of  his  poems  that  had  appeared  in  various  maga-
zines (I860);  "Songs and  Sonnets"  (London.  1H85);
"The  Theatre  and  Christian  Parents"  <1K85);
-Stories  of  Duty"  fl885)j  "A  Garden  of  Roses  "
(1W<>);  and  "The  Life  around  l's,"  a  collection
of  tales,  with  a  strong  religious  teiidencv  (1886).

KGAN,  Michael,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ireland  :  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1*14.  lie  was  educated  in
Ireland,  where  he  beoamc  a  priest  of  the  Francis-
can order.  He  came  to  the  t'niteil  States  in  Ifj
tailored  as  a  missionary  at  I^ant-aster.  Pa.,  ami  in
1S0-1  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  found  a
UrOfUlCa  Of  the  Franciscan  order  in  the  I'nited
States.  He  was  then  appointed  pastor  of  St.
Mary's  church.  Philadelphia.  In  1810  he  was. con-
ed bishop  of  the  new  diocese  of  Philadelphia,
but  was  able  to  do  little,  owing  to  the  Opposition
of  the  trustees  of  his  cathedral,  who  insisted  on
ha\ing  a  voice  in  the  selection  of  their  pastors.


314


EGAN


K(.(il.i:sT()X


EGAN,  Thomas  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1886;  <1.  there.  24  Feb.,  1887.  He  entered
the  40th  New  York  regiment  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  11
June,  1861.  In  June,  1862,  he  was  promoted  colo-
nel, and  participated  in  all  the  battles  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  During  Gen.  Grant's  overland
campaign  of  1864  he  commanded  a  brigade,  re-
ceiving his  commission  8  Sept.,  1864,  and  was
wounded  at  Petersburg.  At  the  battle  of  Bovdton
plank-road  he  commanded  the  division,  and  was
brevetted  major-general.  He  was  seriously  wound-
ed in  November,  and  on  recovery  was  given  a
division  in  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah.  Gen.
Egan  was  mustered  out  of  the  service,  15  Jan.,  1866,
and  subsequently  lived  in  New  York.

EG  AN  A,  Juan  (a-gan'-ya),  South  American
jurist,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1769;  d.  in  Santiago,
Chili,  13  April,  1836.  He  entered  the  seminary  of
Santo  Toribio  in  1776,  distinguishing  himself  as  a
Latin  scholar.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  super-
numerary professor  of  pnilosophy,  and  in  the  five
subsequent  years  occupied  the  chairs  of  law  and
theology,  and  meantime  practised  at  the  bar.  In
1790  he  started  for  Spain  by  way  of  Chili,  but  was
persuaded  to  remain  in  the  latter  country  by  the
regent  of  the  supreme  court,  Francisco  A.  "Moreno,
who  had  been  a  judge  in  Lima,  and  held  Egafia
in  great  estimation.  When,  in  1810,  Chili  threw
off  the  Spanish  yoke  for  the  first  time,  Egafia  was
called  bv  the  corporation  of  Santiago  to  aid  in  their
work.  Tie  was  elected  a  representative  to  the  first
congress,  where  he  distinguished  himself  in  debate,
and  afterward  filled  several  commissions.  After
the  victory  of  the  royalists  at  Rancagua  in  October,
1814,  Egafia  was  imprisoned  in  Santiago,  and  after-
ward in  the  penitentiary  of  the  island  of  Juan
Fernandez,  remaining  there  until  delivered  by  the
victory  of  San  Martin  at  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,  1817.
He  then  reappeared  in  active  life,  with  greater
prestige  for  the  sufferings  he  had  undergone,  and
v/as  appointed  representative  from  Santiago  to  the
assembly  of  plenipotentiaries  that  fixed  on  the  form
of  government,  and  in  1823  presided  over  congress
and  the  committee  in  charge  of  the  formation  of  a
constitution,  distinguishing  himself  by  Ids  knowl-
edge of  history  and  politics.  He  was  afterward  re-
elected to  congress  for  several  provinces.  Egafia
was  the  promoter  of  a  benevolent  society  in  San-
tiago. He  was  for  years  a  senator,  and  devoted  the
latter  part  of  his  life  to  literary  pursuits,  writing
numerous  historical,  geographical,  and  religious
works. — His  son,  Mariano,  Chilian  jurist,  b.  in
Santiago,  Chili,  18  Sept.,  1793 ;  d.  there,  24  June,
1846,  studied  in  Spain,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen
was  graduated  at  law.  In  1813  he  was  appointed
secretary  of  the  sovereign  junta  of  Chili.  After
the  defeat  of  the  insurgents  at  Rancagua,  Egafia
was  exiled  with  his  father,  and  on  his  return  to
Chili,  in  1817,  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  gen-
eral inspection  of  police,  and  afterward  prosecutor
of  the  court  of  appeals.  In  December  of  the  same
year  he  was  given  the  secretaryship  of  the  Eco-
nomic junta.  Egafia  was  elected  a  member  of  the
municipality  of  Santiago  in  1820,  and  in  1822  was
appointed  legal  adviser  of  the  city  government.
In  January  of  the  following  year  he  was  made
chief  clerk  of  the  treasury  and  of  the  department
of  disputed  claims.  He  was  soon  afterward  ap-
pointed secretary  of  the  provisional  government,
and  in  April,  1824.  was  made  secretary  of  the
treasury  and  of  foreign  relations.  At  the  end  of
this  year  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  several  Euro-
peanpowers,  and  remained  abroad  till  1829.  In
1830  he  was  secretary  of  the  interior,  and  prose-


cutor for  the  supreme  court  of  justice  In  1831
he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  was  president  of
the  National  convention.  In  1836  he  Wat  sent  II
minister  to  Peru,  and.  after  efforts  to  arm i..
isting  difficulties  amicahly,  declared  war  by  order
of  his  government.  He  was  minister  of  justice,
worship,  and  public  instruction  in  1839,  and  in  the
following  year  was  again  minister  to  Peru.  After
his  return  to  Chili  he  was  minister  of  justice  up
to  1841,  and  while  in  this  office  he  revised  the
Chilian  code  of  law.

EGEDE,  Hans,  Danish  missionary,  b.  in  Har-
stadt,  Norway,  31  Jan.,  1686;  d.  on  the  isle  of
Falster,  5  Nov.,  1758.  He  became  pastor  in  Dron-
theim  in  1707,  and  while  there  determined  oa  a
mission  to  Greenland  for  the  purpose  of  convert  ing
the  natives.  After  application  to  the  bishops,
which  proved  unsuccessful,  as  far  as  pecuniary
assistance  was  concerned,  he  gave  up  his  benefice
at  Vaagen  in  1717,  and  removed  to  Bergen,  where
he  endeavored  to  found  a  company  to  trade  with
Greenland.  This  likewise  proved  unsuccessful,
and  Egede  determined  to  appeal  to  Frederick  IV.,
at  Copenhagen,  under  whose  auspices  a  company
was  subsequently  organized.  In  May,  1721,  Egede
sailed  for  Greenland  on  the  "  Haabet,"  with  forty-
six  persons,  landing  in  July  at  Baalsreiver,  where
they  were  hospitably  received  by  the  natives.  For
some  years  the  mission  had  a  hard  struggle  for
life,  and  the  colony  was  sustained  only  bv  the  pro-
visions sent  annually  bv  the  king.  Finally,  in
1635,  Egede  returned  to  Copenhagen,  bearing  with
him  the  remains  of  his  wife,  who  had  died  during
1734,  and  to  whose  persistent  courage  and  energy
much  credit  is  due  for  such  success  as  the  colony
had.  In  1740  a  seminary  for  the  Greenland  mis-
sion was  established  in  Copenhagen,  and  Egede  be-
came its  superintendent,  with  the  title  of  bishop.
Seven  years  later  he  retired  to  the  island  of  Falster,
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days  with  his
daughter,  Christina.  He  published  "  Relation  an-
gaaende  den  Gronlandske  Missions  Begyndelse
og  fors&ttelse,"  a  description  of  his  missionary
labors  (Copenhagen,  1738),  and  "  Den  gamle  GrOn-
lands  nye  Perlustration  "  (1741-4).  which  was  pub-
lished in  English  as  "  A  Description  of  Greenland  "
(1745).  Bishop  Egede  is  generally  called  the
"apostle  of  Greenland." — His  son,  Paul,  mission-
ary, b.  near  Drontheim,  Norway,  in  1720;  d.  in
Denmark,  3  June,  1789,  accompanied  his  father  to
Greenland  in  1721.  In  1728  he  returned  to  Copen-
hagen, bringing  with  him  several  Eskimos,  with
the  design  of  civilizing  them,  but  they  soon  died
of  the  small-pox.  He  continued  his  theological
studies  till  1734,  when  he  again  went  to  Greenland.
succeeding  his  father  in  1735,  and  remaining  in
charge  of  the  colony  till  1740,  when  he  withdrew,
leaving  it  in  a  highly  prosperous  condition.  On
his  arrival  in  Copenhagen  he  was  made  chaplain
of  the  Hospital  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  member  of  the
College  of  missions,  and  a  director  of  the  Hospital
of  orphans.  In  1776  he  was  made  bishop  of  Green-
land, and  later  held  the  chair  of  theology  in  the
University  of  Copenhagen.  He  published  a  "Green-
land-Danish Latin  Dictionary"  (1750);  "Green-
land Catechism"  (1756);  and  "Greenland  Gram-
mar" (1760).  In  1766  he  completed  the  transla-
tion of  the  New  Testament  into  the  Greenland
tongue,  begun  by  his  father,  and  in  1787  translated
"The  Imitation  of  Christ."  He  published  in  1789
a  journal  of  his  life  in  Greenland,  giving  a  history
of  the  mission  from  1720  till  1788.

EGGLESTON,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Yevay,
Inil..  10  Dec.  1887.  His  father,  a  lawyer  of  Vir-
ginian birth,  died  when  his  son  was  nine  years  of


■OeLBBToN


Blfl


age.  He  was  prevent**!  by  delicti-  health  frmn
ring  college,  ami  hi*.  education  was  mainly
mlf  enquired  In  1884  In-  s|M-nt  four  months  in
Mum.-'ta  for  his  health,  and  then,  returning  to
In. liana.  Iiccame  a  Methodist  jm-juln-r.  ri<li ■
four-woks'  circuit,  and  tailoring  with  great  imt-
nce.  After  six  months  of  this  work,  failing
health  romptlrtd  Ml  return  to  Minnesota,  where
he  was  a  general  agent  of  the  Bible  society,  ami
held past. .rut.  tar's,  St.  Paul.  Stillwater,

an. I  Winona.  At  times  tin-  -tat.-  of  his  health
for.  ,•<!  him  to  abandon  all  pastoral  work  ami  siip-
|M>rt  his  family  by  various  pursuits,  which  were
"always  honest,  but  sometimes  verv  undignified."

In  istiti  ha  removed  t<>  Bvanston,  111.,  and  for  six
mouths  was  associate  editor  of  the  "  Little  Corpo-
ral." a  children's  paper,  to  which  he  had  previously
contributed  a  scries  of  "  Round  Tabic  Stories."  A
year  later  be  l>ecame  editor  of  the  "Sunday-School
'Teacher"  in  Chicago,  whose  circulation,  under  his
management,  increased  in  three  years  from  5,000
to  85,000.  He  also  gained  a  reputation  as  speaker
at  Sunday-school  conventions,  and  as  a  manager
of  Sundav-school  teachers'  institutes.  During  1 1 1 i —
time  he  had  contributed  to  the  "New  York  Inde-
pendent." under  the  name  of  "  IVn-holder."  and  in
1*70  he  removed  to  New  York,  and  became  its
literary  editor.  On  the  retirement  of  Theodore
Tiltoti,  Mr.  Eggleston  succeeded  him  as  superin-
tending editor,  but  resigned  in  Julv,  1871,  to  be-
come the  editor  of  "Hearth  and  Home."  which
office  he  continued  to  hold  for  over  a  vear.  From
1*71  till  1*7!)  he  held  the  pastorate  of  the  Church
of  Christian  Endeavor,  in  Brooklyn,  but  was  again
compelled  by  failing  health  to  retire,  and  returned
to  literature,  making  his  home  of  "Owl's  Nest,"  on
Ijake  George.  Mr.  Eggleston's  novels,  depicting
early  life  in  southern  Indiana,  have  been  widely
read.  Some  of  them  have  been  reprinted  in  Eng-
land, and  translated  into  various  foreign  languages.
In  addition  to  a  "Sunday-School  Manual"  (1870),
and  several  works  of  a  similar  character,  he  has
published  "Mr.  Blake's  Walking-Stick  "  (Chicago,
lM)i  "  Book  of  Queer  Stories"  (1870);  "The
Booster  fWiool  msntfir"  (New  York,  1871);  "End
of  the  World"  (1872):  "  Mvstcrv  of  Metropolis-
ville"  (1873);  "The  Circuit  Rider ''(1874);  "School-
master's Stories  for  Bovs  and  Girls  "  (1874) ;  "  Christ
in  Literature"  (1875);  "Christ  in  Art"  (1875):
"Roxy"  (1878);  and  "The  Hoosier  School-boy"
(1883).  In  1878,  in  connection  with  his  daughter.
Mrs.  Lillie  E.  Seelye,  he  began  the  publication  of  a
series  of  biographies  of  American  Indians  for  young
people.  It  includes  "  Tecumseh  and  the  Shawnee
Prophet  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  Pocahontas  and  Pow-
hatan "  (1879);  "Brant  and  Red  Jacket"  (1879);
and  "Montezuma  and  the  Conquest  of  Mexico"
(1880).  He  has  finished  a  novel,  not  yet  published,
and  has  in  preparation  (1887)  a  "History  of  Life
in  the  Tinted  States,"  chapters  of  which  have  ap-
peared in  the  "Century." — His  brother,  (ieorge
Carr,  b.  in  Yevay,  Ind..  84  Nov..  1  s;j*»,  WH  edu-
cated at  Indiana  Asbury  university  and  Rich-
mond college,  Ya.  Subsequently  he  studied  law
and  bagn  its  practice  in  \  irginia.  After  serving
throughout  the  civil  war  as  a  private  and  sulmltern
in  the  Confederate  army,  he  settled  in  the  west,
where  he  had  charge  of  the  correspondence  of  a
large  business  hjOOSS,  In  1910  be  bsenSM  a  re-
porteron  tlie  Brooklyn  "  I'nion."  and  soon  aftcr-
wanl  one  of  the  editorial  stalT.  where  be  remained
till  July.  1*71.  when  he  U'came  managing  editor
of  "Hearth  and  Home."  and  subsequently  succeed*

ed  his  brother sj  editor-in-chief. In  1*74  bs  be-

came editor  of the "American Homes." and in


•  rarv  editor  of  the  N.-w  York  Kvening
which  ap|M.intment  he  held  mil i
During  the  three  following  years  he  was  occupied
in  editing  books  and  other  literary  work.  He  be-
came literary  editor  of  the  ■•  ( '..mmenial  Ad\.r-
tiser"  in  March.  1084,  and  editor-in-chief  in  Janu-
ary, Is"  mtributiotiH  to  magazine*  have
btJSJ  numerous,  and  he  has  pabliabed  "  How  t..
Educate  Yourself"  (1*7".'):  "A  Man  of  Honor"
(1*7:5);  "A  Real's  Recollections  "  (Boston,  !•*:»,;
"How  to  Make  a  Living"  (Nee  York,  1875);
"•The  Big  Brother"  (1875);  "Captain  Sam'
"The  Signal  BojSN(1877)i  "Bed  Kagle  and  the
War  with  the  (reck  Indians  "  (1m7*i  ;  "The  Wreck

of  the  Bed-Bird  "(1889);  "Haydn'i  Dictionary  of

Dates"  (American  edition.  1**3);  and  '•  Strange
Stories  fn.m  Historv"  (1*85).

h'GGLKSTON,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Amelia
county,  Ya,  M  Nov.,  1754;  d.  there.  i:t  Kel...  1HH.
He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  177'i,
and  soon  afterward  joined  the  Revolutionary  army,
serving  in  the  cavalry.  In  the  southern  cani|»aign
against  Col.  Tarleton.  ('apt.  Kggleston  commanded
tne  rear  guard  of  CoL  Henry  Lev's  legion,  and  ac-
quired the  name  of  being  one  of  the  most  efficient
ofHecrs  in  the  American  cavalry.  He  was  distin-
guished in  the  engagement  at  (iuilford  Court-House
in  March,  17H1,  ami  in  the  siege  of  Augusta  in
June  of  that  year.  The  first  success  in  the  battle
of  Eutaw.  in  September,  17*1,  was  the  attack  bv
Maj.  Eggleston  on  the  advance  of  the  British
forces.  After  the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the
Virginia  assembly  for  several  years,  and  was  also  a
representative  in  congress  from  Virginia,  serving
from  8  Dec.  1798,  till  :{  March.  1*01.

BQLE,  William  Henry,  historian,  b.  in  Harris-
burg.  Pa.,  17  Sept.,  l*:io.  After  receiving  a  public-
school  education  he  spent  three  years  as  a  printer
in  the  office  of  the  "  Pennsylvania  Telegraph."
and  subsequently  had  charge  of  the  state  printing.
In  1853  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Literary  Com-
panion," and  also  of  the  "  Daily  Times,"  l*>th  of
which  were  soon  discontinued.  He  then  turned
his  attention  to  medicine,  and  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  Cniversit  y  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1859.  after  which  he  settled  in  Harris-
burg.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  as  surgeon
of  Pennsylvania  volunteers,  and  in  the  Appomat-
tox campaign  was  chief  medical  officer  of  Gen.
David  B.  Birney's  division  in  the  24th  army  corps.
Since  1*70  Dr.'Egle  has  been  surgeon  of  militia,
and  is  now  (1887)  senior  medical  officer  of  the
National  guard  of  Pennsylvania.  He  tamed  his
attention  to  historical  research  in  1*71.  and  has
been  elected  corresponding  member  of  various  his-
torical and  learned  societies  in  the  United  States
and  England.  In  March.  1887.  he  was  snppointad
state  librarian  of  Pennsylvania.  Among  his  works
are  "  History  <»f  the  Commonwealth  of  Peniisylva-
"  (Harrisbiirg.  l*7l'»):  "  Notes  and  (Queries  n-lat-
to  Interior  Pennsylvania"  {'M  series,  18*

Historv  of  the  County  of  Dauphin  "( 1**3):  "  His-
torv of 'the  Countv  of  Lebanon"  (1888);  -His-
torical Register"  (2  vols.,  1883-'4):  "  Pennsylvania
(ienealogies,  S-otch,  Irish,  and  (ierman"
"Cut. nary  Memorial  of  the  Founding  of  the  city
of  Berrisbarg"  (1898);  and  "Pennsylvania  in  the
Revolution  "  <2  vols.,  1SH7).  Be  has  also  edited,
with  John Blair  Linn.  "  Peiinsvlvaiiia Archives"

cjd  ■erics,  12  vols..  i*74-'*0).
EGLE8T0N,  Thomas,  anftneerof  mines,  i,.  \n

New  V-.rk  city.  !•  De«  ..  l*-'t2.  Be  was  graduati-d  at
Vale  in  1*">4.  and  at  the  Book  (Ml  mines,  in  Paris,
in  1889,  and  in  l*ol-'4  hail  charge  of  the  collec-
tions of  mineral  ami  metallurgical  products  in  the


ma
ing


316


BGUIARA  Y  EGUKKN


EIGEXBRODT


Smithsonian  institution.  In  1803  ho  published  a
plan  for  a  school  of  mines,  which  resulted  in  the
I'stalilishment  of  the  present  institution  connected
with  Columbia  college.  Mr.  Egleston  was  joined
by  Charles  P.  Chandler  and  Francis  L.  Vinton,
■ad  the  school  was  developed  under  their  joint
supervision.  He  became  professor  of  mineralogy
and  metallurgy  there  in  1804,  and  has  since  con-
tiiiued  to  hold  that  chair.  Prof.  Egleston  was
commissioner  to  make  the  geological  survey  of  the
Union  Pacific  railroad  in  1800,  commissioner  to
examine  fortifications  in  1808,  and  mint  commis-
sioner in  1870,  1878,  and  1885.  He  has  frequently
been  called  in  consultation  as  an  expert  on  metal-
lurgical subjects,  and  his  opinion  has  been  sought
extensively  throughout  the  United  States  as  an
expert  in  mining,  on  important  points  of  furnace
construction,  the  treatment  of  ores,  and  similar
topics.  In  1874  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  Princeton  and  LL.  D.  from  Trinity.  Prof.
Egleston  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  soci-
eties, was  vice-president  of  the  New  York  academy
of  sciences  for  many  years,  and  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  American  institute  of  mining  engi-
neers. He  has  taken  out  various  metallurgical
patents,  and  has  written  about  a  hundred  papers
on  subjects  connected  with  his  specialties.  He  has
published  "Tables  for  the  Determinations  of  Min-
erals "  (New  York,  1807) ;  "  Metallurgical  Tables
on  Copper,  Lead,  Silver,  Gold,  and  other  Metals  "
(1808) ;  "  Tables  of  Weights,  Measures,  and  Coins
of  the  United  States  and  France  "  (1808) ;  "  Metal-
lurgical Tables  on  Fuels,  Iron,  and  Steel "  (1809) ;
"Lectures  on  Mineralogy"  (1871);  and  "The
Metallurgy  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  Mercury  in  the
United  States  "(1887).

EGUIARA  Y  EGUREN,  Juan  Jos6  (ay-ghee-
ah'-rah),  Mexican  clergyman  and  author,  b.  in  the
city  of  Mexico  in  the  Tatter  part  of  the  17th  cent-
ury; d.  there,  29  Jan.,  1703.  He  studied  at  the  col-
lege of  San  Ildefonso,  and  was  afterward  canon,
professor  of  theology,  and  rector  of  the  University
of  Mexico.  His  desire  to  give  up  his  time  to  his
literary  tasks  made  him  decline  the  bishopric  of
Yucatan,  for  which  he  was  nominated.  He  was  the
author  of  the  first  dictionary  of  biography  in  South
America,  which  he  called  "  Biblioteca  Mexicana,"
containing  the  results  of  much  curious  research
(Mexico,  1705).  He  printed  the  first  volume  of
this  work,  containing  the  letters  A,  B,  and  C,  in
his  own  press,  and  left  in  manuscript  other  vol-
umes, which  are  in  the  library  of  the  cathedral  of
Mexico.  Among  his  other  works  are  "Pnelec-
tiones"  (1720-'47);  "Selectae  disertationes  Mexi-
cana? ad  Scholasticam  speciantes  Theologiam  "  (3
vols.,  1740) ;  "  La  Nada  contrapuesta  en  las  balan-
zas  de  Dios  al  aparente  peso  de  los  hombres "
(1727);  and  "  Vida  del  V.  P.  Pedro  Arellano  Sosa,
primer  Preposito  de  San  Felipe  Neri"  (1735).

EHNINGER,  John  Whetton,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  22  July,  1827;  d.  at  Saratoga.  N.  Y..  22
Jan.,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1847,
and  in  1848-'9  studied  art  in  Paris.  The  subject
of  his  first  painting,  "  Peter  Stuyvesant "  (1850),
was  taken  from  Irving's  "  Knickerbocker's  History
of  New  York,"  and  was  engraved  by  the  Ameri-
can art  union.  He  went  abroad  again  in  1851-'2,
and  visited  Dusseldorf  and  other  art  centres.  Be-
sides drawings  in  outline,  pencil,  and  India  ink,  he
produced  a  series  of  etchings  illustrating  Hood's
••  Bridge  of  Si^hs  "  (1849) ;  a  series  on  Irving's  story
of  "Dolph  Hevliger"  (1850);  and  a  set  of  eight  il-
lustrations for  Longfellow's  "  .Miles  St  andish"  (1858).
His  best  known  paintings  are  "  New  England
Farmyard "' ;  "  Yankee  Peddler  " ;  "  Love  me,  Love


my  Horse  " ;  "  The  Forav  " ;  "  The  Sw.  ,nl  "  :  "  I^adv
Jane  Grey";  " Christ  llealing  the  Sick";  "Dean
and  the  Gambler";  "Autumnal  Landscape  "(1st  17 1;
"  Monk  "  (1871);  "  Vintage  in  the  Valtella"  |
and  "Twilight  from  the  Bridge  of  Pau "  (1878).

1  M  II BERG,  Julius,  musician,  b.  in  Dussel--
dorf,  Germany,  in  1N24.  At  seventeen  years  of
age  he  entered  the  conservatory  at  Brussels  as  a
pupil  of  De  Beriot,  and  studied  composition  under
Fetis.  He  was  afterward  professor  of  the  violin  at
the  conservatory  of  Geneva.  Being  advised  to
take  a  sea-voyage  for  his  health  he  came  to  the
United  States,  and  settled  in  Boston.  Mass.  While
director  of  the  Boston  museum,  from  1859  till  1800,
he  became  known  as  the  first  composer  of  English-
American  operas.  "The  Doctor  of  Alcantara"
was  written  in  1802,  followed  bv  "The  Rose  of
Tyrol,"  "  A  Night  in  Rome,"  and  "  The  Two  Ca-
dis." In  1807  he  became  director  of  the  Boston
conservatory  of  music,  and  in  the  same  year  was
elected  superintendent  of  music  in  the  public
schools  of  Boston,  which  position  he  still  holds.

EIDLITZ,  Leopold,  architect,  b.  in  Prague,
Bohemia,  29  March,  1823.  He  was  educated  at  the
Polytechnic  school  in  Prague,  and  in  Vienna,  emi-
grated to  this  country,  and  became  an  architect  in
New  York  city.  Among  the  buildings  designed
by  him  are  Christ  church,  St.  Louis ;  St.  George's
church,  New  York  city ;  the  Brooklyn  academy  of
music ;  the  Dry-dock  bank  building,  on  the  Bow-
ery, New  York ;  and  the  Continental  bank  building
in  that  city.  In  1875,  with  Frederick  Law  Olm-
sted and  Henry  H.  Richardson,  he  was  appointed
on  a  commission  to  consider  the  work  already  ac-
complished in  the  building  of  the  capitol  at  Albany.
An  elaborate  report  was  made,  and  preliminary
studies  for  the  completion  of  the  building  were
undertaken  by  Mr.  Eidlitz.  Subsequentlv  its  con-
tinuation was  confided  to  Mr.  Richardson,  but
much  of  the  dignity  of  the  work  in  its  present
condition  is  due  to  the  designs  of  Mr.  Eidlitz.  He
has  published  "  The  Nature  and  Function  of  Art "
(New  York,  1881).  —  His  son,  Cyrus  Lazelle
Warner,  architect,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27  July,


■


1853,  was  educated  in  New  York,  Geneva,  Switzer-
land, and  at  the  Polytechnic  institute  in  Stuttgart.
Among  the  buildings  that  he  has  designed  are  the
Michigan  central  railway  station  in  Detroit  (1880),
the  Dearborn  station  in  Chicago  (1883),  and  the
Buffalo  library,  which  is  represented  in  the  an-
nexed picture  (1880).

EIGEXBRODT.  Lewis  Ernest  Andrew,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Lauterbach,  Hesse  Darmstadt,  22
Sept.,  1773;  d.  30  Aug.,  1828.  Be  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Giesen  in  L79V,  <raf
master  of  seven  languages,  skilled  in  mathematics,
astronomy,  and  engineering,  and  ha/1  taken  a  full


EiLERs


KKIN


:H7


course  in  divinity.  !!>•  came  to  tin-  United  States
in 17»:{; ud)  after  >|Mii«limr  four  year*  in  pri-

tuitioti  mikI  flirt her  Studios,  ho  was  made  in
I  principal  of  Unioa  Hull  nadnj  at  Jamaica,
|  .  which  In*  genlua,  HM0,  ninl  ability  soon
made  celebrated.  Pupils  flocked  t<»  it  fr«im  all
i.:irt»  of  tin-  I'nited  States  ninl  fnun  the  West
India  island*,  and  iuhmv  mni  received  their  carlv
training  thara  who  have  since  t>ccn  distinguished*.

HfMbVOdt received tin' degree <>f LL. I).

from  Qnion  in  1885.  He  delivered  an  oration  in
honor  "f  George  Washington  on  tin-  day  of  the
tatter's  funeral.  18  Dea,  1798.  Ill-  mo.  Uarld
IjimlMTHnn,  phvsician.  b.  in  Jamaica.  N.  V..  R
Sept,  1810;  d.  in  Now  York,  8  Jail,  1880,  was
graduated  <»<  Vrashlngton  (now  Trinity)  ooilafn  in
1881,  and  at  the  College  i>f  physicians  and  surgeons,
fork,  in  1885.  After  useful  services  in  the
Jfork  hospital  and  at  BeUeroe,  where  he  was

ill  charge  of  tlie  cholera  hospital,  he  removed  to
St.  .lago  de  Cuba,  where  he  practised  medicine  for
fifteen  years.  On  his  return  to  New  York,  he  or-
■aniasdin  1888,  al  the  request  of  Dr.  Muhlcui»crg,

Initli  the  surgical  and  medical  departments  of  St.
Luke's  hospital,  then  just  established,  and  took
charge  of  that  institution  as  its  first  resident
physician,  giving  his  services  gratuitously  for  a
year,  at  tin-  end  of  which  time  he  retired  to  pri-
vate life.— Another  son.  William  Kruent,  clergy-
man. I>.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y..  10  June,  1813,  was  edu-
cated at  Union  Hall  academy,  and  at  Columbia,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1831.  He  then  stud-
ied in  the  General  Protestant  Episcopal  theological
seminary.  New  York,  and  entered  the  ministry  of
that  church.  He  was  engaged  in  professional
duties  in  Hainbridge  and  Rochester  from  1838
till  1840,  in  which  year  he  was  chosen  rector  of
All  Saints'  church,  New  York  city.  He  became
associate  minister  of  Calvary  church.  New  York,
in  18.18,  and  in  1802  was  made  professor  of  pas-
toral theology  in  the  General  theological  seminary,
where  he  has  since  remained.  He  was  secretary
of  the  convention  of  the  diocese  of  New  York  from
1854  till  1888.  Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1855. — Another  son,  Charles  S..  soldier.
b.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  20  March,  1825;  d.  in  Vir-
ginia, 25  Aug.,  1804,  was  one  of  the  pioneers  who
went  to  California  in  1840.  He  >ettledat  Alameda,
and  remained  there  till  1888,  when  he  raised  in
<  alifornia  a  battalion  of  cavalry,  afterward  enrolled
in  the  second  Massachusetts  cavalry.  ( 'apt.  Kigen-
brodt  continued  at  the  head  of  his  troops  for  more
than  a  year,  and  fell,  at  their  head,  in  a  charge  in
the  Shenandoah  valley.  An  address  on  the  higen-
brodt  family  was  defivereil  by  the  Bar,  Beverley
HL  Betts  i>efore  the  New  York  genealogical  and
biographical  society,  11  March.  18X7.

KILKRS,  Frederic  Anton,  metallurgist,  b.  in
Ijaufenscltcn,  Nassau,  Germany,  14  Jan.,  1839.  Ib-
was  educated  at  the  mining-school  in  Clausthal
and  in  the  University  of  Gottingen.  Soon  after
the  completion  of  his  studies  became  to  the  United
States,  and  fnun  18(i!)  till  1870  held  the  office  of
deputy  l".  S.  commissioner  of  mining  statistic-.
Mil>sci|ii. -nt ly  he  was  occupied  in  building  and
managing  smelting- works  for  lead  and  silver  in
I'tali  and  Colorado.  He  is  at  present  (1887)  gen-
eral manager  of  the  Colorado  smelting  company's
works  at  Booth  Pueblo,  Col.  Mr.  Kilers  is  consid-
ered one  of  the  foremost  experts  in  the  I'nited
States  in  his  !>ranch  of  metallurgy,  and.  while  he
has  never  patented  any  of  his  own  inventions,  he
has  done  more  than  any  other  jmtm.ii  to  improve
American  methods  in  the  treatment  of  lead  and
-ilver. This  he  has  accomplished  l»y  making  pos-


sible the  long,  continuous  running  of  large  shaft
furnaces  in  the  smelting  of  argentiferous  had -ores.
The  most  ini|H.rtaiit  •  -I.  mints  of  this  improvement
ie  ii»e  of  water-jacket-  and  the  scientific  and
precis'  adjustment of charges with reference  to
their  chemical  composition  and  the  fii'ion-jioint  of
slags. The  "chills"  or  ••  salamander*." fi.ru
so  frequent  in  furnaces  of  this  ty|ic,  and not  only
necessitating  stop|iages  lnit  compelling  I
small  furnaces,  have  thus  Ueti  obviate^!. Son
his  improvements  are  adopted in KojOPS, He  is
the  author  of  various  professional  papers.

KIN  HORN,  llavid.  b,  in  Diapaek,  Bavaria,  10
Nov..  18<K»;  d.  in  New  York  citv.  2  Nov..  ]*:\i.  He
was  educated  at  the  rabbinical  aohool  of  Kuerth.
and  subseipietitly  at  the  universities  of  Munich  and
Wurzhurg.  Ks|Miusjiijr  the  oattM  of  radical  reform
in  Judaism,  he  was  chosen  rabbi  at  Hopstadter,  and
afterward  chief  rabbi  of  Mccklenhurg-Sehwerhv
He  was  called  to  Pesth  in  1S.11,  when-  his  advanced
views  met  with  such  opposition  that  his  temple
was  closed  by  the  Austrian  government.  In  1886
Dr.  Kinhorn  was  invited  to  assume  charge  of  a
I lelirew  congregation  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  ami  dur-
ing  his  Ineombency  pnHfthtd  a  prayer-l»ook,  which
has  a  wide  circulation  in  the  United  States,  and
also  a  German  magazine.  "Sinai."  devoted  to  inter-
ests of  radical  reform.  In  18(S1  he  was  such  a
staunch  Unionist  that  bit  Baltimore  pastorate  was
exchanged  for  one  in  Philadelphia.  In  1800  Dr.
Kinhorn  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  held  a
rabbinical  position  till  his  death.  A  collection  of
his  addresses  has  been  issued  in  German.

BISFELDf  Theodore,  musician,  b,  in  Wotten*
biittel,  Brunswick,  Germany,  ill  18Hi;  d.  iii  Wies-
baden, 10  Sept.,  1882.  His  chief  instructor  in  mu-
sical composition  was  C.  (J.  Heissiger,  of  Dresden.
He  came  to  New  York  in  1848,  and  in  1840  was
chosen  conductor  of  the  Philharmonic  society  in
that  city.  From  1855  till  the  season  of  180o-'6,
when  he  resigned,  he  conducted  the  society  alter-
nately with  Carl  Bcrgmann.  On  18  Feb.,  1851,  he
began  a  series  of  quartet  concerts,  the  first  being
given  on  the  date  mentioned  at  Hope  fftBPti  On
his  return  trip  from  a  visit  to  Kurope  in  1858,  he
was  one  of  the  few  survivors  of  the  burning  of  the
steamer  "Austria."  He  was  lashed  to  a  platform
and  so  drift ed  on  the  ocean,  without  food,  for  nearly
two  days  and  nights.  Kisfeld  never  recovered  from
this  extraordinary  prostration.  He  returned  to
Germany  in  1868, and  remained  then-  till  his  death.
He  was  also  the  first  conductor  of  the  New  York
harmonic  society,  which  began  the  custom  of  giving
an  annual  Christmas  performance  of  the  "Messiah.

KKIN.  James  Adams,  soldier,  b.  in  Pfttaburg,
Pa.,  81  Aug..  1810:  d.  in  Louisville.  Ky..  27  March,
1891.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered
the  12th  Pennsylvania  infantry  as  1st  lieutenant  and
regimental  quartermaster,  and  at  the  expiration  of
three  months  was  made  captain  and  assistant  quar-
termaster in  the  volunteer  army,  Is-ing  stationed
in  Pittsburg  as  acting  assistant  commissar)* of  sub-
sistence. In  October,  1881,  be  was  made  assistant
quartermaster  and  Stationed  in  Indianapilis  until
Decern l»er.  1803.  when  he  was  admitted  to  the  regu-
lar army  with  similar  rank,  to  date  from  March.
1888.  aiid  assigned  to  duty  as  quartermaster  of  hsf
cavalry  bureau  in  Washington  till  February.  1864.
He  was  then  promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel  and
made  chief  quartermaster  of  the  cavalry  corps  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  remaining  as  such  un-
til August,  when  he  was  advanced  to  colonel  and
siren  Uiaige  "f  the  1st  division  of  thequartcrmas-
ter-i:'iienil's  office  in  Washington,  where  he  con-
tinued till  1 8 70,  holding  various  appointments  in


318


ELBERT


ELDER


that  office.  Subsequently  he  was  chief  quarter-
master of  the  5th  military  district  and  the  depart-
ment of  Texas,  then  chief  quartermaster  of  the  de-
Jartment  of  the  South,  and  in  similar  capacity  in
effersonville,  Ind..  and  finally  disbarring  agent  of
the  quartermaster's  department  in  Louisville,  Ky..
bfling  Mriftanl  quartermaster-general  of  the  army
from  February,  1882.  He  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general  in  the  volunteer  army,  and  those
of  major  to  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army.
for  his  services  during:  the  war.  In  August,  1883,
he  was  retired,  and  afterward  resided  in  Louisville.
ELBERT,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Will-
iam parish,  S.  ('.,  in  1743;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  2
Nov.,  1788.  He  became  an  orphan  at  an  early  ago,
and  went  to  Savannah,  where  he  engaged  in  com-
mercial pursuits.  In  June,  1774,  he  was  elected
captain  of  a  grenadier  company,  and  later  was  a
member  of  the  Savannah  committee  of  safety.  He
entered  the  Continental  army  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel  under  Col.  Lachlin  Mcintosh  in
February,  1776,  and  was  promoted  to  colonel  in
September,  1776.  In  May  of  the  following  year
he  was  given  command  of  an  expedition  against
the  British  in  East  Florida,  and  in  April,  1778.
captured  Fort  Oglethorpe  in  Frederica,  Fla.  Later
in  the  same  year  he  was  actively  engaged  in  the
vicinity  of  Savannah,  and  behaved  gallantly  when
the  attack  was  made  on  that  city  in  December,
1788, by  Col. Archibald Campbell. He  distin-

fuished  himself  in  the  action  at.  Brier  creek,  where
e  commanded  a  brigade  under  Gen.  John  Ashe,  3
March,  1789,  and  was  made  prisoner.  After  his
exchange  he  joined  the  army  under  Gen.  Washing-
ton, and  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Lord
Cornwallis.  He  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  on  3  Nov.,  1783,  and  in  1785  was  elected
governor  of  Georgia,  succeeding  John  Houston.
Subsequently  he  held  the  rank  of  major-general  of
the  state  militia.  Elbert  county,  in  Georgia,  was
named  in  his  honor.

ELCANO,  Juan  Sebastian (el-cah'-no),  Spanish
navigator,  b.  in  Guetaria,  Spain,  in  1476 ;  d.  at  sea.
4  Aug.,  1526.  In  his  early  life  he  was  captain  of  a
vessel  trading  to  the  Levant  and  Africa.  On  15
Aug.,  1519,  he  sailed  from  San  Lucar,  in  command
of  the  "  Victoria,"  one  of  the  five  ships  of  Magellan's
fleet,  which  had  been  sent  to  discover  a  western
passage  to  the  Spice  or  Molucca  islands,  and  was
with  that  navigator,  21  Oct.,  1520,  at  the  discovery
of  the  strait  afterward  called  by  his  name.  After
the  death  of  Magellan,  and  that  of  his  successor,
Carabello,  and  the  destruction  of  most  of  the  fleet,
Elcano,  with  the  only  surviving  ship,  continued
his  vovage  toward  the  Moluccas,  and,  after  having
established  friendly  relations  with  one  of  the  native
sovereigns,  sailed  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
and  returned  to  San  Lucar  on  6  Sept.,  1522.  Elca-
no was  the  first  seaman  who  ever  made  the  com-
plete circuit  of  the  globe.  Elcano  contributed  to
the  establishment  of  a  Spanish  factory  in  the  island
of  Lidor,  and  explored  several  other  islands.  When
he  returned  to  Spain,  Charles  V  received  him  with
distinction  and  gave  him  a  pension,  and  a  coat-of-
arms  bearing  the  inscription  "  Primus  circumde-
disti  me."  On  25  July,  1525,  Elcano  sailed  again
from  Spain,  in  a  second  expedition  under  command
of  Garcia  Loaiza,  and,  after  making  some  explora-
tions on  the  eastern  coast  of  South  America,  passed
again  through  Magellan's  strait,  26  May,  1526.
Loaiza  died  on  30  Jul  v.  and  Elcano  succeeded  him,
but  did  not  long  survive  him.

ELDER,  George  A.  M.,  educator,  b.  in  Hardin's
Creek,  Ky.,  in  1794;  d.  in  Bardstown,  Ky.,  in  1838.
He  was  sent  to  Mount  St.  Mary's  college.Emmetts-


burg,  in  1810,  and  afterward  to  the  seminary  of
the  Sulpitians,  in  Baltimore,  where  he  finished  his
ecclesiastical  -tudies.  Me  was  ordained  a  priori  of
the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  1819,  ami  commis-
rioned  by  Ins  superiors  to  found  acollege  in  Bards-
town, Ky.  Between  the  years  1820  and  It
erected  the  College  of  St.  Joseph,  which  was  at  that
time  one  of  the  largest  and  best-appointed  school
structures  in  the  west.  He  acted  as  president  ..f
this  institution  till  his  death.  He  was  also  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "Catholic  Advocate,"  published
in  Bardstown,  and  author  of  a  work  entitled.
"  Letters  to  Brother  Jonathan."

ELDER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  County  Antrim,
Ireland,  in  1706;  d.  near  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  in  1?!»2.
He  studied  for  the  ministry  with  his  uncle,  a  Pres-
byterian clergyman  in  Edinburgh,  and  about  1786
followed  his  father,  who  had  emigrated  in  1730,
and  settled  near  Harrisburg.  He  was  installed
over  the  churches  of  Paxton  and  Deny,  22  Nov.,
1738,  and  remained  in  that  relation  till  his  death.
He  trained  his  parishioners  for  cavalry  service
against  the  Indians,  and  afterward  received  a  colo-
nel's commission  from  the  proprietaries  and  had
charge  of  the  block-houses  from  Easton  to  the  Sus-
quehanna. His  band  of  rangers  in  1763  massacred
tne  Conestoga  Indians  against  his  advice.

ELDER,  Joseph  Freeman,  clergyman,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  10  March,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  Portland  high  school  in  1856,  and  at  Waterville
college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1860,  After  an
interval  of  teaching  he  entered  the  Rochester.  N.  V.,
theological  seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1867.  In  May  of  that  year  he  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  North  Orange  Baptist  church,  Orange,  N.  .1.,
and  on  1  Jan,,  1870.  went  to  New  York  city  and
assumed  charge  of  the  church  now  called  the  Bap-
tist church  of  the  Epiphany  (formerly  Oliver  street
Baptist  church),  of  which  he  is  still  (1887)  the  pas-
tor. He  served  on  the  Baptist  home  mission  board
in  1870-'85,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  Baptist  city  mission.

ELDER,  Susan  Blanchard,  author,  b.  in  Fort
Jessup,  La.,  about  1835.  Her  childhood  was  passed
at  an  extensive  frontier  military  post,  where  her
father,  Gen.  Albert  G.  Blanchard,  then  a  captain  in
the  army,  was  stationed.  She  was  educated  in  St.
Michael  s  convent  of  the  sacred  heart,  New  Or-
leans, and  was  married  at  an  early  age  to  Charles
D.  Elder,  of  that  city.  After  the  capture  of  New
Orleans  she  went  with  her  husband  to  Selma,  Ala.,
where  she  turned  her  cottage  into  a  hospital  for
wounded  soldiers.  After  the  war  she  became  pro-
fessor of  natural  science  in  the  New  Orleans  high-
school,  and  editor  of  the  "  Morning  Star  "  news-
paper of  that  city.  When  sixteen  years  of  age  she
began  to  write  for  the  press  under  the  name  of
"  Hermine."  Her  writings  comprise  poems,  histo-
ries, and  several  dramas  intended  for  representa-
tion in  Roman  Catholic  colleges.  She  has  pub-
lished "  The  Loss  of  the  Papacy  "  ;  "  James  the
Second";  "Savonarola";  and " EUen  Fitzgerald,"
a  tale,  dealing  with  southern  scenes  and  incident*.
She  has  also  contributed  extensively  to  Roman
Catholic  publications,  and  her  devotional  poems
are  verv  popular  among  her  coreligionists.

ELDER.  William,  physician,  b.  in  Somerset,
Pa.,  23  July,  1806;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  5
April,  1885.  He  practised  his  profession  in  Phila-
delphia, and  was  well  known  as  an  abolitionist
ana  as  an  editorial  writer  and  public  speaker  in
the  period  preceding  the  civil  war.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Periscopics,"  a  volume  of  miscellanies
(New  York,  1854);  "The  Enchanted  Beauty*'
(1855) ;  "  Life  of  Dr.  E.  K.  Kane  "  {Philadelphia,


ELDER


ELGIN


Bill


1857);  ioudm  "f  tli.-  United

Steles*  ■  Question!  of  the [)

hihI  •• '  U-. in  Political  Economy

<  \  i  u», author. I>. in Somerset.

m  educated  in  tin-  noBinma

schools,  and  Mild  during  ill'-  civil  war  as  1st
lieutenant  and  quartermaster  of  the  10th  lVnn-\l-

vHiiiH  reserves. He  edited  the  "Industrial  Buna

tin  "  in  1N7<)-V>.  mill  V8j0  appointed  in  1N*1  a  BOB*
Buanonef  t..  ravin  tin-  revenue  tveteni  of  Pennsyl-
vania. II**  is  the  author  of  "Mj  (lift."  a  volume
i>f  DOattM  <N'ew  York,  1**17):  "Dream  <>f  Fr<-<-
bade  Pandise"  (Philadelphia,  1872);  and  "Man
■Bd  I.aiK>r"  (Ohioago,  I886>

BLDER,  William.  Canadian  journalist,  l>.  in
Malm.  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  H  July,  i-
in  St.  .Inhii.  N.  B.,  in  lKS'J.  He  was  educated  at
Qaaan*l COfleaa.  Belfast,  and  at  tin-  universities  nf
Glasgow  and  Edinburgh,  studied  theology,  and  was
for  s< Hue  time  a  minister  in  the  Presbyterian  church.
He  afterward  came  t(i  >y-w  Brunswick,  and  at
once  attained  prominence  as  a  public  writer  and
speaker.  He  edited  the  "  Colonial  Presbyterian"
and  the  "Honing  Journal"  at  St.  John  for  a
term  of  years,  and  was  chief  editor  and  proprietor
of  the  St.  John  "  Daily  Telegraph."  lie  was  a
inemUr  of  the  grammar-school  board  and  of  the
council  of  the  Dominion  board  of  trade.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment at  the  general  election  in  1872,  was  first  re-
turned for  the  legislature  of  New  Brunswick  in
1878,  and  was  re-elected  in  1882.

ELDER,  William  Henry,  archbishop,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md..  in  1819.  He  was  educated  in
Mount  St.  Mary's  college.  Fmiucttshurg.  and
afterward  in  the  college  of  the  Propaganda,  Home.
After  his  ordination,  in 1846,  he  was  appointed

S resident  and  professor  of  theology  in  Mount  St.
lary's,  where  his  ability  attracted  notice,  and  he
was  elected  bishop  of  Natchez  in  IK.")?.  When  Un-
civil war  began  he  devoted  all  his  energies  to  the
care  of  the  sick  and  wounded.  Having  refused  to
obey  an  order  of  the  jxist  commandant  at  Natchez,
in  1864,  who  insisted  on  his  inserting  a  form  of

Erayer  for  the  president  of  the  United  States  in
is  ritual  of  worship,  he  was  arrested  and  sent  out
of  his  diocese  to  \  idalia.  I;a.,  but  the  order  was
subsequently  revoked.  He  labored  fearlessly  in
aid  of  the  yellow-fever  sufferers  in  the  epidemic  of
1878,  and  was  himself  stricken  down  by  the  dis-
ease. In  1879  he  was  named  coadjutor  archbishop
of  San  Francisco,  but  declined,  giving  as  his  rea-
son that  he  could  not  leave  his  diocese  when  his
people  were  suffering  from  yellow-fever.  In  1880
lie  was  ordered  by  the  pope  to  proceed  as  coadjutor
archbishop  to  Cincinnati,  which  diocese  had  be-
come involved  in  great  financial  difficulties.  He
did  so,  still  retaining  the  administration  of
Natchez.  He  presided  over  the  fourth  provincial
council  of  Cincinnati,  held  in  1882,  and  on  the
death  of  Archbishop  Pun-ell.  in  the  same  year,  be-
came archbishop  of  Cincinnati.

ELDRIDGK.  Charles  A.,  politician,  b.  in  Brid-
port.Vt./27  Feb..lN-Jl.  He  removed  with  his  parents
to  New  York,  where  he  studied  and  begun  the  prac-
tice of  law,  and  in  1848  settled  in  Fonddu  Lac  Wis.
He  was  a  memlxT  of  the  state  senate  in  ls.">4-7».
In  1862  he  was  elected  a  meml)cr  of  Congress  as
a  democrat,  and  was  live  time-  re-elected,  serv-
ing from  7  I>,c.  lHHa.to.'l  March,  is?:,,  on  1  F.-l...
•  offered  a  resolution  condemning  the  draft
as  contrary  to  the  genius  of  republican  govern-
meiit.  and  on  g]  March  of  the  same  year  one  call-
ing u|miii  the  president  to  furnish  the  names  of  all
persons  that  had  been  arrested  for  political  cause.


I  l  in:  mm.  i i  dwla,  capitalist,  b.  in  ihh:  d.

in Klmim,  N.  Y.. 16 !••  lb I  weenie  a

pliv-i.-ian  : tH largely niga.  .l-mming

and  iron  manufacturing,  boOBUM  president  of  ih.-
Flmira  iron  and  steal  company,  and  »a*  long  con-
nected with  the  Erie  railroad.  Dr.  Fid  ridge  gave
a  public  imrk  to  Flmira.  and  contributed  matc-
riallv  t<>  the  progress  of  that  town.

I  I  DR1  I »< .  I  .  Hamilton  N_eoldier,b.  in  South
William-town,  Berk-hire  .....  Ma—.,  28  Aug..  1-
d.  in  Chicago,  111..  J7  Nov.,  1882.  II.  v»a«  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1806,  in  the  -ion.-  .la--  with
.lames  A.  (Jarfleld.  and  at  the  Albany  law  m-ti-
tute  in  lH.'n,  nnd  Iwgan  practice  in  Chicago.  In
July,  lNti'2,  with  hi-  partner.  Col.  F.  W.  T.mrtcl-
lotte,  he  rai-cd  the  [S7tb  Illinois  regiment,  and
was  made  its  lieutenant-colonel.  lb-  command-
ed the  regiment  in  the  MMnttOM  Of  0oB>  Sher-
man from  Memphis  to  Granada  and  Chickasaw
bayou,  distinguished  himself  at  Arkansas  Post,
was  promoted  colonel,  and  took  jmrt  in  the  ■
of  \  icksburg.  where  he  bore  the  colors  with  hi-
own  hand, after  several  color-! <ean-rs  had  ban  shot.
and  led  his  regiment,  in  advance,  to  the  fortifica-
tions of  the  enemy.  After  the  surrender,  he  was
compelled  by  sickness  to  resign,  but  was  brevet  ted
brigadier-general  for  gallantry.  After  a  -low  re-
OOVSJrJ  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Chicago.

ELGIN,  James  Bruce,  eighth  earl  of  Elgin,
and  twelfth  of  Kincardine.  British  statesman,  b.  in
London.  20  Julv.  1811;  d.  in  Dhurmsala.  India.
20  Nov..  1863.  He  was  educated  at  Eton,  ami  at
Christ  church  college.  Oxford,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1888.  He  began  bit  public  life  in  lNll.asa
memberof  parlia-
ment for  South-
ampton, and  be-
fore the  end  of
the  year  succeed-
ed to  the  title
and  estates  of  his
father.  He  was
appointed  gov-
ernor of  Jamai-
ca in  1842,  but
found  the  legis-
lature of  that  isl-
and determined

t<>  disregard  the
rights  of  the  re-
cently emanci-
pated slaves,  and
in  1846  was  re-
called at  his  own
request. He  was

then  appointed  governor-general  <>f  Canada,  and
arrived  there  early  in  1847. Soon  after  his  arrival  he

signed  a  bill  providing  tor  compensation  to  loyalists
in  Lower  Canada  for  losses  sustained  in  the  relwllion
of  1837.  This  bill  had  Iwcn  bitterly  opposed,  and.
when  it  liecame  known  that  the  governor-general
had  signed  it,  a  meeting  was  held  in  Montreal  at
which  violent  epeeefcss  were  made.  After  the  meet-
ing a  mob  dispersed  the  parliament,  then  in  session
in  that  city,  and  burned  the  parliament  buildings
and  their  contents.  The  assembly  next  met  in
Bonsecours  market,  and  passed  an  address  eulo-
gizing the  action  of  I/onl  Elgin.  He  drove  into
the  city  from  Monklands,  his  residence,  to  the
government  house,  to  receive  the  address,  and  was
assailed  on  the  way  by  the  mod  with  vollevs  of
stones.  Hi-  country  residence  was  threatened,  and
had  to  lie  guarded",  and  for  several  weeks  he  re-
mained then-,  that  he  might  not  provoke  an  out-
break by  his  presence  in  the  city. He  refused  to


320


ELGIN


ELIOT


make  use  of  the  troops,  saying,  "  I  am  prepared  to
Ix-ur  any  amount  of  obloquy  t lint  may  !*•  cast  upon
me,  but,  if  I  can  possibly  prevent  it.  no  stain  of
blOM  shall  rot  upon  my  name"  He  thought  it
right,  however,  to  offer  his  resignation  to  the  BOOM
government,  hut  it  was  not  accepted.  The  minor-
ity in  Canada  then  made  an  unsuccessful  appeal  to
the  British  parliament  to  have  the  obnoxious  bill
rescinded.  Toward  the  end  of  September  of  the
same  year  the  arrest  of  some  persons  charged  with
being  implicated  in  burning  the  parliament  build-
ing produced  a  second  outbreak,  during  which  a
young  man  was  killed,  and  his  funeral  was  made
the  pretext  for  a  riotous  demonstration.  The  mag-
istrates of  Montreal  requested  Lord  Elgin  to  pro-
claim martial  law,  but  he  still  refused,  and  the  mal-
contents were  finally  quieted  by  a  proclamation
from  the  mayor.  During  the  autumn,  to  disprove
the  statement  that  he  required  protection,  Lord
Elgin  visited  western  Canada,  without  military
escort,  and  was  received  with  enthusiasm,  except
in  a  few  of  the  large  cities,  where  his  opponents
were  able  to  cause  disturbances.  Lord  Elgin's
policy  of  conciliation  was  regarded  by  some  of  his
warmest  friends  in  Great  Britain  as  weak  and  nerve-
less, but,  after  the  passion  consequent  upon  these
events  had  subsided,  it  was  clearly  perceived  that
it  required  greater  courage  to  submit  patiently  to
unjust  reproaches  than  to  crush  opposition  by  a
display  of  force.  But  a  new  trouble  soon  followed
the  commotion  over  the  losses  bill.  In  1849,  dur-
ing a  period  of  commercial  depression,  a  manifesto
appeared  urging  annexation  with  the  United  States,
which  was  signed  by  manv  prominent  men  through-
out (  anada.  This  remedy  had  often  been  offered
for  the  same  evil,  and  to  put  a  stop  to  such  sug-
gestions the  governor  proposed  free  navigation  and
a  reciprocity  treaty  with  the  United  States,  at  the
same  time  assenting  to  the  dismissal  of  all  officials
who  had  signed  the  annexation  manifesto.  In
June,  1849,  the  abolishing  of  the  imperial  naviga-
tion laws  resulted  in  greatly  stimulating  Canadian
trade,  and,  after  several  years  of  fruitless  diplo-
macy, Lord  Elgin  went,  in  1854,  to  Washington,
where  he  negotiated  a  treaty  with  Sec.  Marcy,
which  was  ratified  by  the  senate,  and  continued  m
force  till  it  was  terminated  in  1864  by  President
Lincoln.  Other  important  measures  of  Lord  El-
gin's administration  were  the  repeal  of  the  impe-
rial act  relating  to  the  clergy  reserves  in  1853,  the
devotion  of  those  reserves  to  education  and  oth-
er public  purposes  in  1854,  and  the  abolition  of
seignorial  tenure  in  Lower  Canada  in  the  same  year.
Lord  Elgin  never  opposed  the  popular  voice,  as
expressed  by  the  majority  in  parliament.  His
principle  was  "  to  let  the  colony  have  its  own  way
in  everything  that  was  not  contrary  to  public  mo-
rality or  to  some  imperial  interest.'  The  constitu-
tion of  the  legislative  council  early  attracted  his
attention,  and,  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Grey  in  1850,  he
expressed  himself  as  favoring  its  being  made  elec-
tive, but  the  proposition  met,  strangely  enough,
with  a  most  determined  opposition  from  such  re-
formers as  Robert  Baldwin,  George  Brown,  and
others.  He  deserves  the  credit  of  setting  before
himself  the  noblest  ideal  of  free  colonial  govern-
ment, and  of  having  largely  realized  it  in  practice.
He  surrendered  the  government  to  his  successor  in
December,  1854,  and  on  his  return  to  England  de-
clined the  chancellorship  of  the  duchy  of  Lancas-
ter. In  1857  he  was  appointed  high  commissioner
to  China  during  the  trouble  with  that  country,
and,  after  penetrating  with  British  troops  to  Pekin
in  June,  1858,  concluded  the  treaty  of  Tientsin
with  the  Chinese  government. He  became  post-


master-general, and  in  1861  accepted  the  governor-
generalship  of  India. He  left  England,  to  assume
his  new  duties,  in  January.  ISH'J,  and  during  the
period  that  elapsed  before  his  death  wn
in  his  administration  of  the  government.

ELIAS.  Domingo  (ay-lee -a>).  Peruvian  states-
man, b.  in  lea,  Peru,  in  1806 J  d.  in  Lima  in  1887.
He  was  educated  in  Spain  and  France,  returned  to
Peru  in  1825,  and  from  the  beginning  took
interest  in  the  new  republic.  He  was  the  first  in
Peru  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  planting  of  cot-
ton on  a  large  scale,  and  to  the  elaboration  of
wines,  and  the  first  that  introduced  t  here  Chinese  la-
borers. He  founded  in  Lima  the  College  of  Nued  ra
Sefiora  de  Guadalupe.  When  Gen.  vivanco  head-
ed the  revolution  of  Arequipa,  Elias  was  the  first
to  lend  him  a  helping  hand. Elias  was  then  ton-

Itorarily  in  charge  of  the  government  at  Lima,  and
le  was  asked  to  exert  his  influence  with  the  oppos-
ing armies,  in  order  to  avoid  war,  and  to  appeal  to
the  country  for  a  decision.  But  Vivanco  and  Cas-
tilla  preferred  to  settle  the  matter  bv  arms,  and
Vivanco  was  defeated  at  the  battle  of  Carmen  Alto
in  1844.  Elias  surrendered  the  command  to  the
one  designated  by  law,  elections  were  held,  and
Castilla  was  chosen  1  April,  1845.  Elias  was  then
appointed  councillor  of  state  and  elected  to  con-
gress. At  the  expiration  of  his  terra  of  office,  he
was  a  popular  candidate  for  the  presidency,  and  it
was  the  first  time  that  serious  efforts  were  made
to  elect  a  candidate  from  civil  life ;  but  the  mili-
tary candidate,  Gen.  Echenique,  was  proclaimed
constitutional  president  in  1851.  In  1854  Elias
proclaimed  a  revolution  at  lea,  and  at  his  own  ex-
pense organized  a  division,  with  which  he  offered
battle  to  the  government  forces  at  Saraja,  and  was
defeated.  He  then  marched  southward,  to  confer
with  Gen.  Castilla,  who  had  proclaimed  a  revolu-
tion at  Arequipa.  Castilla  advanced  upon  Cuzco
to  organize  his  army,  and  Elias  remained  in  the
department  of  Moquegua,  as  chief  commander  of
the  south.  Elias  suddenly  attacked  the  city  of
Arequipa,  1  Dec,  1854,  and  the  government  forces
were  defeated.  A  few  days  afterward  the  liberat-
ing army  approached  the  capital,  and  Gen.  Castilla
won  the  victory  of  Palma,  5  Jan.,  1855.  This
revolution  was  of  great  benefit  to  Peru,  as  it  freed
the  slaves,  and  abolished  the  Indian  taxes.  Gen.
Castilla.  as  provisional  president,  organized  his  cabi-
net, and  appointed  Elias  secretary  of  the  treasury,
who  soon  afterward  was  sent  to  France  as  minister.
In  1858  he  was  nominated  for  president  of  the  re-
public, but  was  not  elected.

ELIOT,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  28  Dec,  1718:  d.  there,  13  Sept.,  1778.  His
great-grandfather,  Andrew  Elliott,  of  Somerset-
shire, settled  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  about  1683.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1737,  and  in  1742
was  ordained  as  colleague  pastor  with  Mr.  Webb,
of  the  New  north  church  in  Boston,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death,  being  sole  pastor  after
1750.  The  University  of  Edinburgh  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1767,  and  in  1765  he  was  chosen
to  the  corporation  of  Harvard,  afterward  declining
an  election  to  the  presidency  in  1773.  During  the
British  occupation  of  Boston,  Dr.  Eliot  did  much
to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the  people,  but,  not-
withstanding his  devotion  to  the  patriot  cause,  his
moderation  won  him  the  respect  of  the  royalists.
When  Gov.  Hutchinson's  house  was  plundered  by
a  mob.  Dr.  Eliot  saved  a  large  number  of  valuable
manuscripts,  including  the  second  volume  of  the
"History  of  Massachusetts  Bay."  He  was  much
interested  in  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and
labored  for  the  passage  of  an  act,  which  was  after-


ELIOT


EUOT


321


ward  vetoed  by  the  governor,  to  establish  in  Mas-
sachusetts ii  -  pruptfBttaf  Ihl  L'oapel
anion u  the  ln<limi«.  similar  to  t hut  m  London,  of
which  he  was  a  member.  I i «*  I«H.k  mi  active  part
in Upholding  tin'  i  unM

the  Kpi* . 1 1 1 1 1  published  oooasiontt)  dis-
eonrsssanda  rolume  of  sermons  (1774). He  also
■  to  a  friend  in  England,  in  1706, Ml  account  of
tin'  effects  of  tho  dispute  between  th Ionics  ami

tin-  mother  country,  which  was  prated  fur  itscan-
dor  ami  moderation.' — His  s<.n,  John,  clergyman.
»>.  in  Boston,  Ma.ss.,  81  May.  lT'.t;  A  there,  It

Feb..  lNi:t,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1772,  be-
iruii  to  preach  in  1771,  and  was  for  a  short  time
chaplain  of  a  Boston  regiment.  On  -l  Nov..  1??!».
M  was  ordained  as  his  father's  successor  in  the
pastorate  of  the  New  north  church,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  He  recei\ei|  the  c|.
of  l>.  I),  from  Kdinhurgh  university  in  17!»7.  and
was  chosen  a  mcmlicr  of  the  Harxard  corporation
in  I«4>4.  Dr.  Eliot  was  intimately  associated  with
Jeremy  Belknap  in  the  formation  of  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society,  and  was  a  principal
contrihutor  to  its  collections  and  feo  its  hhrarv  of
rare  l>ooks.  Besides  numerous  articles  in  the  His-
torical society's  collections,  and  various  eermonej
he  published  a  "Biographical  Dictionary  of  Kmi-
nent  Characters  in  New  England "  (Salem  and
Boston,  1809). — Another  son,  Kphraini,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1780.  and  became  a  druggist
in  Beaton.  He  published  "Historical  Notices  of
the  New  North  Religious  Societv.  with  Anecdotes
<>f  Bar.  Andrew  Kliot  and  John  Kliot "  (1822).

KLIOT,  Charles,  author, b.  in  Boston  in  1791 :
d.  in  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1809,
and  studied  divinity,  but  gave  up  preaching  on
account  of  failing  health.  His  first  writings  ap-
j»eared  in  the  "General  Repository,"  a  Boston  j>c-
riodical.  and  he  was  sjiecially  interested  in  the
preparation  of  Scheiistier's  ••  Lexicon."  His  ••  Mis-
cellaneous Writings"  were  edited  by  Andrews
Anton  (Cambridge,  1814).  —  Charles  s  nephew,
Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass..  22  Dec.  1821.
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1889,  spent  two  years
in  a  Boston  counting-house,  and  four  years  in  for-
eign travel  and  study.  On  his  return  he  took  pri-
vate pupils,  organized  a  charity-school  for  vagrant
children,  and  instructed  classes  of  young  working-
men  gratuitously.  He  was  professor  of  history
and  political  science  in  Trinity  college,  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  1856-'64,  its  president  in  1800-'4,  and
lecturer  on  constitutional  law  and  political  sci-
ence in  1864-'74  He  also  lectured  at  Harvard  in
1870-'8,  was  head  master  of  the  girls'  high-school  in
Boston  in  1872-'6,  and  superintendent  of  Boston

Eublic  schools  in  1878-*80.  He  was  an  overseer  of
[arvanl  in  1860-'?2,  and  in  1868-'72  was  presi-
dent of  the  American  social  science  association,  hv
which  the  first  movement  in  favor  of  civil  service
reform  was  organized  in  1809.  He  beoame  ■  mem-
ber of  the  Boston  school  committee  in  1M8T>,  and  is
president  of  various  charitable  anil  educational  in-
stitutions. Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  LI..  D.
in  im«,  and  Harvard  in  1KS0.  He  has  l.ul.li-lnd
••  1'i.ssages  from  the  Historv  of  Liberty'  (Boston.
1847),  and  "The  Liberty  of  Rome"  (9  vols..  N,.w
York,  1S4!);  revised  ed..  entitled  "The  Ancient
Romans"  Boston.  IN08).  This  forms  Part  I.  of  a
"  Historv  of  Libert  v."  of  which  Part  II.  is  entitled
"The  K.irly  Christians"  (2  vols.,  18581  The  plan
of  the  work  embraces  five  parts,  of  which  the  three
remaining  are  to  treat  of  the  "Papal  Ages,'

nanhical  Age*,"  and  the- American  Nation."
Kliot  has  also  published  a  "Manual  of  United
story  between  the  Years  175*2  and  i860"
vol.  11. — H


1878); thns. volume*
of  mleotions  for  public  schools,  entitled  '
for  <  hildm  riee  fr..m  the  Arabian

Nighti  tions  from  An

Authors"  (New Fork, I*?!'.: and main reviews,

essays,  ami  addresses,  issued  in  pamphlet  form.

I  I  I0T,  John.  lir>t  styled  "the  Indian  ai-nale**
by  Thomas  Thorowgood  in  1000,  a  designation  bo
appropriate  that  8  lias  snonred  UtliiU
[M'tuai  acceptance.  I>.  probably  in  Widford, Hart*

fordshire,  England,  m  than  is  a  raaotd  of  hi*

Imptisin  in  that  parish  ..n  .*,  dflf>,  1  * '«« » 1 :  ,1.  in  }{,,x.

Iiurv.  Maxs.,  ^I
May.  KiiKi.  H,s
father.  Bennett,  a
\  ■  -  .iii.ii  1 .  was  a
landholder  in  the
parishes  of  Ware.

widfotd, Huns-

don,  and  K-t-
weeke,  in  the
county  of  Ilert-
ford.  and  else-
where, and  he  l>e-
qneathi in his

will,  made  5  Nov.,
1881, the profits

of these  lands,  to

the  amount  of
£8  annually,  to
"Trusty and  well-
beloved  friends,"
for  the  maintenance  of  his  son  John  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Cambridge,  "where  he  i-  a  Shollar."
He  had  matriculated  as  a  u  pensioner  "  (La,0M
who  pays  his  own  expenses)  at  Jesus  coll
March,  1G19,  and  the  degree  of  A.  B.  was  con-
ferred u|>on  him  in  1(522.  The  only  record  of
his  life  during  the  next  nine  years  is  that  he  was
employed  as  a  teacher  in  a  grammar-school  at
Little  Beddow,  near  Chelmsford.  England,  estab-
lished by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Hooker,  the  illustri-
ous pastor  of  the  chunh  that,  first  established
at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  was  removed  to  Hartford,
Conn.  In  Anderson's  "History  of  the  Colonial
Church"  (London,  is."it>)  is  the  following  state-
ment respecting  Mr.  Kliot  :  "That  he  had  entered
into  holy  orders  in  the  Church  of  England  before
he  left  home  is  evident  from  the  insertion  of  his
name  in  the  list  given  by  Neal  of  the  emigrant
clergy."  The  Church  of  Kngland  was  then  dealing
rigorously  with  those  who  did  not  conform  to  her
doctrines  and  ordinances.  Imprisonment  awaited
those  who  were  Imld  in  their  opposition,  and  many
battened  to  the  New  World  as  a  refuge  from  perse-
••ution.  John  Kliot  landed  at  Boston.  Mass..  4  Nov..
1081.  Three  brothers  and  three  sisters  aooompanied
him.  or  came  a  few  years  later.  In  his  record  he
writes,  ••  he  adjoyned  to  the  church  at  Boston,  and
then exercised,  "in  the  absens  of  Mr.  Wilson,  the

pastor  ,.f  yt  chunh.  wh«.  was  gone  bank  to  Bag*

land."  His  labors  gave  the  greatest  satisfaction,
as  is  ,\  i.l. nt  from  a  passage  in  his  record:  "The
next  summer  Mr.  Wilson  retained,  and  hv  vt  time
the  church  at  Boston  was  intended  to  call  him  to
But,  he  says,  he  was  "  forcingaiged "  to
friends  who  had  crossed  the  OasjSJ  and  Settled  at
Roxburv.  The  record  of  (tov.Winthrop  i-:  "Though

Boston  laltourcd  all  they  could.  both  with  the  ( •

prcgattonof  Roxburv  and  with  Mr.  Kliot  himself.
alleging  their  wanl  of  him  ami  the  covenant  U>-
tweeii  them.  etc..  vet  he  could  m»t  U-  dmrted  fn>m
accepting  the  call  of  Roxburv."  Here  he  became
the  "teacher "  of  the  church",  with  which  he  re-
tained a  life-long  connection, having Mr. Weld.


839


ELIOT


ELIOT


Mr.  Danforth,  and  Mr.  Walter  as  colleague,  ami
at  l"iiu'  intervals  being  without  clerical  assistance.
A  time-worn  nninuscript  volume,  now  in  the  keep-
ing of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical
society,  Boston,  contains  the  record  of  hit  church
work,  vast  and  interesting.  It  has  DMO  printed  by
the  city  of  Boston  as  "A  Report  of  the  Keeonl
Commissioners,  Document  114"  (1880);  and,  with
notes,  in  the  New  England  "  Historical  and  Genea-
logical Record  "  (vols.  33  and  34).  His  active  and
aggressive  spirit  twice  brought  him  into  unpleasant
relations  with  the  civil  authorities  in  1634,  for
criticising  the  method  of  making  a  treaty  with  the
Feqaods,  and  again  in  1060.  when  one  of  his  pub-
lications, written  several  vears  previously,  "The
Christian  Commonwealth,''  was  "condemned,  and
bv  order  of  the  general  court  suppressed."  Ex-
planations and  acknowledgments  led  to  a  speedy
and  satisfactory  settlement.  Several  petitions  in
his  handwriting,  signed  by  himself  and  others,
to  the  general  court,  attest  the  interest  that  he
took  in  the  secular  affairs  of  the  commonwealth.
In  1637  he  took  part  in  the  examination  of  Mrs.
Ann  Hutchinson  for  her  religious  opinions,  which
were  repulsive  to  him,  and  for  which  she  was  ban-
ished. An  account  of  her  trial  may  be  found  in
Thomas  Hutchinson's  "History  of  the  Province
of  Massachusetts  Bay  from  1628  to  1749."  Eliot's
fame  depends  mainlv  upon  his  labors  in  Christianiz-
ing the  Indians.  The  translations  of  the  Bible,
and  several  other  books  into  their  language,  are
his  imperishable  monument.  As  far  north  as  the
Merrimac  river,  as  far  east  as  Cape  Cod,  to  the
towns  in  the  southern  part  of  Massachusetts,  to
Brookfield,  sixty  miles  west  of  Roxbury,  to  north-
eastern Connecticut,  and  to  the  vicinity  of  Hart-
ford and  to  Martha's  Vineyard,  he  travelled,
proclaiming  the  gospel  to  the  red  man  with  an
enthusiasm  that  brought  thousands  under  its  in-
fluence. A  pamphlet  of  twentv-five  pages,  entitled
"  The  Day-breaking,  if  not  the  Sun-rising,  of  the
Gospel  with  the  Indians  in  New  England  "  (London,
1647),  gives  "  a  true  relation  of  our  beginnings  with
the  Indians."  At  Nonantum,  in  the  northeast
corner  of  Newton,  on  the  south  side  of  Charles
river,  about  five  miles  from  Roxbury,  on  28  Oct.,
1646,  "  four  of  us  "  went  to  the  wigwam  of  Waaubon,
and  there  met  a  company  of  Indians,  men,  women,
and  children,  "  gathered  together  from  all  quarters
round  about."  After  a  prayer  in  English,  Mr.
Eliot  preached  to  them  in  their  own  tongue
for  an  hour  and  a  quarter.  When  askea  if
they  understood  all  that  he  had  said,  many
voices  replied  in  the  affirmative.  Questions
followed,  curious,  wonderful,  and  interesting.
The  meeting  lasted  three  hours,  and  the  In-
dians said  they  were  not  weary ;  but  their  in-
structors resolved  to  leave  them  "  with  an  ap-
petite." An  appointment  for  another  meeting
was  made,  and  apples  were  given  to  the  chil-
dren, and  tobacco  to  the  men.  The  Indians
desired  more  ground  to  build  a  town,  and  it
was  promised  that  the  government  should  be
petitioned  in  their  behalf  for  this  purpose.
The  second  meeting  differed  from  the  first
in  this :  it  was  closed  with  a  prayer  "  in  their
own  language  for  above  a  quarter  of  an
hour."  The  pamphlet  describes  also  a  third  and
a  fourth  meeting.  The  Indians  showed  great
willingness  to  receive  the  gospel,  requesting  that
their  children  might  find  homes  with  their  white
friends  in  order  that  thev  might  be  trained  in  the
right  way,  and  some  adults  sought  employment
with  the  settlers,  that  they  might  receive  instruc-
tion in  the  truths  of  Christianity. It  was  then


believed  by  many  that  these  Indians  were  the
descendants  of  the  lost  tribes  of  Israel,  and  this
opinion  was  an  additional  incentive  for  efforts  to
convert  them.  Mr.  Eliot  was  convinced  that  the
Indians  must  give  up  their  roving  habits  and  lie-
come  members  of  settled  communities  before  they
could  make  much  progress  in  the  Christian  life.
Natick.  seventeen  miles  southwest  of  Host  on,  a
place  "somewhat  remote  from  the  English,"  was
selected  as  a  verv  advantageous  place  for  a  town,
and  thither  the  Indians  at  Nonantum,  and  other
"  praying  Indians,"  as  the  converts  were  called,  re-
moved in  1651.  A  civil  government  was  established,
and,  after  many  delays  and  much  hesitation,  a
church  was  formed  in  1660,  an  ecclesiastical  organi-
zation that  continued  until  the  death  of  their
last  pastor,  Daniel  Takawombpait,  an  Indian,  in
1716.  The  work,  although  it  sometimes  encountered
fierce  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  Indians  and
ungenerous  depreciation  on  the  whites,  prospered
until  King  Philip's  war  in  1675.  Town  after  town
was  organized,  and  worshipping  assemblies  gath-
ered, in  several  instances  presided  over  bv  Indian
preachers,  until  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Massa-
chusetts there  were  seven  old  and  seven  new  "  pray-
ing towns,"  embracing  not  fewer  than  eleven
hundred  "  souls  yielding  obedience  to  the  gospel."
Those  in  Plymouth  colony  and  in  the  isles  of
the  ocean  much  exceeded  this  number.  In  the
war  the  praying  Indians  suffered  dreadfully,
both  from  their  own  countrymen,  by  whom  they
were  hated,  and  by  a  great  majority  of  the  Eng-
lish, who  suspected  them  of  the  most  atrocious  in-
tentions. It  is  now  generally  believed  that  the
latter  were  saved  from  extinction  by  the  aid  re-
ceived from  the  friendly  Indians.  But  to  them
the  war  was  ruin.  The  number  of  Indian  towns
and  their  inhabitants  were  greatly  diminished,  and
after  the  death  of  Mr.  Eliot,  a  few  vears  later,  their
extinction  was  rapid  and  irresistible.  When  the
infirmities  of  age  made  him  too  feeble  for  the  ex-
ertions of  an  active  life,  he  proposed  that  negro
servants  should  be  sent  to  him  for  religious  in-
struction ;  and  a  boy,  made  blind  by  falling  into
the  fire,  was  taught  by  him  to  repeat  many  chap-
ters of  the  Bible.  One  of  his  last  recorded  acts
was  to  give  by  deed,  in  1689,  about  seventy-five
acres  of  land  for  "  the  maintenance,  support,  and
encouragement  of  a  school  and  schoolmaster  at


that  part  of  Roxbury  commonly  called  Jamaica,
or  the  Pond  Plain,  for  the  teaching  and  instruct-
ing the  children  of  that  end  of  the  town  (to-
gether with  such  Indians  and  negroes  as  shall  or
may  come  to  the  said  school),"  etc.  His  remains
were  placed  in  the  parish  tomb  In  the  old  burving-
ground  at  Roxbury.  No  authentic  likeness  of  him
exists. The  accompanying  picture  is  known  as


BLIOT


ELIOT


;{•>•{


the  Whiting  |x)rtrnit  i>f  the  "apojftn."  but  then-
is  BO  ant horit \  for  l!n'  statement  that  it  i»  it  rcprv-

mtation  of  John  Eliot. His  mum  la  ineerioed,

with those  <»f  his ■1100—011 in the ministry at

monumental  ■tructun  thai  cov-
ers the  tomb.  Then  is  a  monument  to  his  memorj
in  the  Indian  burying  ground  at  Booth  Netick,

a  granite  welling  I H  High  Hi  Canton,  Ma».,  ami  a

rial  structui  ton,  on  or  near  the  site

of  Nonantum,  where  the  apostle  first  preached  t<>

tin*  Indians. Sm  the  aftwmpanylng  illu>tr»it i<>n.

His  lift-  ami  labors  have  been  the  subject  of  DO-
ni.  n>iis  biogrephiee,  the  first  by  Cotton  Mather  in
|fgl,and  the  beet  by  ConTera  Francis  In  18

.*>.  Spark"-.  ••  American  Hiography  ").  .Mr.  Eliot's
manner must have Urn particularly  attractive.

lodging  from  the  accounts  of  hit  oontemporarin

ami  of  several  strangers  who  visited  him.  Hankers
&  Slnyter,  agents  for  the  Laltadist  coinniunitv,  in
the  record  i>f  their  visit  made  in  1<>H>,  >peak  of
him  its  "a  ffjfj  old  man,  named  John  Eliot,  as  the
Mil  of  the  ministers  who  we  have  yet  heard  "  in
Boston  and  its  vicinity.  John  Ihinton.a  boofcealleT
from  London,  deeoribes  bin  in  1888  m  "  the  glory
of  lioxburv,  as  well  as  of  all  New  England  ";  and
the  narrative  in  French  of  the  Jesuit  Eat  her  Gabriel
Dreuillettes.  a  missionary  from  Canada,  who  spent
the  night  before  Christmas  in  1650  at  the  apostle's
■nee,  justifies  the  statement  of  the  historian,  Mr.
Parkinan,  that  "there  was  great  sympathy  between
the  two  missionaries,  and  Kliot  prayed  his  guest  to
spend  the  winter  with  him."  Before  leaving  Eng-
land, Mr.  Kliot  had  made  a  matrimonial  engage-
ment, and  his  betrothed  came  over  in  the  year
following  his  arrival.  The  first  entrv  on  the
record  of  "  Maragesof  the  Inhabitants  of  koxbury"
is  that  of  Mr.  John  Eliot  and  Hanna  Mum  ford,  4
Spt..  Iggft,  To  use  his  own  words,  spoken  at  her
funeral  three  years  before  his  own  death,  she  was  a
"dear,  faithful,  pious,  prudent,  prayerful  wife."
Unusual  honors  were  paid  to  her  memory.  Six
children — a  daughter  ami  five  sons — were  born  to
them.  Of  the  sons,  but  one  survived  their  parents,
the  Rev.  Joseph,  who,  as  a  "  burning  and  snineing
liirht."  ministered  to  the  people  of  (iuilford,  Conn.,
from  1664  till  1094.  From  him  descend  all  the
posterity  of  the  apostle  bearing  his  surname.  A
genealogy  of  the  descendants  of  John  Eliot  was

SoUiahea  in  1ht>4  :  Fits-Greene  Halleck;  the  Rev.
ared  Eliot,  of  Killingworth  (now  Clinton),  Conn.,
eminent  as  a  minister,  physician,  and  scientist  in
our  colonial  history;  Prof.  Elisha  Mitchell,  of  the
I'niversity  of  North  Carolina,  whose  remains  are  at
rest  upon  the  highest  peak  of  land  in  the  United
States  east  of  Mississippi  rivet,  named  Mt.  Mitchell,
in  his  honor:  Charles  Wvllys  Elliott:  and  Ethc-
liuda  Eliot  Been,  who  wrote  the  poem  "All  <J,uiet
Bang  the  Potomac" — are  the  most  distinguished
of  his  posterity.  With  his  ooUeogOQ.  the  Rev.
Thomas  Weld,  and  his  neighbor,  the  Rer.  Rich-
ard Mather,  of  Dorchester.  Mr.  Eliot  translated
into  the  Indian  language  the  Psalms  of  I>avid.
and  their  work,  the  "Hay  Psalm-Hook."  was  the
first  book  printed  in  this  country  (Cambridge,
.  1040),  It  was  reprinted  and  extensively
used  in  England  and  Scotland,  and  a  small  edi-
tion was  reprinted  in  Cambridge  in  W>2  as  a  cu-
riosity. So  rare  has  this  book  become  that  a  cony
has  |H.,.ri  sold  for  $1,200.  There  is  one  in  the
\  library,  New  York.  In  the  tracts  entitled
"The  Clear  Sunshine  of  the  GospeL"  "The  (ilo-
rious  Progress  of  the  Gospel,"  "The  Light

and  more  toward  the  Perfect  Day,"

ii^'th out of  Weakness,"  "Tears  of Repent

anoe,"  "A  Late  and  Further  Manifestation  of  the


re«  ,,f  the  QoOpaL"  "A  Hrief  Narrative."  and
in Other communication*, published moMlv in

I Ion  from  104?  till  1671,  the  method*  i

and  the progress mad-' in the  conversion  ■  f  the
Indians,  are  get  forth  with  much  interesting  .1
by  Mr.  Eliot  and  others. The  principal  part .  .

expense  of  thOM  and  other  publications,  as  well  as

the  salaries  of  thOSl

Indians,  was  defrayed  by  M A  Corporation  torn*
Promoting  and  Pro|iagating  the  (i<*|iel  of  Jesus
Christ  in  NOW  England."  established  in  London  in
lo»!».  In  1698  0T 1664  Mr.  Eliot'sCatechisin.  prob-
ably the lirst l>ook  in  the Indian  laasmage,  wee

printed  at  Cambridge. No  copy  pan  i«-  mad,

Another  edition  was  printed  in  UUY*.  Genesis  and
Matthew,  in Indian,  wen-  printed  in  MM; but  n<>

eot.y  i>  known. Baton  the  elon  of  ignj  i,r  pub-

lished  a  translation  of  a  few  psalms  in  metre.  The
New  Testament  in  Indian  was  printed  at  (ami  *
in  1001.  A  few  copies  remain,  one  of  which  was
sold  a  few  years  ago  for  $700.  The  libraries  ,,f  the
I'niversity  of  Edinburgh  and  t¥r  nn IgTtgetllllnl
library  in  Hoston,  Mass..  mm  tain  the  only  known
copies  (not  alike)  of  "A  Christian  Covenanting
Confession,"  in  Indian  and  English,  which  are
thought  to  have  been  printed  in  1000.  In  HW*S  the
Old  Testament  was  printed.  This,  boundwitfa  the
New  Testanent,  a  metrical  version  of  the  Peatm,
and  with  a  single  leaf  containing  what  has  been
called  a  Catechism,  is  known  as  the  first  edition
of  the  Indian  Hible — the  first  Rible  printed  in
America.  A  copy  of  this  edition  was  sold  at
auction  a  few  years  ago  for  fl.Stf).  The  noond
edition  of  the  New  lestament  was  published  at
Cambridge  in  1680,  and  this,  bound  with  the  Old
Testament  (1685),  the  Psalms  in  metre,  and  the
Catechism,  complete  the  second  edition  of  the
Indian  Hible.  'I  hese  editions  can  not  be  regarded
as  very  rare,  since  between  fifty  and  sixty  copies
(many  of  them  imperfect)  are  owned  in  this  country.
The  finest  collection  of  them  is  in  the  Lenox  li-
brary. New  York.  There  are  copies  that  show  signs
of  much  use,  and  some  have  autographs  and  other
manuscript  of  Indian  owners.  The  Psalter,  as  well
as  the  New  Testament,  of  the  first  edition  was
bound  separately.  Of  the  translation  of  Haxter's
"Call  to  the  I'ncon  verted  "  (1654),  DO  copy  has
been  found;  but  of  the  second  edition  (1688)  then
arecopiesat  Harvard  college  and  in  other  libraries.
An  abridgment  of  Bishop  Hayly's  "Practice  of
Piety,"  translated  into  Indian,  was  printed  in  166B.
and  again  In  166&  Vale  ooUage  owns  a  copy.  Of
"The  Indian  Grammar  Begun  (Cambridge,  1666),

copies  are  in  the  John  Carter  Brown  library  at
Providence,  H.  I.,  and  in  the  Lenox  library,  Kew
York.  "  The  Indian  Primer."  of  which  the  only
copy  known  is  in  the  library  of  the  I'niversity  of
Edinburgh,  was  printed  at  Cambridge  in  1668.  It
has  Ihiii  reprinted.  The  last  of  Mr.  Eliot's  trans-
lations printed  in  his  life-time,  "The  Sincere  Con-
vert." by  the  Hev-  Thomas  Slicjiard,  SHM  published
in  168Bl  Mr.  Eliot's  published  l*>oks  in  the  Eng-
lish language  an:  "  The  Christian  Commonwealth  "
(London.  lOV.h.  This  book  is  extremely  rare,  hav-
ing been  mpptesnd  by  the  government  because

it  was  "full  of  seditious  principles  and  not
in  relation  to  all  established  governments  in  the
Christian  world.  es|>eviallv  against  the  govern-
ment established  in  their  native  country."  Tho
author  wa>  induced  to  make  public  acknowledg-
ment that  he  had  "  offended  "  in  his  opinl
"  The  ( 'oniniunion  of  <  Shunhn  "  ((  ambridge,  1005).
This  book  has  been  described  as  the  first  privately

fainted  book  in  America.  A  cony  is  in  the  bonoi
ibrary. "Indian Dialogues"  (Cambridge, 1071).


324


ELIOT


ELIOT


in  the  Lenox  library.  "  Indian  Logiek  Primer"
(Cambridge,  1678),  in  the  lii»rary  of  the  British

museum.  "  The  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  "  (  Boston,
1078),  in  the  Lenox  library.  "  Brief  Answer  to  a
Book  by  John  Norcot  against  Infant  Baptism"
(Boston,  1679).  The  copy  in  the  Lenox  library  is
the  only  one  known.  "  Dying  Speeches  of  Several
Imlians "  (Cambridge,  about  1080).  But  one  copy
is  known,  which  is  in  the  Lenox  library.  Many  of
these  have  been  reprinted  separately,  in  the  col-
lections of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society  and
elsewhere. — His  grandson,  .lured,  b.  in  Guilford.
Conn.,  7  Nov.,  1685 ;  d.  in  Killingworth  (now  Clin-
ton), Conn.,  22  April,  1763,  was  the  son  of  Rev.
Joseph  Eliot,  who  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
L66&  Immediately  after  his  graduation  at  Yale  in
1706,  Jared  was  appointed  school-master  of  his
native  town,  and  numbered  among  his  pupils  Sam-
uel Johnson,  first  president  of  Kings  (now  Colum-
bia) college,  in  March.  1707,  he  accepted  a  call
from  the  church  at  Killingworth,  to  become  the
successor  of  Rector  Abraham  Pierson,  whose  favor-
ite pupil  he  had  been  while  at  Yale.  He  retained
this  charge  till  his  death,  and  while  discharging  in
full  measure  the  duties  of  his  office  he  found  time
to  make  himself  eminently  useful  and  famous  as

a  physician,
an  agricultu-
rist, a  scien-
tific investi-
gator, and  an
author.  In
1747  he  writes
in  the  preface
to  his  "  Essays
upon  Field
Husbandry  "  :
"Havingspent
more  than
Thirty  years
in  a  Business
that  required
a  great  deal  of
Travel,  altho'
it  did  not
much  hinder
Reading  and  Study,  it  gave  me  an  opportunity  to
see  much  of  the  Country,  of  making  many  Obser-
vations, and  of  being  acquainted  with  verv  many
Persons  of  Worth  and  Ingenuity,  both  Farmers
and  Others."  This  manner  of  life  brought  him  into
Intimate  relations  with  Benjamin  Franklin,  and
others  who  at  that  early  day  took  delight  in  scien-
tific pursuits.  Franklin  writes  to  him  in  1755:
"  I  remember  with  Pleasure  the  cheerful  hours  I
enjoyed  last  winter  in  your  Company,  and  would
with  all  my  heart  give  any  ten  of  the  thick  old
Folios  that"  stand  on  the  shelves  before  me  for  a
little  book  of  the  stories  you  then  told  with  so
much  propriety  and  humor."  In  Sparks's  edition
of  Franklin's  works  are  eleven  letters  to  Mr.  Eliot.
His  high  standing  as  a  clergyman  is  attested  by  the
fact  that  he  was  several  times  moderator  at  the  meet-
ings of  the  General  association  of  Connecticut.  As
a  physician,  his  ability  gave  him  the  highest  rank.
Not  only  in  his  own  but  in  neighboring  colonies,  his
skill  was  frequently  in  demand,  some  of  his  medical
pupils  afterward  becoming  distinguished  physi-
cians. He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard
in  1709;  he  was  elected  a  trustee  of  Yale  in  1730,
in  which  capacity  he  rendered  valuable  services  to
that  college  during  life,  besides  making  himself  in
his  will  the  first  contributor  to  its  library  fund,
and  in  1756  or  1767  was  unanimously  chosen  a  fel-
low of  the  Royal  society,  London. His  publica-


tions include  sermons  entitled  "The  Right  Hand
of  Fellowship"  (Boston.  17:5(1):  "Religion  Sup-
ported by  Reason  and  Divine  Revelation'
London,  I7:i<i):  u  Give  Caaar  hii  Due  "(New  Lon-
don, 1738);  "The  Blessings  Bestowed  on  Them
that  Fear  God  "(New  London.  1789) :  a  God's  Mar-
vellous Kindness,"  preached  on  the  occasion  of  a
general  thanksgiving  to  commemorate  the  capture
of  the  city  of  Louisbourg  (New  London.  1745);
"  Repeated  Bereavements  Considered  and  Im-
proved "(New  London,  1748);  and  "A  Discourse
on  the  Death  of  Rev.  William  Worthington "
(New  Haven,  1757);  "An  Essay  upon  Field  Hus-
bandry in  New  England"  (Boston,  1760);  ami  an
"Essay  on  the  Invention  or  Art  of  Making  Vers
Good,  if  not  the  Best,  Iron  from  Black  Sea-Sand
(New  York,  1762).  The  accompanying  illustration
is  a  copy  of  a  medal  awarded  to  the  Rev.  Jared
Eliot  in  i762,  by  the  London  Institute, "  for  produc-
ing malleable  iron  from  the  American  black  sand."
ELIOT,  Samuel  Atkins,  mayor  of  Boston,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  March,  1798 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1817,  became  a  merchant  in  Boston,  served
several  terms  in  the  state  legislature,  and  was
mayor  of  the  city  in  1837-'9.  During  his  adminis-
tration a  riot  took  place,  caused  by  a  collision  be-
tween a  volunteer  fire  company  and  an  Irish  fu-
neral procession.  The  disturbance  was  suppressed
by  the  promptness  of  Mayor  Eliot,  who  was  on  the
ground  at  the  first  alarm,  and  immediately  took
measures  for  calling  out  the  militia.  The  result
of  this  affair  was  the  establishment  of  a  paid  fire
department  and  a  day  police.  Mayor  Eliot  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  whig,  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  appointment  of  Robert  C.  Winthrop
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  22  Aug.,  1850,
till  3  March,  1851.  He  was  treasurer  of  Harvard
college  in  1842-'53.  He  published  a  "  Sketch  of
the  History  of  Harvard  College  and  of  its  Present
State  "  (Boston,  1848),  and  edited  selections  from
the  sermons  of  Dr.  Francis  W.  P.  Greenwood,  with
a  memoir  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1844). — His  son,  Charles
William,  educator,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  March,
1834,  was  fitted  for  college  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853.
In  the  following  year  he  was  appointed  tutor  in
mathematics,  and  studied  chemistry  with  Prof.  Jo-
siahP.  Cooke.  In
1858  he  was  made
assistant  profes-
sor of  mathemat-
ics and  chemis-
try, but  in  1861
was  relieved  of
his  work  in  the
mathematical  de-
partment, and
taught  chemistry
in  Lawrence  sci-
entific school.  In
1863  he  went  to
Europe  and  spent
two  years  in  the
study  of  chemis-
try and  in  the  ex-
amination of  the
systems  of  pub-
he  instruction  in
France,  Germany,

and  England  ;  and  on  his  return  in  1865  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  analytical  chemistry  in  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology.  In  that
year  an  important  revolution  occurred  in  the
government  of  Harvard  univei^ity.


flvL-Uu  4Y^  CLrf~


The  board


BLIOT


BLK


BH


rseera  had  hitherto  con-i-t.-d  Of the  gOT-
enmr.  lieutenant-governor,  |>rt*si<l«-ut  of  t!

iker i'f tin- bonce, secretary i>f ilir
hoard  «>f  education.  Mini  president  ami  treasurer  of
the  uni\er-ity.  together  with  thirty  other |
hikI  these  other  p  ted  hv  joint  Iwllot

of  the  two  boonae  of  the  state  legislature.  An
opinion  ha«l  long  been  gaining  ground  thai  it  would
hi  better  lor  the  community  and  the  interests  of
learning,  as  well  as  for  the  university,  if  the  power

to  .Lit  the  overseers  weiv  transferred  from  the
legislature  to  the  graduates  of  the  college.  This
whs  made  in  1865.  and  at  the  same  time
\.  rnor  and  other  state  officers  censed  to  form
part  of  the  lionrd.  The  effect  of  t  hi- change  was
greatly  to  strengthen  the  interest  of  the  alumni  in

the  management  of  the  university,  and  thus  to  pra>

Sure  the  way  for  extensive  and  thorough  reforms,
hortlv  afterward  Dr.  Thomas  Hill  resigned  the
presidency,  and  after  a  eonsiderahle  interregnum
Sir.  Kliot  succeed..!  to  that  office  in  lHti!).  During
hi-administration  the  elective  system  has  complete-
ly supplanted  the  old-fashioned  prescribed  curricu-
lum, and  llarvanl  has  come  to  resemble  in  its  mcth-
iwis  the  great  n.iirupaan  universities,  while  it  has
douhled  in  numtter  of  students  and  professors,  and
more  than  trebled  in  wealth.  President  Kliot  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  I>.  from  Williams  and
from  Princeton  in  I88e%  and  from  Yale  in  1870.
He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  m  iences,  and  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  a  member  of  other  literary  and  scien-
tific bodies  On  many  occasions  he  has  been  called
upon  to  deliver  addresses,  notably  at  the  inaugu-
ration of  Daniel  C.  Oilman  as  president  of  Johns
Hopkins  university,  at  the  opening  of  the  Ameri-
can museum  of  natural  bJetOfJ  in  New  York,  and
In-fore  various  educational  bodies.  His  brief  re-
marks at  the  museum  were  described  by  Prof.  Ed-
ward L.  Youmans  as  having  "  summed  up  in  a  few
words  the  grandest  characteristics  of  modern  sci-
ence.'" President  Kliot  is  a  frequent  speaker  at
the  meetings  of  the  Harvard  club  in  New  York,
and  at  public  dinners  in  Boston.  Beeldei  chemical
memoirs,  written  with  Prof.  Frank  H.  Storer,  es-
says on  educational  topics,  and  his  annual  reports
us  president  of  Harvard,  he  has  published,  in  con-
nection with  Prof.  Storer,  a  "  Manual  of  Inorganic
Chemistry"  (New  York,  1868),  and  a  "  Manual  of
Qualitative  Chemical  Analysis"  (1869).

ELIOT,  Thomas  Dawes,  congressman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  20  March.  1808;  d.  in  New  Bedford,
Mass.,  12  June,  1*70.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bian  college,  Washington,  D.  ('.,  in  IWft.ltwdifd  law
in  Washington  and  New  Bedford,  and  was  admitted
to  the  Massachusetts  bar.  After  being  a  member.
of  both  houses  of  the  legislature,  he  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Whig,  to  till  the  unexpired  term  of
Zeno  Scudder,  serving  from  17  April,  1H.")4,  till  ii
March,  1H.V>,  and  making  an  eloquent  speech 00 the
Kansas-Nebraska  bill,  which  was  published  (Wash*
iinrton,  is.yi).  He  was  prominent  in  the  Flee  eoil
convention  at  Worcester,  rffirr.  in  1866, and  on  the
dissolution  of  the  Whig  party  was  active  anions  the
founders  of  the  Republican  party  in  Massachusetts.
Be  declined  its  nomination  for  attorney-general  in
it  was  afterward  elected  to  congress  again
for  five  succi — ive  terms,  serving  from  1850  till
1869.  Mr.  Kliot  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceed-
ings of  the  house,  particularly  in  the  legislation  00
the  protection  and  welfare  of  the  negroes.

KLIOT.  William  Qroealeaf,  educator,  b.  in
N.w  Bedford,  Macs.  B  An-,  1811;  d.  at  Pees
Christian,  Mi-*..  2:5  .lan..  1887.  His  great  grand-
father  was brother to the great-grandfather of


Charles  William  Kliot,  president  ..f  Harvard.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbian  oil.-.  *on.

D  ( .in 1881.  and  at llarvanl  divinity-*  h<«. I  in
In  the  latt.r  y.-ar  he  was  ordeised  paetof  of
the  Church  of  the  Messiah  il'nitarian)  in  h
Mo.,  a  place  which  be  held  until  1*72. During  all

this  time  he  was  energetically  employee1  in  improv-
ing the  condition  and  advancing  the  interest*  of
the  public  schools  of  St.  I/ouis.  A  man  of  untir-
ing energy  and  rare  administrative  ability,  he  wan
engaged  in  all  -«>rts  of  puhlic  and  philanthropic
eiiterpri-.-.  and  ha-  prolwiUy  done  mOTS  for  the
advancement  of  St.  Louis  and  all  the  southwest
than  any  other  man  that  ha-  lived  in  that  section.
He  was  always  0  hold  and  outsiMiken  op|Kmeut  of
slavery.  In  1*61  he  was  found  among  the  small
band  of  resolute  men  who  assisted  (Jens,  Nathaniel
Lyon  and  Framis  P.  Blair  in  preserving  Missouri
to  the  Union  :  and  during  the  war  he  was  active  in
the  western  sanitarv  commission.  In  1H72  he  was
chosen  t<»  succeed  Dr.  Chauveiiet  a.-  chancellor  of
Washington  university  in  St.  LooJB,  and  held  the
office  until  his  death.  He  has  published  a  "  Man-
ual of  Prayer"  (Boston,  1851) ;  "  Discourses  on  the
Doctrines  of  Christ ianitv  "  (Boston,  1868;  22d  ad,
1886);  "  lectures  to  Young  Men  "  1 1861 :  11th  sd-
1882);  "Lectures  to  Young  Women "  (1868;  Pith
ed.,  enlarged,  with  the  title  ••  Home  Life  ami  Influ-
enee,"  St.  Louis.  18801;  "The  I'nitv  of  God"
(Boston,  1854);  "  Karlv  Religious  Kdtu-ntion"
(1855);  "The  Discipline  'of  Sorrow"  (1855):  "The
Story  of  Archer  Alexander,  from  Slavery  to  Free-
dom (Boston,  1885);  and  a  great  numU-r  of
pamphlets,  tract-,  dlsooorsea,  and  review  articles.

ELfZAOA.  Mariano  (ay-lec -thah-gali).  Mexi-
can musician,  l>.  in  fcforelia,  27  Sept,  17*1 ;  d.  in  the
city  of  Mexico,  2  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  noted  for  pre-
cocious musical  talent,  and  at  the  age  of  the  jean
was  called  to  the  presence  of  the  viceroy  (Jalv.z,
who.  pleased  with  the  extraordinary  facility  of  the
child,  gave  orders  for  his  education  at  the  expense
of  the  king.  He  was  sent  to  the  College  of  In-
fantes, where  he  made  wonderful  progress,  and
while  yet  a  voting  man  became  an  accomplished
musician.  He  was  the  teacher  of  Catalina  de  Hu-
arte.  wife  of  the  Emperor  [tnrbtde,  who  appointed
him  master  of  the  imperial  chapeL  After  the  fall
of  Iturbide  he  spent  his  life  in  teaching.  His  com-
positions include  ••  Kl  Miserere  del  Micrcoles  San-
to." ••  Lameiitacion."  "  ReeponeorfcV  and  "  Mi-a.*'

ELKINS,  Henry  Arthur,  artist,  l>.  in  Ver-
shire.  \'t..  :$0  Mav.  1 84 7 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  CoL,
80  July,  1HS4.  lie  removed  t<>  Chicago  fan  i-
taught  himself  to  |>aint,  and  achieved  BOOM  success.
Among  his  pictures  are  "Mount  Sheeta,"  "  The
Thirty-eighth  Star."  "Storm  at  Shasta."  "New
Kldorado."  and  "Crown  <>f  the  Continent."

KLKINS.  Stephen  Benton,  politician,  b,  in
Port  county.  Ohm,  86  Bept,  184L He  rsaaored

to  Mi—ouri  when  very  JTOJOng,  was  graduated  at
Missouri  university  in  I860, and  studied  law.  11.-
d  in  1888-1  BS  a  captain  in  the  77th  Missouri
regiment,  and  in  the  latter  year  went  to  N.w  M.-xic..,
where  he  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar  in  1884  He  also
engaged  in  mining  and  stock-raising  there,  and
accumulated  a  fortune. He  was  a  memlier  of  the

territorial  legislature  in  isc.w..  attwnui  general

..f  the  territory  in  18<58-'i),  and  I  .  S.  district  att.-r-
nev  in  l870-*8.  He  was  then  elected  a  delegate  to
congress  a-  a  Kepuhlican,  and  served  two  terms,
from lN7:t  till 1*77,  making  a  Bpeeeh in ls?4  0B

the  admission  of  Hew  Mexico  to  the  Union,  which
attracted  much  attention.  In  1875  be  haaame  b>
tere-t.d  in  the  West  Virginia  system  of  railroads,

ami has lately  re-id. d in  N.w  York. Mr.  Klkins


32G


ELLERY


ELLET


was  smemlioripf  the  National  Republican  commit-
tee  from  1872  till  1884.  He  took  an  active  part  in
the  Chicago  convention  of  1884  that  nominated
James  <'  Mlainc  for  the  presidency.  In  1891  he
joined  Harrison's  cabinet  as  secretary  of  war.

I  II  IK  V.  William,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  22  I  >.<■..
1727:  (1.  there,  15  Feb.,  1820.  His  father,  of  the
same  name,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1798,  be-
came  a  successful  merchant  in  Newport,  served
successively  as  judge,  senator,  and  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  colony,  and  died  in  1764.  The
younger  William  received  his  early  education
mostly  from  his  father,  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1747.  He  married  in  1750,  engaged  in
business  in  Newport,  and  was  for  some  time  naval
offloer  of  Rhode  Island.  He  began  the  practice  of
law  in  Newport  in  1770,  having  served  for  two
years  previous  as  clerk  of  one  of  the  courts.  He
was  an  active  patriot,  and  in  May,  1776,  was  chosen
the  colleague  of  Stephen  Hopkins,  as  delegate  to
the  Continental  congress,  and  took  his  seat  on  the
14th  of  that  month.  He  became  an  influential
member  of  that  body,  serving  on  the  committee  to
consider  the  ways  and  means  of  establishing  ex-
presses between  the  continental  posts,  on  those

on  the  treasury
and  on  marine
affairs,  and  on
the  special  com-
mittee for  pur-
chasing clothing
for  the  army.
During  this  ses-
sion he  signed
the  Declaration
oflndependence,
and  he  was  accus-
tomed in  later
years  to  relate
with  great  vi-
vacity the  inci-
dents connected
with  that  event.
"  I  was  deter-
mined," he  said,
"  to  see  how  they
all  looked  as  they  signed  what  might  be  their
death-warrant.  I  placed  myself  beside  the  secre-
tary, Charles  Thomson,  and  eyed  each  closely  as  he
affixed  his  name  to  the  document.  Undaunted
resolution  was  displayed  in  every  countenance."
Mr.  Ellery  continued  a  member  of  the  congress  till
1786,  with  the  exception  of  the  years  1780  and
1?S'J.  and,  overcoming  his  natural  diffidence,  be-
came a  ready  debater.  He  was  a  member  of  im-
portant committees,  but  did  especially  good  ser-
vice on  the  board  of  admiralty,  where  he  had  much
influence,  and  probably  originated  the  plan  of
fitting  out  lire-ships  at  Newport.  During  the
British  occupation  of  Rhode  Island,  Mr.  Ellerv's
house  was  burned  and  much  of  his  other  property
injured.  In  1779  he  was  a  member  of  a  committee
to  arrange  some  diplomatic  difficulties  among  the
American  commissioners  to  Europe,  and  was
chairman  of  a  committee  to  consider  means  of
relieving  the  distress  brought  upon  the  Rhode
Islanders  by  the  British  occupation.  In  1782  he
presented  to  congress  a  plan  for  organizing  a  de-
partment of  foreign  affairs.  In  1785  he  actively
supported  Rufaf  King  in  his  effort  to  abolish
sla\  try  throughout  the  country,  seconding  Ring's
resolution  to  that  effect.  He  was  appointed  com-
missioner of  the  continental  loan-office  for  Rhode
Island  in  1786,  was  for  a  short  period  chief  justice


{//i£^-^UX


of  the  Rhode  Island  superior  court,  and  from
1790  till  his  death  was  collector  of  Newport,  being
retained  in  the  office  in  spite  of  frequent"  nod  frank
avowals  of  political  differences  with  several  ad-
ministrations. Mr.  Ellery  was  of  moderate  stat-
ure, with  a  large  head  and  impressive  features*,
lie  was  fond  of  study  and  literature:  and  was
highly  esteemed  for  his  social  qualities,  being  inti-
mate with  all  the  distinguished  men  of  his  time,
He  retained  the  full  use  of  his  faculties  to  the
close  of  his  long  life,  and  died  holding  in  his  hand
a  copy  of  Cicero's  "  De  Officiis,"  which  he  had
been  reading.  See  a  biography  of  Ellery  by  his
grandson,  Edward  T.  Channing,  in  Sparks's
"American  Biography,"  vol.  vi.,  and  Goodrich's
"  Lives  of  the  Signers  to  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence."— His  nephew,  Christopher,  senator,
b.  in  Newport.  R.  I.,  1  Nov.,  1768;  d.  there,  2
Dec,  1840,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1787,  studied
law,  and  began  to  practise  in  his  native  city.  He
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  to
fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Ray
Green,  and  served  from  7  Dec.,  1801,  till  3  March,
1805.  President  Jefferson  appointed  him  commis-
sioner of  loans  at  Providence  in  1806,  and  from
1820  till  1834,  when  the  failure  of  his  health  caused
him  to  resign,  he  was  collector  of  customs  at  New-
port.— Christopher's  son,  Frank,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  23  July,  1794;  d.  in  Castleton,
Vt.,  24  March,  1871,  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman on  1  Jan.,  1812,  and  served  in  the  frigate
"  President "  on  all  her  cruises,  being  wounded  in
the  action  with  the  "  Belvidere  "  by  the  bursting
of  the  gun  at  which  he  was  stationed.  He  received
a  sword  and  the  thanks  of  congress  for  his  services
on  Lake  Champlain,  was  in  the  "Constellation"
in  the  Mediterranean  in  1815,  at  the  capture  of  an
Algerine  frigate  and  a  Turkish  flag-ship,  and  as-
sisted in  expelling  McGregor's  band  of  adventur-
ers from  Amelia  island,  Fla.,  in  1817,  capturing
one  of  their  privateers  with  her  prize.  He  became
lieutenant,  28  March,  1820,  commanded  the  "Cy-
ane,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in  1827,  and  was  on
duty  at  the  Boston  and  New  York  rendezvous  in
1829-'37.  He  commanded  the  steamer  "  Enter-
prise" in  1840,  was  put  on- the  reserved  list,  13
Sept.,  1855,  commanded  the  Boston  rendezvous
again  in  1861,  and  was  commissioned  commodore
on  the  retired  list,  4  April,  1867.

ELLET,  Charles,  engineer,  b.  in  Penn's  Manor,
Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  1  Jan.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Cairo,  111.,  21
June,  1862.  He  was  destined  by  his  father  for  the
life  of  a  farmer,  but  his  inclinations  led  him  to
mathematical  and  engineering  pursuits.  First  as
a  rodman,  then  as  a  volunteer,  and  subsequently  as
a  paid  assistant  on  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,
he  soon  acquired  means  to  visit  Europe,  and  com-
pleted his  education  in  the  Ecole  polytechnique  in
Paris.  He  became  an  engineer  on  the  Utica  and
Schenectady  railroad,  then  on  the  Erie,  and  subse-
quently chief  engineer  of  the  James  and  Kanawha
canal.  In  1842  he  planned  and  built  the  first
wire  suspension  bridge  in  this  countrv,  across  the
Schuylkill  river  at  Philadelphia.  He  designed
and  "built  the  railroad  suspension  bridge  across
the  Niagara  river  below  the  falls  in  1847.  and
afterward  built  a  suspension  bridge  at  Wheeling,
Va.  He  then  engaged  in  many  important  en-
gineering works,  constructed  a  remarkable  tem-
porary track  across  the  Blue  Ridge,  improved  the
navigation  of  the  Kanawha  river,  ana  aided  in
laying  out  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and  in
1846-'7  he  was  president  of  the  Schuylkill  naviga-
tion company.  I  Is  was  among  the  first  to  advoo
the  use  of  steam  rams,  and  suggested  a  plan  to  the


BLLBT


KM. I


an


Btabn  government  bi  ottah  ton  allied  Bool  ba-

boitopol  might  OS  destroyed.  At  tin-  be-
ginning of  tnc  eiriTwnrtn  i*»u  on  btOMOO  loon>

.11  military  matters,  ami  devoted  noon
attention  to  the  11*  of  rims  in  naval  warfare.  II.-
sent  a  |iliin  for  ratting  off  i In-  Confederate  army
at  htnnnoMi  to  ( ii-ii.  nfoCleUnn,  who  oriented  it.
Htni  I'.iift  t ii«'ii  vnti  two  pamphlets  fttnuiring

McClellan's  mode  of  conducting  the  campaign.
He  urged  upon  the  government  tin- construction  of
steam  nun*,  for  use  00  the  large  rivers  of  the  west,
and  after  his  plans  had  l>een  rejected  by  the  navy
department  he  presented  them  to  the  secretary  of
war.  bt  whom  they  were  approved.  Me  was  then
commissioned  colonel  of  engineers,  and  converted
several  powerful  light-draught  steamers  on  the
Mississippi  river  into  rams.  With  these  he  en-
gaged in  the  naval  Imttle  off  Memphis  on  <>  .lime.
186%,  and  sank  and  disabled  several  of  the  Con-
federate vessels,  but  during  the  Iwttle  he  was
struck  above  the  knee  by  a  musket-ball,  and  died
from  the  effects  of  his  wound.  Among  his  most
noteworthy  labors  was  his  investigation  of  the
hydraulics  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers,  the
result  of  which  he  published  in  a  paper  entitled
the  "  Physical  Geography  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,
with  Suggestions  as  to  the  Improvement  of  the
Navigation  of  the  Ohio  and  other  Rivers,"  printed
in  the  "Smithsonian  Transactions"  (Washington,
1851).  His  other  publications  are  "An  Essay  on
the  Laws  of  Trade  '  (1889) ;  "  The  Mississippi  and
Ohio  Rivers,  containing  Plans  for  the  Protection
of  the  Delta  from  Inundation "  (Philadelphia,
1853) ;  a  pamphlet  on  "  Coast  and  Harbor  Defences,
or  the  Substitution  of  Steam  Battering-Rams  for
Ships  of  War"  (Philadelphia,  1855).  and  many
other  scientific  papers.— His  brother,  Alfred  W„
held  a  commission  under  him  as  lieutenant-colonel
in  the  same  fleet,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  1  Nov.,  1862.  He  ordered
the  burning  of  Austin,  Miss.,  on  24  May,  1863,  in
retaliation  for  information  furnished  by  citizens
to  Confederates  of  Gen.  Chalmers's  command,
which  enabled  them  to  fire  upon  a  Federal  trans-
port. He  resigned  on  31  Dec.,  1864. — Charles's  son,
Charles  Rivers  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1841;  d.  in  Hunker  Hill,  111.,  29  Oct.,  1863,  was
engaged  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  in  studying
medicine,  and  became  assistant  surgeon  in  one  of
the  military  hospitals.  In  1862  he  commanded  one
of  his  father's  rams  in  the  action  at  Memphis.
After  his  father's  death,  on  the  organization  of  the
-ippi  brigade  by  his  uncle,  Alfred  W.  Kllet.
he  was  appointed  colonel,  and  when  his  uncle  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  marine  brigade.  Choosing  the
ram  "  (jueen  of  the  West  "  for  his  headquarters,  he
made  many  daring  expeditions  on  the  Mississippi.
and  succeeded  in  running  the  Confederate  bat-
teries at  Vick-lnirg  as  he  was  cruising  between  that
stronghold  and  Port  Budeon,  On  1<»  Feb..  1863,  he
made  an  expedition  up  the  Bed  river  and  captured
tin-  Confederate  steamer  "  Kra "  and  some  other
Teasels. After  ascending  the  river  with  success  the

Silot  ran  his  vessel  aground,  placing  her  in  such  a
ifficult  position  that  she  was  disabled  by  the  tire
from  the  Confederate  fort,  and  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  enemy. Col.  Ellet  made  his  escaj>e  on  a

bale  of  cotton,  and  was  rescued  by  tl I>e  Soto."

During  the  siege  of  Yicksburg.  and  afterward,  he
rendered  valuable  assistance  to  (ten.  Grant  in  keep-
ing open  his  communications,  but  in  the  oourM  <>f
this  dutv  his  health  failed,  owing  to  the  influence
Of  the  climate,  and  he  died  suddenly  in  Illinois.
where  he  had  retired  for  rest.


ELLET,  William llenrv.  . too***,  b.  fa

York  city,  l Nov..  1H4MI;  ,1.  there,  96  Jan.,  1859.
Me  was  graduated  at  t'oluinbia  in  1H24.  and  m.
i|iiently,  while  studying niedieine,  gained  a gold
medal  for  a  dissertation  on  thccom|>oundM  of  cyan-
ogen. In  1880  he  liecamc  lecturer  on  elementary
rheiniMry  in  Columbia  college,  and  two  year* ,
was  promoted  to  the  chair  of  that  name,  but  in  :
was  made  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  in  Sooth  Carolina  college. Pot  Bo  dis-
covery of  a  new  and  cheap  method  of  preparing
gun-cotton  the  legislature  of  Booth  Carolina  pn-
lOBtod  him  with  a  service  of  silver-plate. In  :
he returned to  New York,  and in lH.r>4  became
consulting  chemist  of the Manhattan gas  com-
pany, which  otlice he  held  until his  death.— His
wife.  Elizabeth  Fries,  author,  b.  in  SmIus  point,
N.  Y..  in 1H1K;  d.  ;{  June,  1*77.  was  the  daughter
of Dr.  William  Nixion  Lummis. She  w;as edu-
cated at  the  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  Ononis  s, •miliary,  and
after  her  marriage  with  Dr.  Kllet,  •boot 1885,  be-

fpOB  to  write  for  ]>eriodicals.  She  has  contributed
argely  to  magazines  and  reviews,  and  has  pob-
lished  a  translation  of  Silvio  PoIliOM)*!  "  Kuphemia
of  Messina"  (1834);  M Teresa Contarini,"  a  tragedy,
which  was  represenb'd  in  New  York  (lKXi):  *Po-
ems,  Original  and  Selected  "  (Philadelphia,  1835);
"Scenes  in  the  Life  of  .Joanna  of  Sicilv"  (Boston,
1840);  "Characters  of  Schiller"  (1842);  "Family
Pictures  from  the  Bible  "(New  York,  1M4!I|;  »  Kven-
ings  at  Woodlawn"  (1850);  "Domestic  History  of
the  American  Revolution"  (1850);  "Watching
Spirits"  (1851);  "  Women  of  the  American  Involu-
tion" (1851);  "Pioneer  Women  of  the  \V,-i  "
(1852);  "Novelettes  of  the  Musicians"  (Is".
"Summer  Kambles  in  the  West"  (1M.">3);  "The
Practical  Housekeeper,  a  Cyclopaedia  of  Dome-tic
Economy"  (1857);  "Women  Artists  in  all  Ages
and  Countries"  (1861);  "Queens  of  American
Societv"  (1867);  and  "Court  Circles  of  the  Re-
public," with  Mrs.  R.  K.  Mack  (Hartford.  1869).

ELLICOTT,  Andrew,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Bucks  countv.  Pa..  24  Jan..  17">4:  d.  in  West
Point.  N.  Y.,29  Aug.,  1820.  Mis  father  and  uncle.
who  were  (Quakers,  purchased  a  large  tract  of  w  ild
land  on  the  Patapsco  river  in  1 770,  and  in  1774
founded  the  town  of  KUicott's  Mills,  now  Kllicott
City,  where  Andrew  passed  his  vouth  in  the  study
of  science  and  practical  mechanics.  Mi-  scientific
attainments  soon  attracted  attention,  and  he  en-
joyed the  friendship  and  contidence  of  Washing-
ton, Franklin,  and  Rittenhonoe.  Be  was  ■ppesJtt>
ed  commissioner  at  various  times  for  marking  the
boonderies  of  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  New-
York,  and  about  17H."i  removed  to  Baltimore,  where

he  was  elected to  the  legislature. He  WHS  selected

by  Washington  in  1789  to  survey  the  land  lying
between  Pennsylvania  and  Ijakc  Krie,  and  deling
that  year  he  made  the  first  accurate  measurement
of  the  Niagara  river  from  lake  to  lake,  with  the
height  of  the  falls  and  the  descent  of  the  rapids.
In  1  TIM)  he  was  employed  by  the  government  to
survey  and  lay  out  the'eity  of  Washington,  and  in
1792  "was  made  siirvevor-general  of  the  I'nited
States.  He  sii|  erintencied  the  construction  of  Fort
Krie.  at  Presoue  Isle,  now  Krie.  Pa.,  in  17J»."».  and
was  employed  in  laying  out  the  towns  of  Krie,
Warren,  and  Franklin.  He  was  nppototoi  by
Washington  in  1796  as  l\  S.  commissioner  under
the  treaty  of  San  LotWttOO  si  Keal.  b)  iletermine
the  Umndary  separating  the  United  States  from
the  Spanish  possessions  "ii  the  south.  The  results
of  this  service,  which  embraced  a  |ktj<m1  of  nearly
ti\.  \i -ar-.  appear  in  his  •■  Journal  "  (Philadelphia,
Dpon  its  completion  he  was  ap|*»inted  by


328


ELLIOT


ELLIOTT


Gov.  McKean,  of  Pennsylvania,  secretary  of  tin-
state  land-oflice.  but  resigned  in  1H0S,  and  in  1H12
became  profe-sor  of  mathematics  at  West  Point,
when-  lie  remained  till  his  death.  Hi  went  to
Montreal  in  1817.  I>y  order  of  the  government,  to
make  astronomical  observations  for  carrying  into
effect  some  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent.
He  was  an  active  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  contributed  to  its  transactions,
and  corresponded  with  many  of  the  learned  socie-
ties of  Europe.  With  the  exception  of  his  "  Jour-
nal" and  a  few  other  writings,  his  works  are  still
in  manuscript. — His  brother,  Joseph,  engineer,  b.
in  Bucks  county,  Pa..  1  Nov.,  1760;  d.  in  Batavia,
N.  Y.,  19  Aug..  1826,  received  a  common-school
education,  and  subsequently  studied  surveying  and
engineering.  He  was  engaged  as  an  assistant  to
his  brother  Andrew  in  the  survey  and  plotting
of  the  citv  of  Washington,  and  in  running  the
boundary-line  between  New  York  and  Pennsylva-
nia. In  1797  Mr.  Ellicott  was  employed  by  the
Holland  land  company  to  survev  the  tract  in  west-
ern New  York  known  as  the  "  Holland  purchase,"
and,  on  the  completion  of  the  survey  in  1800,  was
appointed  local  agent  of  the  company,  with  head-
quarters at  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  which  he  had  located,
and  toward  whose  early  development  he  contrib-
uted largely.  Mr.  Ellicott  was  among  the  first  to
recognize  the  possibility  of  building  a  great  city  at
the  foot  of  Lake  Erie  on  the  lands  owned  by  the
company  that  he  represented.  His  influence  was
largely  used  not  only  in  promoting  settlements  in
the  vicinity  of  the  present  city  of  Buffalo,  but  in
assisting  in  its  growth  and  development.  Mr.  Elli-
cott has  justly  been  called  the  "  founder  of  Buf-
falo." He  surveyed  and  laid  out  the  city  on  its
original  plan.  He  was  a  zealous  advocate  of  the
projected  Erie  canal,  and  corresponded  with  Gov.
be  Witt  Clinton  concerning  the  project.  He  op-
posed Clinton's  plan  of  sending  to  England  for
engineers,  insisting  that  there  was  abundant  home
talent  for  the  work,  and  succeeded  in  convincing
the  governor  that  he  was  right.  He  served  for
some  time  as  canal  commissioner,  but  held  no
other  public  office.  After  serving  the  Holland  land
company  twenty  vears,  during  which  time  most  of
the  vast  tract  of  land  owned  by  it  in  western  New
York  was  disposed  of  to  actual  settlers,  Mr.  Elli-
cott retired  from  active  pursuits.

ELLIOT,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1786:  d.  in  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1806,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1810,  and  began  to  practise  in  South
Carolina.  He  was  the  author  of  numerous  literary,
historical,  and  political  productions.  Among  his
works  is  a  "  Refutation  of  the  Calumnies  circulated
against  the  Southern  and  Western  States  respect-
ing the  Institution  and  Existence  of  Slavery"
(1822).  He  also  prepared  and  published  "The
Militia  System  of  South  Carolina"  which  was
adopted  as  the  military  code  for  the  state.

ELLIOT,  Charles,  governor  of  Bermuda,  b.  in
England  in  1801;  d.  9  Sept.,  1875.  He  entered
the  British  navy  in  1816,  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Algiers,  and  subsequently  served  in  India,  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  ana  in  the  West  Indies,  rising  to
the  rank  of  admiral.  In  1835  he  was  appointed
chief  superintendent  of  trade  and  British  minister
to  China.  From  1842  till  1845  he  was  chargd
d'alTaires  in  Texas.  He  was  governor  of  Bermuda
in  1847-52,  of  Trinidad  from  1853  till  1856,  and  of
St.  Helena  from  1863  till  1869,  when  he  retired
from  the  service. He  was  made  a  K.  C.  B.  in  1806.

ELLIOT,  George  Henry,  military  engineer.  1..
in  Lowell,  Mass.,  31  March,  1831. He  was  gradu-


ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855  as  a
lieutenant  of  artillery,  served  on  the  Texas  frontier,
and  entered  the  engineer  corps  in  ls">?.  11,  was
engaged  in  constructing  the  works  on  Alcatraz
island,  San  Francisco  harbor,  and  other  fortifica-
tions on  the  Pacific  coast  till  1870,  was  promoted
major  on  3  March,  1867,  chief  engineer  of  the
Washington  aqueduct  in  1870-'l.  engineer  mob*
tary  of  the  Light-house  board,  and  in  1873  went  to
Europe  to  examine  light-house  systems  there.  He
became  assistant  to  the  chief  of  engineers  at  Wash-
ington in  1884,  and  was  advanced  to  the  grade  of
lieutenant-colonel  on  8  Aug.,  1882.  He  superin-
tended the  improvement  of  Connecticut  river  in
1882-'3.  and  in  1883-'7  harbor  improvements  at
Nantucket,  Newport,  Providence,  New  Bedford,
and  other  places  on  the  coast  of  New  England.  He
published  "  Light-House  Systems  in  Europe  "  (1874),
and  "  The  Presidio  of  San  Francisco  "  (1874).

ELLIOT,  George  Thomson,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  May,  1827;  d.  there,  29  Jan..
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1845,  and
at  the  New  York  university  medical  school  in  1845.
He  subsequently  studied  in  Paris,  London,  and
Dublin,  where  he  attained  great  clinical  skill  un-
der Dr.  Shekelton.  In  1857  he  was  chosen  visit-
ing physician  of  the  Lying-in  hospital  in  New  York,
and  in  1861  was  elected  to  fill  the  chair  of  obstet-
rics and  diseases  of  women  and  children  and  of
clinical  midwifery  in  the  Bellevue  hospital  college.
His  principal  medical  work  is  "  Elliot's  Obstetric
Clinic"  (New  York,  1867).

ELLIOT,  William  Horace,  genealogist,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1824 ;  d.  in  St.  Croix,  West
Indies,  8  Dec.,  1852.  His  father,  of  the  same
name,  was  a  merchant  in  New  Haven.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1844,  and  at  the  law-
school  in  1847,  and  compiled  a  "Genealogy  of  the
Eliot  Family,"  which  was  revised  and  enlarged  by
W.  S.  Porter  (New  Haven,  1854).

ELLIOTT,  Andrew,  collector  of  customs.  He
was  the  third  son  of  Sir  Gilbert  Elliott,  bart.,  lord
justice  clerk  of  Scotland.  While  very  young  he
was  sent  to  Philadelphia,  served  as  an  apprentice
in  a  counting-house  there,  and  afterward  entered
into  mercantile  life.  After  his  marriage  with  his
second  wife,  who  possessed  a  large  fortune  in  Phila-
delphia, he  returned  to  Great  Britain  and  obtained,
through  the  influence  of  his  brother,  a  place  of
honor  and  profit  in  the  household  of  the  princess
dowager  of  Wales.  He  succeeded  Archibald  Ken-
nedy as  receiver-general  and  collector  of  New  York
in  January,  1764,  and  held  these  offices  till  the
close  of  the  Revolution.  In  1774  he  seized  a  quan-
tity of  fire-arms,  and  the  people  threatened  to  tar
and  feather  him.  In  1782  he  was  not  only  at  the
head  of  the  customs,  but  was  lieutenant-governor,
receiver-general  of  quit-rents,  superintendent-gen-
eral of  police,  and  chief  of  the  superintendent  de-
partment, established  by  Sir  William  Howe  in  1777.
When  Sir  Henry  Clinton  made  his  last  effort  to
save  Maj.  Andre  from  the  gallows,  in  1780,  Mr.
Elliott  was  one  of  the  three  persons  who  were  sent
to  confer  with  Gen.  Washington,  and  get  his  con-
sent to  a  pardon  or  exchange.  He  remained  in
New  York  till  its  evacuation  by  the  British  forces
in  November,  1783,  when  he  sailed  in  the  "  None-
such" with  his  family  for  England.

ELLIOTT,  Anna,  patriot  of  the  Revolution.
She  was  a  daughter  of  Thomas  Ferguson,  a  patriot
who  was  exiled  after  the  British  capture  of  Charles-
ton. Her  husband  was  Charles  Elliott,  of  that
Elace.  American  prisoners  that  were  brought  into
harleston  were  aided  and  relieved  by  her  assidu-
ous ministrations.


ELLIOTT


BLLI


BSQ


I  I  I  h>  I  I i  barlea,  olergyman,  t>.  in  <ir.

Count)  Donegal,  Ireland,  10  May.  17W:  d.  in
', Iowa,  <;  .Inn.. 18M. Ba  united
with  the  W  hurrh  nml  applied  f<>r  admis-

tn  tin-  University  i>f  Dublin, but  wm  refused
bccau-e  he  could  nol  take  the  t>rcscril>ed  te-t  uHth.
By  tin-  aid  of  boom  eminent  scholars,  he  succeeded
in  following  h  oourae  of  study  equivalent  t<»  that

•  >f the  university. 1 1 «- emigrated to the I'nitcd
-  ulN.iit  I81s\  and  whs  received  into  the  trav-
elling connection  «>f  the  Ohio  conference  in  1818,
In 1822  he  was  appoints!  su|>erintendent  <>f  the
mission  among  the  Wyandotte Indians  ut Djppex
Sandusky,  Ohio. He  wm  presiding  alder  of  the
Ohio  district  for  four  years,  and  professor  <>f  lan-
igea  iii  Madison  college,  I'niontown,  Pa.,  f<>r  four
In  ls:tl  he  was  stationed  in  l*i 1 1 -l»ur^r.  and
was  suliseouently  presiding  elder  of  that  district,
editor  of  tin-  *•  Pittsburg  Conference  .lonrnal,"  and

afterward  of  tin-  "Western  Christian  Advocate."
which  he  conducted  until  1K4M,  and  again  from
-'  till  1856.  He  then  became  professor  of  bibli-
cal literature  in  Iowa  Wcsleyan  university  ami  its
president,  but  resigned  in  l*i'><>.  lie  was  after-
ward appointed  editor  ol  the  "Central  christian

Advocate"  at  St.  Louis.  Mo.,  and  during  the  civil
war  strongly  Mpporttd  the  Union  cause.  After
the  eloae  of  the  war  he  was  again  connected  with
Iowa  Wcsleyan  university  until  1866.  His  chief
works  are  a  "Treatise  on  Babtism  "  (lSil-l);  "De-
lineation of  Koinan  Catholicism"  (2  vols.,  New
York.  1851);  "Life  of  Bishop  Roberts"  (1KW):
••  History  OX  the  Qraal  Secession  from  the  Method-
i-t  Kpix-o].al  Church"  (1855);  "Political  Hoinan-
i  in"  (1888);  "Reminiscences  of  the  Wyandotte
Mission":  "Southwestern  Methodism";  and  two
works  against  siaverv.

ELLIOTT.  Charles  Lorlng,  artist,  b.  in  Soipio,
N.  V..  in  Daoambar,  18i2;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  25

Sept,  1*68.  In
early  life  he  was
a  clerk  in  a  store
in  Syracuse,  but
devoted  his  leis-
ure to  drawing
and  painting.  Em
came  to  New  York
about  1834,  and
became  a  pupil  ol
Trumbull  and  af-
terward of  Quidor.
At  first  his  por-
traits were  un-
Boooaaafal,  but  he
executed  some
oil  -  |>aintings  il-
lustrating scenes
from  Irvine's  and
Paulding's  works,
which  attracted
attention.  After  painting  portraits  for  several
years  in  the  western  pari  ol  the  state,  he  returned
10  New  York  city,  where  be  opened  a  studio.  He
was  elected  associate  of  the  National  acadeinv  in
1845,  and  academician  in  1848.  He  is  said  to
have  painted  more  than  700  portraits  of  eminent
nen, among  them  likeneaaee  of  Eit»-Oreana  Hal-
leck.  in  the  office  of  the  publiabera  of  this  work:
James  EL  Freeman,  belonging  to  the  National
academy;  Matthew  Ya— ar.  in  Yassar  college :
Louis  (iavlonl  Clark:  W.  W.  Corcoran;  Fletcher
Harper:  renimorel  e  engraving  in  ToLi.);

uiour  and Hunt,  in  the New  York  city
hull:  and  Braetna  Corning;  in  the  state  library,

Albany. N  reral  of  his  works  were  at  the  National


academy  m  1H6X.  including'  "  Doaj  Ouixotc,"  ••  Fal-

<  orlear.  the  'I  rum|
own  portrait,  and  "The  Head  of  Skiincatelea  Ijike,"
-aid  to  be  the  oiilv  landscn|M-  that  he  najajfted,

I  I  I.IOTT.  Chariot  \>  rllys,  author,  b.  in  OvO*

ford.  Conn..  27  May.  1*17;  d.  M  Aug.,  IHKJ.  ||..
was  a  lineal  descendant  in  the  fifth  generation  of
Kliot, the  -Indian Apostle.** Af:  .ears

s|ient  in  mercantile  life  in  the  city  of  New  York,
he  studied  horticulture  and  landscape  gardening
with  A.  .1.  Downing,  al  Newburg,  in  ikvk-'u  „nd
from  1K40  till  1h4*  practised  those  pursuit* at  <  in-
cinnati.  He  then  returned  to  New  York  ami  en-
gaged with  his  brother  Henry  in  t In*  iron  business,
devoting  his  attention  also  to  literary  and  philan-
thropic labors.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  and
trustees  of  the  Children's  aid  society  in  1858.  In
1887  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners
for  laying  out  Central  |wtrk  in  the  city  of  I
York.  He  resided  for  some  time  in  Camhriilge,
Mass.,  and  Ikihiiic  manager  of  the  HooaohoU  art
company  of  Boston,  and  afterward  in  hts  native
place,  lie  has  publi-hed  "Oottam  and  Cottage
Life"  (New  York.  1N4H);  "Mysteries,  or  (dimpaes
of  the  Supernatural *  (1852);  "St.  Domingo,  it*

Revolution  and  it-  Hero,  Toiissuint  l'Ouvertutc"
(1855);  "The  New  England  History,  from  the  I»i-
coverv  of  the  Continent l>v  the Northmen.  A.  I).

986  to 177(J "  (1887); "Remarkable  Cham

and  Places  in  the  Holy  Land"  (Hartford.  1-
"  Wind  and  Whirlwind."  a  novel.  l»v  "Mr.  Thom
Whyte  "  (New  York.  1888);  "The  Book  of  Ameri-
can Interiors,  prepared  from  existing  I  louses,"
with  nellotype  illustrations  (Boston.  lN7m;  and
"  Pottery  and  Porcelain,  from  Early  Times  to  the
Philadelphia  Exhibition,''  giving  the  marks  ami
monograms  (New  York.  1*77).  He  was  also  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  periodicals,  and  was  the  au-
thor of  several  novels  published  anonvinouslv.

ELLIOTT,  David,  educator,  b.  In  Sherman's
Valley,  Perry  ax,  Pa..  6  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Allegheny
City.  Pa.,  is*  March.  1874.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish
parentage.  He  entered  Dickinson  college  in  the
junior  class,  and  was  graduated  In  l*"*.  studied
theology  for  three  years,  was  a  home  missionary  for
one  year,  and  was  then  Battled  as  pastor  of  the
Preebyterian  church  at  what  is  now  Mcrcersl.urg.
Pa.,  where  he  remained  for  eighteen  years.  Then
he  was  called  to  Washington,  Pa.,  as  jtastor,  and
was  also  for  nearly  two  years  acting  president  of
Washington  college  and  profeeaorof  moral  philoso-
phy. He  did  more  than  any  one  else  to  revive  the
college  when  threatened  with  extinction,  but  de-
clined the  presidencv  of  the  institution,  consenting.
bowerer,  to  ad  in  thai  capacity  in  connection  with
hi-  pa-;  iral  duties  until  in  lKt'jn  pwrmanenl  praai-
dent  ww  secured.  In  1888  be  waa  called  t<»  the
professorship  of  ecclesiastical  history  and  church
government  in  the  Western  theological  seminary,
at  Allegheny.  Pa. He  decline<l.  but  the  following

roar,  al  the  solicitation  of  the  directors,  he  accepted

the  chair  of  polemic  and  historic  theology.  He
held  this  for  nearly  thirty-fire  year-,  and  retired  in
|s7(i.i-  professor  emeritus. In  is:!?  he  WSJ  mod-

arator  of  the  Preabytariaa  jmsbbJ  Bssaaably,  which

divided  that  year:  but  he  lived  to  see  the  reunion
of  1870-'L  and  took  |>art  in  its  exercises.

ELLIOTT.  K/ekiel  Brown,  statistician,  b.  in
Sweden.  Monroe  c<>..  N.  Y..  HI  July,  1818;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C-  84  ataj 1888 B  |radu-

atad  at  Hamilton  in  1S44,  and  was  connected  with
the  development  of  telegraphy.  He  Ucaine  actu-
arv  <d  a  life-insurance  company  in  Bo-ton.  and  in
lsci  was  called  to  till  a  similar  ofieja  to  DM  U,  S.
sanitary  coinini— ion. He  became  secretary  of  the


330


ELLIOTT


ELLIOTT


commission  for  revising  the  U.  S.  revenue  laws  in.
1865,  and  in  1871  entered  the  civil-service  reform
commission.  At  his  death  he  held  the  office  of
government  actuary  in  the  U.  S.  treasury  depart-
ment. In  1863  he  was  a  member  of  the  Inter-
national statistical  congress,  held  in  Berlin,  and  in
1888  was  vice-president  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science,  presiding  over
the  section  of  economic  science  and  statistics.  Mr.
Elliott  was  also  a  member  of  numerous  scientific
societies  at  home  and  abroad.  He  published  vari-
ous papers  on  mathematical  physics,  but  achieved
his  greatest  reputation  in  connection  with  the  many
valuable  statistical  reports  on  coinage,  weights  and
measures,  and  similar  topics,  that  he  prepared  for
the  government.  Several  of  these  appeared  in  the
volumes  of  the  U.  S.  census,  especially  in  that  on
"  Vital  Statistics."

ELLIOTT,  Franklin  Reuben,  horticulturist,
b.  in  Guilford,  Conn.,  27  April,  1817 ;  d.  in  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  10  Jan.,  1878.  He  settled  in  Cleveland
in  1844.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Western
Fruit  Book,  or  American  Fruit-Grower's  Guide"
(New  York,  1*54;  enlarged  ed.,  1867);  "Popular
Deciduous  and  Evergreen  Trees"  (1868);  "Hand-
book for  Fruit-Growers"  (Rochester,  N.  Y.,  1876) ;
and  "  Handbook  of  Practical  Landscape  Garden-
ing "  (1877).  He  also  contributed  frequent  articles
on  fruit-culture  to  periodicals. — His  son,  Henry
Wood,  author,  b.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio.  13  Nov.,  1841,
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  his  native
city,  and  has  been  employed  for  many  years  by  the
Smithsonian  institution,  Washington,  as  an  artist.
He  edited  the  Cleveland  "  Daily  Herald  "  in  1879,
and  then  went  to  Alaska  as  a  special  agent  of  the
treasury  department.  He  has  published,  besides
magazine  articles, "  Monograph  of  the  Seal  Islands  "
(Washington,  1881);  and  "Our  Arctic  Province,
Alaska,  and  the  Seal  Islands"  (New  York,  1886).

ELLIOTT,  Gilbert  Molleson,  soldier,  b.  in
Thompson,  Windham  co.,  Conn.,  7  Oct.,  1840 ;  d.  on
Lookout  Mountain,  Tenn.,  24  Nov.,  1863.  He  re-
moved to  New  York  in  early  childhood  and  studied
at  the  Free  academy  (now  the  College  of  the  city  of
New  York),  received  the  gold  medal  for  excellence
as  the  leader  of  his  class  at  four  successive  com-
mencements, and  delivered  the  valedictory  ora-
tion at  his  graduation  in  1861.  He  also  took  the
Burr  gold  medal  for  mathematics,  the  Cromwell
gold  medal  for  history  and  belles-lettres,  and  the
Ward  bronze  medals  for  excellence  in  logic,  phi-
losophy, law,  Greek,  Latin,  and  Spanish,  oratory,
composition,  and  engineering.  In  April,  1861,
when  Fort  Sumter  was  fired  upon,  he  unfurled
the  stars  and  stripes  from  the  college  building,
and  in  his  address  declared  he  would  defend  his
country's  honor  with  his  life's  blood.  Full  of  loy-
alty and  patriotism,  he  gave  up  his  purpose  of
studying  law  and  entered  the  United  States  ser-
vice in  October,  1861,  as  1st  lieutenant  in  the  102d
New  York  volunteers.  He  took  part  in  Banks's
campaign  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  distinguished
himself  at  Antietam,  was  soon  afterward  promoted
to  captain,  and  a  little  later  was  attached  to  the
staff  of  Gen.  John  W.  Geary.  He  acted  as  ord-
nance officer  in  the  2d  division  of  the  12th  army
corps,  and  rendered  effective  service  during  the
battles  of  Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  When
his  commission  as  major  was  received,  he  returned
to  his  regiment  and  shared  its  fortunes.  The  12th
corps  was  transferred  to  Chattanooga  in  1863.
His  regiment  was  directed  to  lead  the  assault  at
Lookout  Mountain,  and  he  was  placed  in  actual
command  of  it.  While  leading  the  skirmishers,  he
was  mortally  wounded  by  a  sharp-shooter. The


f:overnment  gave  him  the  posthumous  brevets  of
ieiitemuit -colonel  and  colonel.

ELLIOTT,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Guilford,  Yt..
9  Aug.,  1770;  d.  in  Ncwfane.  Vt..  10  Nov.,  18
He  received  a  public-school  education,  served  un-
der Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  in  the  Indian  cam-
paigns of  1793-'6  as  a  non-commissioned  officer,
and  afterward  studied  law,  and  was  a  contributor
of  prose  and  verse  to  several  newspapers  in  Ver-
mont and  Philadelphia.  He  resided  for  a  short
time  in  the  latter  place,  and  edited  the  "  Freeman's
Journal."  Returning  to  Brattleboro',  Vt.,  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  began  practice,  and  held  vari-
ous local  and  state  offices.  In  1802  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  served  from  1803
till  1809.  He  published  a  volume  of  poetry  and
prose  (Greenfield,  Mass.,  1796).

ELLIOTT,  Jesse  Duncan,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Maryland,  14  July,  1782 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
18  Dec.,  1845.  He  was  educated  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,
and  studied  law,  but  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman in  April,  1804,  and  was  promoted  to  a
lieutenancy.  23  April,  1810.  In  1812  he  was  at-
tached to  Chauncey's  command  at  Sackett's  har-
bor, and  in  the  war  with  Great  Britain  was  sent  by
him  to  the  upper  lakes  to  purchase  vessels  and
make  other  naval  preparation.  While  on  this  ser-
vice, on  8  Oct.,  1812,  he  captured  two  armed  Brit-
ish brigs,  the  "  Detroit "  and  "  Caledonia,"  anchored
under  the  guns  of  Fort  Erie.  The  "  Caledonia,"
with  a  cargo  valued  at  $200,000,  was  brought  over
safely  to  the  American  side  with  but  slight  loss  of
life,  while  the  "  Detroit "  was  afterward  burned  by
her  captors  after  the  removal  of  most  of  her  stores.
For  this  exploit,  the  first  naval  success  on  the  lakes,
Elliott  was  voted  a  sword  by  congress.  He  next
commanded  the  "  Madison  "  with  distinction  in  the
capture  of  York,  19  April,  1813,  was  promoted  in  July
to  the  rank  of  master,  and  commanded  the  "  Niag-
ara "  in  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  being  also  second  in
command  of  the  fleet  in  that  engagement.  Elli-
ott's conduct  in  this  action  Was  eulogized  in  Per-
ry's official  report,  and  he  received  a  gold  medal
from  congress.  A  court-martial,  appointed  at  Elli-
ott's request  in  consequence  of  insinuations  to  his
disparagement,  pronounced  him  "  a  brave  and  skil-
ful officer."  He  succeeded  Perrv  in  command  on
Lake  Erie  in  October,  1813,  and  in  1815  command-
ed the  "  Ontario  "  sloop-of-war,  in  Decat  ur's  squad-
ron, employed  against  Algiers.  He  was  promoted  to
captain  in  1818,  and  till  1824  was  engaged  in  select-
ing sites  for  dock-yards,  light-houses,  and  fortifioa-
tions  on  the  coast  of  North  Carolina.  In  1829-33
he  commanded  the  West  India  squadron  and
the  Charleston  navy-yard.  He  then  commanded
for  several  years  the  "  Constitution,"  of  the  Medi-
terranean squadron,  but  his  conduct  did  not  meet
the  approval  of  his  superiors,  and  resulted  in  his
trial  by  court-martial  in  June,  1840,  and  his  sus-
pension from  duty  for  four  years.  In  October,
1843,  the  remaining  period  of  his  suspension
was  remitted  by  the  president,  and  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  command  of  the  Philadelphia  navy-
yard.  He  was  a  man  of  kind  feelings,  but  a  rigid
disciplinarian.  A  biographical  notice  of  him  was
published  by  "A  Citizen  of  New  York "  (Philadel-
phia, 1835). — His  son,  Washington  Lafayette,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Carlisle,  Cumberland  co..  Pa.,  31  March.
1821 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal..  29  June,  1888,  ac-
companied his  father  in  cruises  in  the  West  Indies
in  1831-'2,  and  in  the  Mediterranean.  He  studied
at  Dickinson  college,  and  in  1841  entered  the  U.  S.
military  academy.  In  May,  1846,  he  was  commis-
sioned as  2d  lieutenant  of  mounted  rifiea,  lb-
served  with  his  regiment  in  Mexico  till  the  sur-


ELLIOTT


F.LLloTT


B81


ren-l  WM  promoted 111  lieutenant

'IiiU.  1^17.  ami  uftiT  the  war  was  stationed
at  F.»rt  bnak  ami  in  Texas  ami  N- ■«  MeXsBO,
rning  ■  captain  in  July.  1864  In  September,
-  he  distinguished  himself  in  conflicts  with
the  Nevajoaa  in  Neu  sfexloo.  In  the  beginning  of
ivil  war  ho  took  jwirt  in  the  actions  at  Spring-
field and  Wilson*!  Creek.  M<>..  was  appointed  ooS>
ml  i.f  iln-  ftd  Iowa  cavalry  in  September,  1861,  ami
on  5  Nov.,  1861,  wan  promoted  major  in  t In*  regu-
lar  army.  1 1 «-  afterward  commanded  a  brigade  of
cavalry  in  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  was  engaged
at  the  rapture  of  Sladrid.  brevet  ted  for  gallantry
at  the  capture  of  Island  HO.  10,  ami  again  for  scr-
Yioes  at  the  siege  of  Corinth,  ami  in  a  raid  on  the
Mississippi  and  Ohio  railroad  in  May.  1861.  Ha
was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  "volunteers  in
dune,  isti'j.  became  chief  of  cavalry  in  the  Army  of
Virginia  in  August.  1869,  and  WM  wounded  at  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  commanded  the
Department  of  the  Northwest  in  the  beginning  of
1863,  was  placed  in  command  of  a  division  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  summer  of  that  year,
then  in  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  and  was  en-
gaged in  re-enforcing  Gen.  Burnside,  and  com-
manded in  the  action  of  Mossy  Creek.  Term.  He
was  subsec|uentlv  chief  .if  cavalry  in  the  Army  of
the  Cumberland,  and  took  part  in  the  Atlanta
campaign  and  in  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  Hood.  In
1865  he  commanded  a  division  of  the  4th  corps,
and  was  in  the  battles  around  Nashville.  For  ser-
vices at  Na>hville  he  received  the  brevets  of  major-
general  of  volunteers  and  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army.  He  was  also  bre vetted  major-gen-
eral, U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vices during  the  war.  He  became  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  August.  1866.  colonel  in  April,  1878,  and  on
20  March.  1879,  was  retired  at  his  own  request.

ELLIOTT,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Clinton.
Conn.,  24  Aug.,  1768';  d.  in  Madison,  Conn.,  17
Dec,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1786,  and
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  there  in  1822.  He  was
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Madison,
Conn.,  from  1791  till  his  death,  and  from  1812  till
his  death  was  a  fellow  of  Yale.  Eleven  of  his  dis-
courses, one  of  them  an  "election  sermon,"  were
printed,  and  he  was  also,  with  Samuel  Johnson,  Jr.,
of  Guilford,  Conn.,  author  of  the  first  American
dictionary  of  the  English  language,  a  huh  is  now
a  great  rarity  (Suffield.  Conn..  1K00).  Mr.  Johnson
had  published  a  small  "School  Dictionary"  the
previous  vear.

ELLIOTT.  Jonathan,  publicist,  b.  near  Car-
lisle. England,  in  1784:  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
U  March,  1846.  He  emigrated  to  New  York  about
1802  and  became  a  printer,  but  in  1H10  volun-
teered to  assist  in  the  establishment  of  the  inde-
pendence of  New  Granada,  and  was  in  several  en-
gagements under  Bolivar,  in  one  of  which  he  was
severely  wounded.  He  was  taken  prisoner  at  the
surrender  of  (Jen.  Miranda  in  1H12.  and  suffered
many  hardships,  bat  returned  to  the  Tinted  States
in  1H1;{  and  served  in  the  U.  S.  armv  in  the  war  of
1819-*8,  In  1H14  he  made  his  home  in  Washington,
and  edited  with  ability,  during  thirteen  years,  the

••  Washington  Gazette."  He  published  ••  American
Diplomatic  Code"  (Washington,  ]X'27 :  new  ed..
Is.,  1X14):  "Delmte  on  the  Adoption  <>f  the
Constitution  *»  (IgfJ  *80  :  *  Funding  System  of  the
United  States";  "Statistic* of  the  United  Stat*
"The  Comparative  Tariffs";  and  "Sketches  of  the
riot  of  Columbia "  (1880).  He  also  edited  the
"  Madison  Papers  "(16

ELLIOTT,  Robert  Brown,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boa-
Ion,  Mass.,  U At-..  1848;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La..


961  II.  was  of  African  descent.  After  study-
ing in  private  schools,  he  entered  High  Bolbofl
academy.  London.  England,  in  1861.  and  tubae-
qneutly  studied  at  Kton  college,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1869.  He  then  Studied  law  ami  prac-
tised, afterward  settling  in  South  Carolina.  He
was  a  uicmlM-r  of  the  Slate  constitutional  conven-
tion in  lHtW.  and  from  .Inly  of  that  year  till  <  I
bar,  1870,  was  a  member  "of  the  legislature,  hi
lHoD  he  was  made  assistunt  adjutant-general,  which
office  he  held  till  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
republican,  serving  from  1N?1  to  1*74.  whan  be
resigned,  having  been  elected  sheriff  of  his  county.
In  1*7.*,  he  was  again  elected  to  the  legislature,  and
was  speaker  of  the  lower  honsa.  Be  removed  to
New  Orleans  in  1N77,  became  special  agent  for  the
treasury  department,  and  then  resumed  law  prac-
tice, lie  delivered  various  lectures  and  addresses.

KLLIOTT,  Samuel  Mackenzie,  oculist,  I.,  in
Inverness,  Scotland,  0  April.  1W1;  d.  in  New
Brighton.  Staten  Island.  N.  Y..  1  May,  is?:,.  He
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  surgeons  in  Glas-
gow in  1828,  pursued  original  investigations  into
the  anatomy  of  the  eye  and  the  effects  of  climate
on  that  organ,  and  in  V*'.M  emigrated  to  the  United
States,  and  continued  his  medical  studies  in  Cin-
cinnati and  Philadelphia.  In  183.1  he  opened  an
office  in  New  York  citv  and  devoted  himself  to  the
cure  of  eye  diseases.  He  gained  a  high  reputation
in  this  specialty,  but  the  medical  profession  con-
sidered htm  an  irregular  practitioner,  and  accused
him  either  of  charlatanism  or  of  unprofessional
conduct  in  keeping  his  medical  discoveries  a  secret.
He  accordingly  obtained  a  diploma,  after  an  ex-
amination in  the  New  York  medical  college,  and  in
a  course  of  lectures  explained  his  methods  of  prac-
tice. Ha  exhibited  eccentricities,  but  his  scientific
attainments  and  professional  skill  obtained  recog-
nition, and  his  amiable  characteristics  and  generous
charities  gained  him  many  friends.  At  the  l>egin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  79th  regiment  of  New  York  volunteers.  During
the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run  his  horse  was  shot  and
fell  upon  him,  so  injuring  his  spine  as  to  incapaci-
tate him  for  further  active  service.  He  afterward
raised  the  Highland  brigade,  ami  at  the  close  of
the  war  was  mustered  out  as  brigadier-general.  He
continued  to  practise  his  profession  until  1*74.
when  he  retired  to  his  residence  on  Staten  Island.

ELLIOTT,  Stephen,  naturalist,  b.  in  Iieauf.-rt.
S.  C,  11  Nov..  1771:  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  c
March,  1830.  His  father  settled  in  Beaufort,  where
he  purchased  land,  and  married  a  granddaughter
of  John  BarnwalL  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1791,  devoted  himself  to  the  cultivation  of  his  es-
tate and  to  literary  and  scientific,  studies,  ami  in
17!»:l  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  Booth  Caro-
lina, of  which  he  continued  to  !*>  a  meml>er  until
the  establishment  of  the  Bank  of  the  state  in  I8UL

of  which  he  was  chosen  president. He  retained

tbJeofflOB  till  his  death.  His  leisure  was  devoted
to  literature  and  science,  and  he  cultivated  the
study  of  botany  with  enthusiastn. In  \*vt  he  was

instrumental  in  founding  the  Literary  and  philo-
sophical SOtSOty  of  Suith  Carolina,  of  which  he
was  president.  He  lectured  gratuitously  on  his
favorite  science,  and  was  f..r  SPBQS  time  editor  of
the  "Southern  lb-view."  In  lS'J.'i  he  aided  in  estab-
lishing the  Medical  college  of  the  state,  and  was
elected  professor  of  natural  history  and  botany.
He  was  the  author  Of  "The  Botany  of  S..uth  Caro-
lina and  OaOCgia"  (Charleston,  I861V4*  in  the
preparation  of  which  he  was  assisted  by  I»r.  .lames
Slchride.  and  left  seven]  works  in  manuscript.
His  collection  in  natural historv  was  OM  Of  the


332


KU.IOTT


ELLIS


mod  extensive  in  the  count  rv. — His  son,  Stephen,
P.  K.  bishop,  l».  in  Beaufort.' S.  C.  31  Au^..  1806;
(1.  in  Savannali,  (in..  81  Dec.  1866,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1884)  studied  law,  and  practised
in  Charleston  and  Beaufort  from  1827  till  1833.
He  became  a  candidate  for  holy  orders  in  the
Episcopal  church,  and  was  ordained  a  deacon  in

1835,  and  became  professor  of  sacred  literature  in
South  Carolina  college. He  took  priest's  orders  in

1836.  In  1840  he  was  chosen  first  bishop  of  the
diocese  of  Georgia,  and  after  his  consecration,  28
Feb.,  1841,  became  rector  of  St.  John's  church,
Savannah.  In  1844  he  was  made  provisional  bish-
op of  Florida.  From  1845  till  1853  he  lived  in
Montpelier,  Ga.,  where  he  founded  a  seminary  for
young  ladies,  and  expended  his  fortune  in  the  ef-
fort to  improve  female  education.  He  afterward
officiated  as  rector  of  Christ  church,  Savannah,
until  his  death. — Another  son,  James  Habersham,
clergyman,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  in  1819;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  18  June,  1876,  was  graduated  at
South  Carolina  college,  and  for  a  few  years  prac-
tised law  in  Charleston :  but,  after  studying  for
the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry,  he  was  ordained
at  Beaufort,  and  held  pastorates  in  Grahamville.
S.  C,  Charleston,  Greensboro,  Ga.,  and  Brookline,
Mass.  While  in  the  last-named  place  he  had
charge  for  four  years  of  the  "  Christian  Witness,"
published  in  Boston.  In  1871  he  was  called  to
the  pastorate  of  St.  Paul's  church  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  In  1871
he  received  a  large  vote  for  bishop  of  the  diocese.
Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1871. —
Stephen,  son  of  the  second  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in
Beaufort,  S.  C,  in  1832;  d.  in  Aiken,  S.  C,  21
March,  1866.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  he
raised  and  equipped  a  battery  of  light  artillery,
known  as  the  Beaufort  artillery.  At  Pinckney
island,  in  August,  1862,  he  commanded  three  bat-
teries, and  was  promoted  for  his  gallantry.  Short-
ly afterward  he  was  placed  in  command  of  Fort
Sumter,  where  he  continued  during  the  long  bom-
bardment to  which  it  was  subjected  by  Gen.  Gill-
more.  In  July,  1864,  he  was  wounded  by  the  ex-
plosion of  the  mine  at  Petersburg,  and  was  dis-
abled for  the  rest  of  the  war.  lie  attained  the
grade  of  brigadier-general.  In  1865  he  took  the
oath  to  support  the  constitution  of  the  state  and
of  the  United  States,  and  later  was  a  candidate  for
congress,  being  opposed  by  ex-Gov.  Aiken. — An-
other son  of  the  second  Stephen,  Robert  Wood-
ward Barnwell,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,
16  Aug.,  1840 ;  d.  in  Sewanee.  Tenn.,  26  Aug.,  1887,
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in
1861,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major  in  the  Con-
federate army.  He  took  deacon's  orders  at  Rome,
Ga.,  in  1868,  and  studied  in  the  General  theologi-
cal seminary,  New  York  city,  officiating  while
there  as  an  assistant  minister.  He  was  ordained  a
priest  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1871,  and  in  November
of  that  year  became  pastor  of  St.  Philip's  church
in  that  city,  which  rapidly  increased  in  numbers
under  his  ministry.  On  15  Nov.,  1874,  he  was
consecrated  missionary  bishop  of  western  Texas,
and  took  up  his  residence  in  San  Antonio. — Will-
iam, brother  of  the  first  Stephen,  patriot  of  the
Be/rotation,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  in  17(U  ;  d.  there
in  1808.  He  served  in  the  patriot  army  while  still
a  youth,  and  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  surprise  of
John's  island,  and  confined  in  the  prison-ship.
After  the  war  he  applied  himself  with  su<
repairing  the  damage  done  to  his  estates,  was  a
promoter  of  various  charitable  and  educational
enterprises  and  public  improvements,  and  served
with  distinction  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature.


— William's  son,  William,  author,  b.  in  Beaufort,
s.t  ■..■,'?  April.  lTss;  d.  th.iv  in  February,  l^i:;.
entered  Harvard  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  took
a  high  rank  of  scholarship  in  his  class;  his  health
tailing  him,  he  was  obliged  to  return  home  befoN
completing  his  studies,  but  his  degree  was  conferred
upon  him  in  1810.  During  the  nullification  crisis
in  South  Carolina  in  1832  he  was  a  senator  in  the
state  legislature,  but  resigned  upon  being  instructed
by  his  constituents  to  vote  to  nullify  the  tariff  law,
not  believing  in  the  right  of  nullification,  though
unalterably  opposed  to  protection.  He  afterward
devoted  himself  to  agriculture  and  rural  sports,
and  occasionally  published  essays  on  rural  econo-
my, controversial  articles  on  political  science  and
economics,  sporting  sketches  signed  "  Venator  "  and
"  Piscator,"  and  poems,  and  delivered  many  ad-
dresses before  agricultural  societies.  His  letters
against  secession,  signed  "Agrfeola,"  and  published
in  1851,  were  among  his  latest  expressions  of  opin-
ion upon  political  subjects.  He  contributed  largely
to  the  periodical  press  of  the  south,  especially  the
"Southern  Review."  His  published  works  include
an  "Address  before  the  St.  Paul's  Agricultural
Society  "  (Charleston,  1850),  and  "  Carolina  Sports
by  Land  and  Water"  (1856).  He  was  also  the
author  of  "  Fiesco,"  a  tragedy  (1850).

ELLIOTT,  Susannah,  patriot,  b.  in  South
Carolina  about  1750.  Her  maiden  name  was  Smith.
She  was  descended  from  one  of  the  oldest  families
of  the  colony,  left  an  orphan  at  an  early  age,  was
educated  by  Rebecca  Brewton  Motte,  and  married
Barnard  Elliott,  a  colonel  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  On  28  June,  1776,  after  the  battle  of  Fort
Moultrie,  she  presented  to  Col.  Moultrie's  regiment
two  standards,  embroidered  by  her  own  hands,
saying  that  the  soldiers'  gallant  behavior  entitled
them  to  the  highest  honors,  and  that  she  had  no
doubt  they  would  stand  by  the  colors  as  long  as
they  should  wave  in  the  air  of  liberty.  At  her
plantation  she  had  a  secret  apartment  in  which  two
American  officers  were  hidden  safely  from  the
British,  who  searched  the  house,  and  found  neither
the  patriots  nor  the  family  silver,  which  was  buried
in  a  marsh  and  disinterred  after  the  war.

ELLIS,  Abner,  patriot,  b.  in  Dedham,  Mass.
He  represented  that  town  in  the  provincial  con-
gresses of  October,  1774,  and  February  and  May,
1775,  taking  a  prominent  part  in  the  proceedings.
He  collected  clothing  and  supplies  for  the  army,
and  in  1775-6  and  in  1776- '8  he  was  a  member
of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives.

ELLIS,  Calvin,  physician,  b.  in  Boston.  Ma-<„
in  1826 ;  d.  there,  14  Dec.,  1883.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1846,  and  at  the  medical  school  in
1849,  and  established  himself  in  practice  in  Boston,
In  1863  he  became  adjunct  professor  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine  in  Harvard,  and  in  1865
adjunct,  and  in  1867  regular,  professor  of  clinical
medicine,  which  chair  he  held  till  his  death.  He
was  for  some  time  attending  physician  to  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital.  Among  his  publi-
cations the  most  important  are  papers  on  "  Obstruc-
tion of  Lung,  caused  by  Pressure  on  the  Primary
Bronchus"  and  "The  lendency  of  Disease  in  One
Part  to  excite  it  in  Another,"  and  clinical  lectures
on  "  Capillary  Bronchit  is  "  (1874).

ELLIS,  Charles  Mayo,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  23  Dec,  1818;  d.  in  Brookline.  M
Jan.,  1878.  He  was  one  of  the  early  abolitionists
of  Boston,  one  of  the  few  prominent  lawyers  who
openly  opposed  slavery,  and  acted  as  counsel  for
Anthony  Boms,  the  fugitive  slave.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "  History  of  Roxburv."  of  which  only
one  volume  was  issued  (Boston,  1847).


ELLIS


ELLIS


:va:\


I  I  I  IV l.do.ird IMmick. journalist, b. in
1801  ;  ,1.  mi  Detroit,  Mid,..  18
May,  Is  Is. 11  irlv  immigrant  t«>  Mu-hi-

.ui.|  edited  <ii  Mow  lichigan  Senti-

nel." II"'  mi  member  of  the  i-i  Constitutional
. . niii'ii. and  suggested  thai  judicial  fine*  should
uride  to  -iiMH.rt  town  libraries.
I  I  LIS,  E.  John,  lawyer,  l>.  in  Covington,  I*n..
18  Oct,  isii. Be  was.  graduated  in  the  lav  de-
partment of  the  I'nivtTMtv  <>f  LflWintl  in 1861,
joined  the  Confederate  army  at  ■  private,  and  be-
name  a  oaptain  of  infantry, In  IMS  be  wm  talon
prisoner  and  oonflned  at  Johnson'i  island  in  Lake
Erie,  whence  he  was  not released  till lxtlo. He
then  returned  to Louisiana,  was  admitted  to  the

liar  in  1866,  and  practised  in  New  Orleans tiB  1x74.

when  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,

and  re-eleoted  in  i*7»;.  is?*,  isso.  and  181

F.I. I. IS.  George  Kdward,  clergyman,  l».  in  Bos-
ton. -  91  I.  Hi-  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1888,  and  at  tin-  divinity-school  in  lsCM,  and
after  two  years'  travel  in  Kurope  was  ordained,  on
li  Karoh.1840,  as  pastor  of  the  Harvard  Unitarian
church,  Charlestown.  Mass.  From  1X57  till  1st;::
he  was  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  Har-
vard divinity-school.  In  1864  he  delivered  l>efore
the  Lowell  institute  a  course  of  lectures  on  the
"  Kvidenoes  of  Christianity,"  in  1X71  a  course  on
the  "Provincial  History  of  Massachusetts,"  and
in  1879  a  course  on  "The  Bad  Man  and  the  White
Man  in  North  America"  (1XX2).  II.-  resigned  the
pastorate  of  Harvard  church  on  22  Feb.,  1809.  Mr.
Kllis  was  at  one  time  sole  editor  of  the  "Christian
Register,"  and  afterward  joint  editor  with  Rev.
Geo.  Putnam.  I>.  I).;  and  subsequently  conducted
the  "Christian  Kxaminer"  for  several  years.  He
has  been  vice-president  of  the  Massachusetts  his-
torical society  and  is  now  (1887)  president,  and  was
a  member  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Harvard  in
lX5l>-'4,  serving  for  one  year  as  its  secretary.  Har-
vard gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  D.  in  1857.  and
that  of  LL.  I),  in  1X8:}.  Mr.  Kllis  is  the  fourth
person  who  has  received  both  these  degree-  from
Harvard.  He  has  published  lives  of  "John  Ma-
son" (1H44),  "Anne  Hutchinson"  (1845%  and
"William  Penn"  (1847),  in  Spancs's  "American
Biography";  "Half  Century  of  the  Unitarian
Controversy"  (Boston,  1857):  "Memoir  of  Dr.
Luther  V.  Bell"  (18*1);  "The  Aim*  and  Pur-
poses of  the  Founders  of  Massachusetts,  and  their
Treatment  of  Intruders  and  Dissentients"  (1869);
■  Memoir  of  Jared  Sparks"  (1869) :  "  Life  of  Ben-
jamin Thompson,  Count  Rumford,"  in  connec-
tion with  an  edition  of  Iiumford's  complete  works,
issued  by  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
Balances  (1871):  "Historv  of  the  Massachusetts
General  Hospital"  (1879);  "  History  of  the  Battle
of  Bunker  Hill"  (1875);  an  "  Address  on  the  Cen-
tennial of  the  Evacuation  by  the  British  Army,
with  an  Account  of  the  Siege  of  Boston  *  (1876) ;
"  Memoir  of  Charles  W.  Cpham  "(1*??) :  "  Memoir
of  Jacob  Bigelow"  (18M0);  "Memoir  of  Nathaniel
Thayer"  (1885);  and  numerous  sermons  and  ad-
dresses, tie  also  printed  privately  memoirs  of
Charles  Wentworth  I'pham  and  Kdward  Wiggles-
worth  (1X77).  Mr.  Kllis  wrote  three  historical
chapters  for  tin-  "Memorial  Historv  of  Boston"
<1880-'l);  "The  Red  Man  and  the  White  Man  in
North  America "  (1888);  an  "Address  on  the  B8d
Anniversary  of  the  New  York  Historical  Society "
(1886);  "The  Religions  Element  In  New  England"
ami  other  chapters  in  t lie  ••  Narrative  and  Critical
History  of  America"  (1886);  and  several  articles
for  the  ninth  edition  of  the  "  Encyclopsjdis  Britan-
nica,"  and  has  contributed  to  pnnodloali —  HJi


brother,  Rnfna,  n  lv,-t4>n.  M««„

14  Sept..  1819;  d.  in  Li\er|.oo|,  I
1XH5, was  graduated with bonoi

id  at the  Cambridge  theological  seminary
in  184L Be  preached  si  Northan

the first I'nitanaii pastor in
N.  Y..  returned  to  Northampton  in  1H43,  and  from
\*~>:\  till  his  death  he  was  |>a»tor  of  the  1st  church
in  Boston, H(  was  also  lwturer  in  the Harvard
divinity-school in I860  ami 1*71.  and for

vears  before  his  death  was  editor  of  the  "  Religions
Monthly  Magazine," Many  of  his  discount
published,  including  a  series  of  ssrmoas  ensaaejan*
orating  the  two  hundred  and  fiftieth  anniversary

of  the lal  iliunh.  which  were  ptHMltll  in  a  vof-

iime  (Boston,  ihmO).
KLLIS.  Beniy, explorer, b. in  England  in  17*21  -.

d.  21  Jan..  lHtMI.  lb-  was  educated  to  the  law  at  the
Temple.  London.  In  May,  1746,  he  went  out  sj
■gSSj]  of  a  company  for  the  discovery  of  a  north-
west passage.  After  extinguishing  with  diuVulty
a  fire  in  his  ship,  he  Bailed  to  flnMnlsnd.  where  he
exchanged  commodities  with  the  Ksquimaux.  8
.Inly,  then  proceeded  to  Fort  Nelson,  and  wintered
in  Hayes  river,  lie  renewed  his  efforts  in  June.
1717.  without  success,  and  returned  to  Kngland.
where  he  arrived  on  14  Oct.  Kllis  was  rewarded
for  his  services  by  l>eing  made  lieutenant-governor
of  Georgia,  15  Aug..  1756,  He  arrived  at  Savan-
nah on  16  Feb..  1757,  and  on  17  May,  1758,  was
made  royal  governor.  His  services  to  the  colony
were  great  in  securing  the  good-will  of  the  Creeks
and  in  a  wise  and  able  administration,  and  he  was
highly  esteemed  :  but  the  climate  was  injurious  to
his  health,  and  he  left  on  2  Nov..  17»»<>.  After  his
return  to  Kngland  his  knowledge  of  American
affairs  were  called  into  requisition  for  develop-
ing the  plan  for  taxing  the  colonies,  and  in  return
for  this  service  he  was  rewarded  with  sinecure
otfloea  He  wits  governor  of  Nova  Scotia  in  !761-'4
He  afterward  resided  in  Italy,  principally  occu-
pied in  scientific  researches.  He  published  "  Vow-
age  made  to  Hudson's  Bay  in  174«>-'7.  by  the
•  Dobbs  Gallev'  and  'The  California,'  to  disoover
a  Northwest  *  which  contains  important

facts  and  remarks  relating  to  Budson  bay  (1748);
••Considerations  relating  to  the  Northwest  Pas-
sage" (London,  1750);  and  valuable  {tapers  on
"Mr.  Hale's  Ventilators'1  and  the  "Heat  of  the
Weather  in  Georgia"  in  theMPhiloeophioal  Trans-
actions" for  17.")1  and  1758.

ELLIS,  John  Millot,  clergyman,  b.  in  Keene,
N.  II..  14  July.  17!i:i:  d.  6  Aug,  1856.  He  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1x22.  ami  at  Andovcr
theological  seminary  in  1886.  He  then  reaaoved
to  Illinois,  ami  was  pastor  at  Kaskaskia  and  Jack-
sonville, where  he  established  a  female  seminary.
Subsequently  he  became  secretary  of  the  Indiana
education  society, and  was  instrumental  in  found-
ing Wabash  college  at  Crawfords\  ille.  and  Marshall
college.  Mich,  lb-  was  settled  as  jiastor  at  East
Hanover.  N.  II.,  in  1X40.  and  in  1X44  entered  the
service  of  the  Society  for  promoting  collegiate  and
theological  education  at  the  west.

ELLIS,  John  Willis,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Rowan  county.  N.  C.  25  Nov..  1060:  d.
in  Raleigh,  N.  C.  in  1861,  He  was  graduated  at
the  I'niver-sity  of  North  Carolina  in  1X41,  was
admitted  to  the  Iwir  in  1X42.  and  soon  acquired
a  large  practice.  Be  was  a  astasber  <>f  the  state
house  of  commons  from  1X44  till  1X48,  when  he
was  elected  a  judge  of  the  snpsilof  court  of
North  Carolina.  This  ofllce.  in  which  he  suc-
ceeded his  former  preceptor,  Judge  R,  M.  Pearson,
who  was  elevated  to  the  supreme bfJBI  h.  he  held


384


BLUS


KLI.SK  \V  ATA  WA


until  1858,  when  ho  was  chosen  governor  of  North
Carolina.  He  was  re-elected  in  I860,  and  died  in
office.  On  2  Jan.,  1801,  Gov.  Ellis  took  pniHtrwdflTI
of  Kort  .Macon,  at  Beau fort,  the  works  at  Wilming-
ton, and  the  U,  S.  arsenal  at  Fayetteville.  pro-
fessedly on  behalf  of  the  state.  On  the  20th  <>f
April  lie  ordered  the  seizure  of  the  U.  S.  mint  at
Charlotte.  He  was  active  in  promoting  the  pas-
sage of  the  secession  ordinance  in  North  Carolina.

ELLIS,  Powhatan,  jurist  and  politician,  b.  in
Virginia  about  1794;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  about
1844.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
1813,  settled  in  Mississippi  while  it  was  a  territory,
gained  a  high  reputation  as  a  lawyer,  and  in  1818
was  elevated  to  the  supreme  bench  of  the  state,
being  one  of  the  first  judges  of  that  court.  He  re-
mained in  office  till  1825,  when  he  was  appointed
by  the  governor  to  serve  out  the  unexpired  term
of  David  Holmes  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  The  legis-
lature elected  Thomas  B.  Reed  for  the  place,  who
displaced  Mr.  Ellis  after  he  had  served  three
months.  At  the  next  election,  however,  the  latter
was  chosen  senator  for  the  full  term,  but  served
only  from  3  Dec.  1827,  till  1832,  when  he  resigned
to  take  his  seat  on  the  bench  as  [J.  S.  judge  for  the
district  of  Mississippi.  While  in  the  senate  he
joined  Thomas  II.  Benton  and  William  Smith  in
ott|M>sing  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  1828  with
Mexico,  which  established  a  boundary-line  inter-
secting the  Red  and  Arkansas  rivers,  thus  leaving
only  Florida  and  Arkansas  for  the  expansion  of
slavery.  While  on  the  bench  he  delivered  more
opinions  than  any  contemporary  judge.  On  5
Jan.,  1836,  he  was  appointed  by  President  Jackson
charge  d'affaires  in  Mexico,  and  on  28  Dec.  he
closed  the  American  legation.  President  Van  Bu-
ren  appointed  him  minister  to  Mexico  on  15  Feb.,
1839,  in  which  post  he  was  superseded  by  Waddy
Thompson  on  21  April,  1842.  After  his  return  he
resided  in  Virginia.

ELLIS,  Reuben,  clergyman,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina: d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  February,  1796.  He
entered  the  Methodist  ministry  in  17.77,  and  was
one  of  the  early  leaders  of  that  church.  His  la-
bors extended  from  South  Carolina  to  Baltimore,
which  was  his  last  station.

ELLIS,  Robert  Fulton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tops-
ham,  Me.,  16  Oct.,  1809 ;  d.  in  St,  Louis,  Mo.,  24
Julv,  1854.  He  studied  at  Bowdoin  college,  and
at  Newton  theological  institution,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1838.  From  1838  till  1845  he  was
pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
then  for  two  years  a  missionary  in  Missouri,  where
he  established  many  Sunday-schools  and  furnished
them  with  libraries,  and  in  1847-'53  pastor  at
Alton.  111.  He  was  afterward  associate  editor  of
the  "  Western  Watchman,"  published  in  St.  Louis,
and  again  an  itinerant  agent  in  Missouri.

ELLIS,  Snmner,  clergyman,  b.  in  North  Or-
ange, Mass.,  17  May,  1828;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  26
Jan..  1886.  He  was  educated  at  Melrose  seminary,
West  Brattleboro,  Vt.,  studied  divinity  under  Ho-
sea  Ballou,  Jr.,  and  was  the  colleague  of  Sebastian
Streeter  in  the  1st  Universalist  church  of  Boston
in  1851-'3.  Subsequently  he  held  charges  in  that
city,  Lynn,  Salem,  and  other  places,  and  went  to
Chicago  as  temporary  and  afterward  permanent
successor  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Ryder.  He  engaged  in
literarv  work  in  Boston  in  1872-'4,  and  again  in
1881-'2.  He  published  "  At  Our  Best ;  or  Making
the  Most  of  Life"  (Boston,  1873);  "Hints  on
Preaching,"  and  a  "Life  of  Edward  H.  Chapin,
D.  D.  "  (1883).  He  also  delivered  many  lectures  in
Chicago  and  other  places.  After  his  death  ap-
peared "  Faith  and  Righteousness,"  a  memoir,  to-


gether with  several  of  his  sermons,  edited  by  the
K.  Moor  (Boston,  is-:

ELLIS,  Theodore  GunvHle,  soldier,  b.  in  Bos-
ton. Ma-s..  80  Sept..  1N2!);  d.  in  Hartford,  (
8  Jan.,  1883.  He  became  a  civil  engineer,  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Sackett's  harbor  and  Saratoga  rail-
road, subsequently  had  charge  of  silver  mines  in
is.-(i; -'."is  in  Mexico,  and  in  1859  became  engineer
of  the  Hartford  dyke.  He  entered  the  Federal
army  as  adjutant  of  the  14th  Connecticut  infantry,
was  engaged  at  Antietam  and  Frederickslm
promoted  major  in  April,  1863,  and  at  the  battle
of  Chancellorsville  commanded  the  regiment.  At
Gettysburg  his  regiment  was  hotly  engaged,  and
captured  five  battle-flags  in  a  bayonet  charge.  In
September,  1863,  he  became  lieutenant-colonel,  and
in  October  colonel,  of  the  regiment.  He  was  en-
gaged at  Mine  Run,  and  in  the  battle  of  the  Wil-
derness and  the  subsequent  conflicts  commanded  a
brigade.  During  the  summer  of  1864  he  com-
manded the  camp  at  Annapolis,  Md.  His  regi-
ment had  become  greatly  reduced  in  numbers  oy
many  severe  engagements.  In  the  winter  of  1864-'0
he  was  a  member  of  a  general  military  court  at
Washington.  He  was  mustered  out  on  8  June,
1865,  with  the  brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general.
In  1867  he  became  surveyor-general  of  Connecti-
cut. He  was  for  several  years  vice-president  of
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers.  In  1874
he  conducted  hydraulic  experiments  with  large
apertures  at  Holyoke,  Mass.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  had  charge  of  the  government  works  on
the  Connecticut  river.  He  published  many  im-
portant papers  on  engineering  in  the  "Transac-
tions "  or  the  American  society  of  civil  engineers.

ELLIS,  Welbore,  British  "statesman,  d.  2  Feb.,
1802.  He  succeeded  Charles  Townshend  as  parlia-
mentary secretary  for  war,  and  in  1763  proposed
appropriations  for  twenty  regiments  for  America.
In  1776  he  opposed  the  receiving  by  parliament  of
the  papers  from  the  American  congress.  On  13
Aug.,  1794,  he  was  created  Baron  Mendip.

ELLISON,  Matthew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Monroe
county,  Va.,  10  Nov.,  1804.  lie  became  a  Baptist
minister  in  Virginia,  travelled  over  wide  districts
in  that  vocation,  and  organized  twenty-five  church-
es. When  seventy-five  years  of  age  he  gave  up
preaching  and  settled  at  Raleigh,  W.  Va.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Dunkerism,  a  Plea  for  the  Union
of  Baptists,"  and  other  controversial  works  on  the
subject  of  Baptism.

ELLMAKER,  Amos,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Holland,
Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  2  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Pa.,  28  Nov.,  1851.  He  was  educated  at  Yale,  but
not  graduated,  and  studied  law  at  the  Litchfield,
Conn.,  law-school  under  Judge  Reeve,  and  in  Har-
risburg.  Pa.,  under  Thomas  Elder.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1808,  was  deputy  attorney-gen-
eral for  Dauphin  county  in  1809-'12,  and  served  in
the  legislature  in  1812-'14.  He  was  appointed  presi-
dent judge  of  his  judicial  district,  3  July,  1815.  In
1814  he  accompanied  the  volunteers  to  Baltimore
as  an  aide  to  Gen.  Forster.  On  30  Dec.,  1816,  he
resigned,  to  accept  the  office  of  attorney-general  of
the  state,  serving  till  1819.  In  June,  1821.  he  re-
moved to  Lancaster  and  resumed  the  practice  of
his  profession.  He  was  the  anti-masonic  candidate
for  vice-president  of  the  United  States  in  1832.
'•  Mr.  Elimaker."  says  Alexander  Harris  in  his
"  Reminiscences.*'  "was  reported  to  be  a  good  law-
yer, and  his  addresses  to  the  jury  when  at  the  bar
were  clear,  distinct,  and  argumentative."

ELLSKWATAWA,  Indian  prophet,  b.  on  the
banks  of  the  Scioto  river,  near  what  is  now  Chilli-
cothe,  early  in  1775. The  date  of  his  death  is  un-


SLKR


SWORTII


880


known.  Ilf  wu  the  »<>n  of  Pukeeshcno,  a  chief  <>f
tin-  Shewnees.  and  a  brother  <»f  tin-  famous  Tceum-
•m-Ii.  He  poWMd  in  I****  '»  tract  of  country  near
the  Tippecanoe  with  thcWaliash.
With  him  was  a  band  Of  al>out  a  thousand  warriors

belonging  to  various  triU-s. He  administered  the

affairs  a  his  follower*  so  badly  that  in  a  short
time  lie  was  deserted  by  all  hut  aboul  three  hun-
dred, and  MMH
were  in  a  most
wretched  state
of  existence.  At
this  juncture  Tc-
eumooa  appeared
among  them,  and
assumed  tlif  di-
rection of  affairs,
acting,  however,
in  tin'  name  of
tin-  prophet.  In
1809  the  gov-
eminent  directed
GOT.  William  II.
Harrison  to  pur-
BBan  of  the  Del-
aware*. Miainis,
and  Pottawata-
m  ics  a  large  tract
of  country  on
Imt  h  >ides  of  the  Walvish,  and  extending  up  t he  river
sixty  milt's  beyond  Vincennes.  This  tract  included
tlif-fi  -t  i<  m -«'t  tied  u  t  mn  hy  the  prophet  and  his  band,
ami  the  purchase  led  tot  he  famous  interview  bet  ween
Harrison  and  Tecimiseh.  The  prophet  is  next  heard
of  at  t  he  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  4  Nov,,  181 1.  where  he
directed  or  ordered  the  attack.  During  the  action
he  was  performing  conjurations  on  an  eminence  in
the  vicinity,  but  out  of  the  reach  of  danger.  After
the  end  of  the  war  lietween  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States  the  prophet  received  a  pension  from
the  British  government,  and  resided  in  Canada  till
1820,  when,  together  with  the  only  surviving  son
of  Tecumseh  and  others,  he  settled  beyond  the  Mis-
sissippi. The  accounts  relative  to  his  character,
and  his  pretensions  as  a  prophet,  are  conflicting.
There  can,  however,  l>e  hut  little  doubt  that  the
Indians  generally  regarded  him  as  possessing  the
gift  of  prescience  in  an  eminent  degree.  In  \\'\<  fif-
tieth year,  while  in  the  act  of  lighting  his  pipe,  he

■ntly  life-
interment.
but  during  his  removal  for  that  purpose  he  revived.
His  first  words  were:  "  Don't  be  alarmed.  I  have
seen  heaven.  Call  the  nation  together,  that  I  may
tell  them  what  has  appeared  to  me."  When  the
people  had  assembled,  he  told  them  that  he  had
HOB  conducted  to  the  gates  of  heaven  by  two
Toung  men  sent  hy  the  Great  Spirit,  and  that  the
Braal  Spirit  was  angry  with  them,  and  would
destroy  them  unless  they  refrained  thenceforth
from  drunkenness.  King,  and  stealing.  Bm  BttV
ward  Kirgltston's  "Tecumseh  and  the  Shawnee
Prophet  "  (New  York,  1878).

F.I, LSI, Kit,  Faiinv,  dancer,  b.  in  Vienna.
Austria,  2:<  .lime.  1*10;  tl.  tin-re  -JT  Nov..  1KH4.
She  liegan  her  career  at  six  years  of  age,  and  at
the  age  of  seventeen,  with  her  sister,  who  was  two
years  ncr  senior,  ap|M'atvd  on  the  stage  at  Naples.
In  1830  the  two  performed  in  Berlin,  afterward  in
Vienna,  and  in  1884  went  t<>  the  oiiera-house  in
Paris.  Fanny  was  much  preferred  for  her  grace,
agility,  and  beauty,  and  caused  an  excitement
among  theatre-goara  in  the  French  capital.  In
1840  sin-  came  to  this  cuntry  and  ai>|>eared  at
the  Park  theatre  in  several  ballets  with  immense


ll< ill _iwii, •• him ill I ■■• <•• i •-■ lif,Utin. ..-

fell  hack  upon  his  bed.  and  became  apparel
less. Preparations  were  made  for  Ins  int


success.  Anally  making  a  general  tour  through
the  principal  cities  ,,f  the  United  State*.  She  re-
turn..1  to  aVudaad  in  1*42.  visited  Russia  and
Germany  professionally,  ami  t<mk  leave  of  the
stage  at  Vienna  in  IM51.  Most  of  her  later  years
were  spent  in  retirement  at  her  villa  near  Ham-
burg. She  was  tall  and  slender,  and  her  features
regular,  animated,  and  winning.  In  aprifhtUnem,
combined  with  grace,  she  has  never  l»ccn  excelled.

ELLSWORTH,  Ephralm  I  later,  wldier.b  in

Me.haiiics\i||e.  Saratoga  c...  N.  \\.  M  April,  1887:
d.  in  Alexandria.  Va..  M  May.  I88L  After
ing  mercantile  life  in  Tnn  ami  New  York  city,  he
removed  at  an  early  age  to  Chicago,  when-  he
studietl  law,  ami  became  a  solicitor  of  patents.  In
1800  he  organized  a  regiment  of  zouaves,  which
became  renowned  for  the  |H-rfection  of  their  disci-

fline,  and  of  which  In-  was  coiiiiiii-sioned  colonel.
It-  accompanied  Lincoln  t<»  Washington  in  1861,
and  proceeded  thence  to  New  York,  where  in
April  he  organized  a  zouave  regiment  com|>osed  of
firemen,  of  this  regiment  he  was  appointed  colo-
nel, ami  sent  to  Alexandria.  Va.  Seeing  a  Con-
federate flag  floating  abort  ■  hotel  owned  by  a
man  named  Jaokaon,  Ellsworth  rushed  to  the  roof

and  tore  down  the  flag.  On  his  way  from  the  roof
he  was  met  and  shot  dead  by  Jackson,  who  in  turn
was  immediately  killed  l»y  one  of  Ellsworth's  men,
Frank  K.  BrcwnelL

ELLSWORTH,  Erastus  Wolrott,  poet  h.  in
East Windsor, Conn.,  27 Nov.. 188ft He  was

(graduated  at  Amherst  college  in  1H44.  and  studied
aw,  but  was  diverted  from  the  profession  by  a  taste
for  mechanics,  and  has  occupied  himself  chiefly  as
an  inventor.  In  1846  he  took  out  patents  for  a
drawing  or  copying  instrument,  and  for  a  device
for  making  a  siphon  discharge  a  portion  of  its
contents  at  the  highest  point.  He  then  entered
an  extensive  foundry.  His  first  published  jkh-iii,
entitled  •* The  Yankee."  appeared  in  1K4!»;  his  best
and  longest  is  "Ariadne,  originally  printed  in  the
-International  Magazine  "  (1*52) :  his  most  popu-
lar is  "Tulootn."  Sune  of  his  fugitive  piece-  wen
collected  ami  published  (Hartford,  1855).

ELLSWORTH,  Mary  Weleott,  writer,  b.  in
Exeter,  X.  H.,  in  1830;  d.  in  Newton.  Mass.,  12
Aug.,  INTO.  Her  maiden  name,  under  which  -he
wrote,  was  .Tanvrin.  She  was  educated  at  the
Exeter  female  seminary,  and  began  her  literary
career  at  eighteen  years  of  age  with  a  prim  tale  for
a  Boston  journal.  She  afterward  wrote  both
prom  and  rerm  for  periodicals,  and  in  1N5N  Itegau
an  engagement as  a  regular  contributor  to  "  <o>-

dey*i Lady*!  Hook." Miss  Janrrin  edited  and

wrote  biographical  articles  for  "  Cynrem  Imf "
(Boston,  1S.'i7):  and  publiehed  "Peace,  or  the
Stolen  Will'"  (Boston,  1887),  and  -An  Hour  with
the  Children"  (Boston.  1880).  She  also  compiled
a  series  of  books  entitled  "The  Juvenile  Misecl-
lanv"  (Moston,  1858).

ELLSWORTH,  Oliver,  jurist.  »».  in  Windsor,
Conn..  89  April.  1745;  d.  there,  M  KoT.,  1887.  He
entered  Yale  in  1702.  hut  afterward  went  to  Prince-
ton, where  he  was  graduated  in  1788.  with  high
rank  as  a  scholar.  After  a  \car'«  study  of  theology
he  abandoned  it  for  the  law.  and  was  admitted  to
the  l»ar  of  Hartford  county  in  1771.  lie  married
in  the  following  year,  and  for  three  years  divided
hll attention  between  farming  and  practice.  Be-
comiiig  states' attorney  in  1775.  he  sold  his  farm,

removed  to  Hartford, and  soon  ennimd  a  larger

ami  more  remunerative  practice  than  any  other
iiieinlxr  of  the  Connecticut  l>ar.  As  a  Whig  he
was  choM-n.  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  to
represent Windsor  in  the  general  assembly,  was


336


ELLSWORTH


ELLSWORTH


one  of  the  committee  of  four,  called  "the  Pay-
taiiN'."  tli.it  managed  all  the  military  finance!  "f
the  colony,  and  in  October.  17?N,  took  his  scat  as
a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  where  he
served  on  the  marine  committee  (acting  as  a  board
of  admiralty)  and  the  committee  of  appeal!  Bj
yearly  election,  from  17H0  till  17H4.  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  governor's  council,  in  which  he  held  un-
rivalled influence,  and  in  June,  17N3,  left  his  seat
in  congress  and,  although  re-elected,  declined  to
serve.  In  1784  he  declined  the  appointment  of
commissioner  of  the  treasury,  tendered  by  congress,
but  accepted  a  legislative  assignment  as  judge  of
the  Connecticut  superior  court,  which  he  held  un-
til made  a  member  of  the  Federal  convention  at
Philadelphia  in  May,  1787.  Here  he  was  conspicu-
ous in  advocacy  of  the  rights  of  the  individual
states,  and  it  was  on  his  motion  that  the  words
"  National  government "  were  expunged  from  the
constitution  and  the  words  "Government  of  the
United  States  "  substituted.  His  name  was  not  af-
fixed to  that  document,  because  pressing  domestic
considerations  compelled  his  return  home  as  soon
as  all  of  the  provisions  of  the  constitution  had  been
completed ;  out  his  force  and  energy  were  success-
ful the  next  year  in  securing  its  ratification,  against
much  opposition,  in  the  Connecticut  state  conven-
tion. When  the
new  government
was  organized  at
New  York  in  1789,
he  was  one  of  the
senators  from  Con-
necticut, and  was
chairman  of  the
committee  for  or-
ganizing the  U.  S.
judiciary,  the  orig-
inal bill,  in  his
own  handwriting,
passing  with  but
slight  alterations,
and  its  provisions
being  still  in  force.
rLf "*"  Vfii  4i  ^^ watchfulness

l/UAs  CAA^ur^f^Zy  over  the  public  ex-
penditures earned
for  him  the  title  of  "the  Cerberus  of  the  Treas-
ury," and  his  abilities  were  strenuously  exercised
in  building  up  the  financial  credit  of  the  govern-
ment, and  for  the  encouragement  and  protection
of  manufactures.  John  Adams  spoke  of  him  as
"the  finest  pillar  of  Washington's  whole  admin-
istration," and  he  was,  by  common  consent,  the
Federalist  leader  in  the  senate.  The  mission  of
John  Jay  to  England  in  1794  was  suggested  by
him,  and  by  his  influence  Jay's  treaty,  though
strenuously  opposed  in  the  house  of  representatives,
was  defended  and  approved  by  the  senate.  In
March,  1796,  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the
U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  served  with  distinguished
ability  till  1799,  when  President  Adams,  on  the
recommendation  of  the  senate,  appointed  him,
with  Patrick  Henry  and  Gov.  William  R.  Davie,
an  extraordinary  commission  to  negotiate  with
France,  the  relations  between  which  nation  and
the  United  States  were  then  severely  strained.  On
reaching  Paris,  2  March,  1800,  they  found  Napo-
leon Bonaparte  at  the  head  of  the  new  republic,
and  soon  concluded  a  satisfactory  adjustment  of
all  disputes.  The  negotiations  and  discussions
were  conducted  almost  exclusively  by  Judge  Ells-
worth, and  secured  all  the  points  most  essential  to
the  securing  of  peace,  including  a  recognition  from
France  of  the  rights  of  neutral  vessels,  and  an  in-


dent i) it v  for  depredations  on  American  commerce.
Ill  health  preventing  his  immediate  return,  Mr.
Ellsworth  sent  home  his  resignation  as  chief  jus-
tice and  visited  England,  where,  while  trying  the
mineral  springs  at  Bath  and  elsewhere,  he  became
the  recipient  of  marked  attention  from  the  con rj
ami  from  leading  public  men,  as  well  as  from  the
English  bench  and  bar.  After  his  return  to  his
home  in  April,  1801,  his  impaired  health  decided
him  to  remain  free  from  the  cares  of  public  life,
but  in  1802  he  was  again  elected  a  member  of  the
governor's  council,  which  acted  as  a  supreme  court
of  errors,  being  the  final  court  of  appeals  in  Con-
necticut from  all  inferior  courts  of  state  jurisdic-
tion. In  May,  1807,  on  a  reorganization  of  the
state  judiciary,  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of
the  supreme  court,  but  failing  health  compelled  his
resignation  within  a  few  months,  and  he  died  soon
afterward.  His  extraordinary  endowments,  accom-
plishments as  an  advocate,  integrity  as  a  judge,
patriotism  as  a  legislator  and  ambassador,  and  sin-
cerity as  a  Christian,  were  fitly  complemented  by  a
fine  personal  presence  and  by  manners  at  once
plain,  unaffected,  and  social,  yet  tinctured  with  a
courtliness  and  dignity  which  impressed  all  with
whom  he  came  in  contact.  In  1790  Yale,  and  in
1797  both  Dartmouth  and  Princeton,  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D. — His  son,  Henry  L«'ji>  itt.
commissioner  of  patents,  b.  in  Windsor,  Conn.,  10
Nov.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Fairhaven,  Conn.,  27  Dec.,  1858,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1810.  After  studying
Law  under  Judge  Gould,  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  he
settled  first  at  Windsor  and  then  at  Hartford,
where  he  remained  eight  or  ten  years.  At  the
close  of  this  period  he  accepted  a  government
appointment,  and  went  as  resident  commissioner
among  the  Indian  tribes  to  the  south  and  west  of
Arkansas.  From  Julv,  1836,  till  May,  1848,  he  was
U.  S.  commissioner  of*  patents.  His  reports,  espe-
cially those  on  the  science  of  agriculture,  were
much  prized.  He  afterward  settled  for  a  time  as
a  land  agent  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,  but  in  1857  re-
turned to  his  native  state  and  settled  at  Fairhaven.
He  published  "  Digest  of  Patents  from  1770  to  1839  "
(1840).— Henry  Leavitt's  twin  brother,  William
Wolcott,  jurist,  b.  in  Windsor,  Conn.,  10  Nov.,
1791 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  15  Jan.,  1868.  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1810,  studied  law  in  Litchfield  and  Hart-
ford, and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1813.  In  the
same  year  he  married  Emily,  eldest  daughter  of
Noah  Webster,  and  established  a  successful  prac-
tice in  Hartford.  In  1817,  when  his  brother-in-
law,  Judge  Williams,  then  the  foremost  lawyer  at
the  Hartford  bar,  was  elected  to  congress,  he  made
Mr.  Ellsworth  his  partner.  In  1827  Mr.  Ellsworth
became  professor  of  law  in  Trinity  college,  and
held  this  office  till  his  death.  In  1829  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  served  till  1834,
when  he  resigned  and  returned  to  the  practice  of
his  profession.  During  his  congressional  service
he  was  a  member  of  the  judiciary  committee,  and
in  this  capacity  took  an  active  part  in  preparing
and  reporting  measures  to  carry  into  effect  Presi-
dent Jackson's  proclamation  against  nullification.
He  prepared  and  reported  for  the  committee  the
present  law  of  copyright,  after  exhaustive  and
comparative  research  into  the  laws  of  the  United
States  and  other  countries.  He  was  also  one  of  the
committee  to  investigate  the  U.  S.  bank  at  Phila-
delphia. In  1838  he  was  chosen  governor  of  Con-
necticut, and  re-elected  the  three  following  yean,
during  which  period  he  twice  declined  an  election
to  the  L\  S.  senate.  In  1847  he  was  elected  by  t  la-
legislature  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  and  of  the
supreme  court  of  errors,  and  remained  on  the  bench


KIAA


KLMOKE


:,:.?


till hi'  readied the  nty.  when his  term

-1  l>v  limitation. Id-  r.-.  ,im<|  tin'  degree  of  I
1. 1..  I>.  from  the  I  invtTMtv  of  N.w V.,rk in !

ration  dclm-rcd  at his  funeral  by  George  A.
(build was published (Hartford. 1N0H). —  Henry
Hear] Militant,  lawyer  and  au-
thor, l>.  in  Windsor,  Omul,  in  1814:  <l.  in

n  in  August,  1864,  wis  graduated  at  Yah-  in
i.  studied  in  tin-  law-school,  and  removed  to  In-
diana in  1885. II''  was  charp'  d'affaires  to  Sweden,
and  after  this  counsel  for  Samuel  F.  I?

•  •  in  suits  connected  with  his  telegraph  (intent.*.
Hi  wa>  author  of  "Sketches  of  the  I  p|>er  Wabash
Valley,  Indiana"  (New  York.  1*:|S),  and  "Ameri-
can Swine  Breeder"  (1K40),  and  was  a  contributor
to  the  ••  Knickerbocker  Magazine."

EI.LYSON,  llenrv  keeling,  journalist.  1..  in
Richmond,  Ya.,  .'II  .Inly.  1888.  He  was  apprenticed
at  an  early  age  as  a  printer,  and  steadily  ros,.  in  his
calling.  In  ls.Vl  '.">  he  served  his  native  city  in  the
Virginia  legislature,  from  1857  till  1880  wassherilT
of  Henrico  coiintv,  and  in  1870  WM  elected  mayor
of  Richmond,  lie  has  long  been  connected,  as  as-
sociate proprietor  and  editor,  with  the  Richmond
••  Dispatch. '  one  of  the  most  widely  circulated
journals  in  the  south.  Mr.  Kllvson  has  bean
prominently  identified  with  all  the  great  enter-
prises of  the  Virginia  Baptists  for  the  past  forty
vears,  and  as  secretary  of  the  state  mission  board
he  has  jierformed  a  most  valuable  work.  He  is
presid<  nt  of  the  trustees  of  Richmond  college.

BLMENDORF,  Joachim,  b.  in  Rochester,  Ul-
ster co.,  N.  Y..  20  March,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  Sateen  in  1850.  and  at  the  New  Brunswick,  N.
.1.,  theological  seminary  in  1853.  He  was  licensed
to  preach  by  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  in
Poughkeepsie  in  the  same  year,  and  had  pastorates
in  Syracuse,  Albany,  and  other  places,  till  1872,
when  he  was  called  to  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  where
he  remained  until  he  removed  to  New  York  city  in
1886.  He  was  elected  a  trustee  of  Rutgers  college
in  1869.  He  is  the  author  of  several  discourses,
memoirs  of  Richard  Varick  De  Witt  and  Alice
dust ina  De  Peyster  (1872),  and  many  addresses
and  contributions  to  periodical  literature.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Union.

I  I  M  I  n  DORK,  John  James,  educator,  b.  in
New  York  city.  27  June,  1827.  lie  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1845,  and  entered  the  priesthood  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In  1848  he  be-
came instructor  of  mathematics  at  Columbia,  and
in  1H68  professor  of  philosophv  and  Inlles-lettres
in  Racine  college.  Wis.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  bv  Columbia  in  lsbb.  His
publications  include  "Manual  of  Rites  and  Rit-
ual" (1Hu7);  -A  History  of  Philosophy"  (1870);
and  "(bit  lines  of  Logic ,r  (1884).

II  MIR.  Jonathan,  jurist,  b.  in  Fairfield,
Cumberland  co..  N.  J„  90  Nov..  1745;  d.  in  Bur-
lington. N.  J..  :i  Sept,  1H07.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  Cniversity  of  Pennsylvania  in
1771.  and  elected  the  next  year  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society.  He  began  the
practice  of  medicine,  and  afterward  turned  his  at-
tention to  political  affairs,  raised  a  military  com-
pany, was  active  in  the  committee  of  vigilance,
entered  the  Provincial  congress  in  1778,  and  was
»  raemhtT  of  the  committee  that  formed  the  first
constitution  of  the  state.  He  was  a  member  of  the
National  congress  during  the  Revolution,  and  was
a  medical  InapastOf  of  the  army.  After  the  .
lishiinnt  of  independence  he  was  for  two  years  a
BMOlber  of  the  National  hoiis,.  of  representatives,
ami  wits  a  member  of  the  upper  house  of  the  state
legislature  in  1780,  and  again in  1784. He  was

VOL.  II.— 22


high  sheriff,  anil  afti-rwanl  Minamata,  of  CiimU-r-
laud  county,  holding  the  latter  i.flW  from  17M  till
••led  to  the prcs|,|,  t,

the  State medical society,  and  in  1789  wa- dioaen
to  represent the  state  «»',, Federalist fa  the  I
senate,  ri'signing  it  in  1 7!»1. lb wa«  ooeof  those
who  voted  for  establishing  tie  eminent

on  the  Potomac, For  many  r  laartaa

the  senate  he  devoted  himself  both  t<«  literary  anil
legal  pursuits,  ami  was  presiding  judire  of  the
county  court  of  common  pleas,  which  office  he  re-
signed in  181  L— His  brother,  Khenezer.  phvsician,
b.  in  Cedarville.  N.  .1..  in  1788;  d.  in  Bridgcton.
N.  I..  18  (  tot.,  1848,  after  receiving  an  academic  edu-
cation,  studied  inedi<ine  with  hi*  brother, and  was
admitted  to  practice.  He  entered  the  army  as  an
ensign,  and  in  1777  was  appointed  surgeon  of  the
2d  New  Jersey  regiment.  He  practised  medicine  in
Bridgcton,  N.  J.,  was  a  DMnbaff  of  the  state  house
of  representatives  from  17W»  till  1786,  serving  as
stieaker  of  the  assembly  in  17.U  and  17'.»"».  ami  was

thrice  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  lHOl  till
1807.  He  was  appointed  collector  of  customs  in
Bridgcton  in  180&  Be  vm  rkm  prtairtnal  of  tin-
state  council  from  1H07  to  1  h  1  ."i.  ami  held  the  office
of  vice-president  of  Burlington  collage  from  ]min
till  1817.  and  again  from  1*22  till  188ft  Daring tha
war  of  1812  he  cominanded  a  brigade  of  New  Jersey
militia  on  the  eastern  Imnk  of  the  Delaware,  lie
was  president  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  for
New  Jersey  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  was  the
last  survivor  of  the  original  imuiliers,  as  he  was
also  the  last  surviving  Revolutionary  officer  of
New  .Jersey. — Lucius  (^uiutiiis  Cincintiatus.  s,,n
of  Ebenezer.  jurist,  b.  in  Bridgcton.  N.  J..  li  I  ■'<  b..
1798;  d.  then«,  11  March,  18*1,  was  educated  in
the  schools  of  his  native  town  and  at  Woodbury,
Bordentown.  and  at  Philadelphia.  Heterred  in  the
militia  during  the  war  of  1818  n-  lieutenant  of  ar-
tillery, and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigade
major  and  inspector.  In  l*b"i  he  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  tne  bar  of  New  Jersey,  and  practised
in  his  native  town,  where  he  was  prosecuting  at-
torney for  the  state  for  many  years,  and  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  from  i  820  till  1888,  ami  in
the  latter  year  acted  as  its  speaker.  In  1884  he
was  prosecutor  of  the  pleas  for  Cumlierlauil  county.
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  made  I*.  S.  attorney
for  the  state.  He  was  elected  a  representative  in
congress,  as  a  Democrat,  in  1*42,  was  appointed  at-
torney-general of  New  Jersey  in  I860, holding  the
office  "two  years,  and  twice  ap|>ointed  justice  of  the
state  supreme  court — in  1852.  and  again  in  lK."i!».  In
1800  he  retired  from  public  life.  lie  was  president
of  the  New  Jersey  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  when
I.  died.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in
1884,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1805.  His  published
works  were  "A  Digest  of  the  I  jaws  of  New  Jer-
sey," which  aeeame  known  as  ••  Nixon's  Digest  "
(Newark.  1888;  4th  eil..  1*»>S);  ••  (Jciiealogical  and
Biographical  Account  of  the  Flnier  Family  "
(Bridgcton.  N.  J..  1800);  "  Historv  of  CumUr-
land  County"  (I860);  "History  of  the  Constitu-
tion and  Covernmeiit  of  Nca  Jersey,  with  Bio-
graphical Sketches  of  the  QottrnoW  fn-m  1 77*1  till

few"  (1878);  "  Kulogium  on  Garrett  I>.  Wall,  de-
livered before  the  Bench  and  Bar  of  New  Jan
(1872);  and  several  historical  collections.

I  I  Moll  1.  Franklin  Harper,  financier,  b.  in
Laurens  district,  s.  c.  16  Jan.  17W;  d.  in  Wash-
ington. D.  c..  8J  Ma\.  1888, He  was  the  eaaood

son  of  Ceti.  John  A.  F.lniore.  a  soldier  of  the  Rl
fation. He  was  graduated  at BofJtfc  Carolina  col-
li 1*1!»,  studied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1821. From  1822  till 1830  he  was  solicitor


B88


ELMSLEY


ELTON


of  the  southern  circuit.  In  1824  he  was  appointed
aide  to  Got.  .Manning,  with  the  rank  of  colonel.
Hi-  married  Harriet,  the  second  daughter  of  Presi-
dent Taylor.  He  was  elected  trustee  of  the  state
in  1888,  1*21),  and  1838.  was  elected  to  congress  in
1885,  as  ;i  State  rights  Democrat,  and  remained  un-
til 1889,  when  he  was  elected  president  of  the  bank
of  the  state  of  South  Carolina.  To  this  office  he
was  annually  elected  till  April,  1850,  when  by  the
governor's  appointment  he  became  U.  S.  senator,  to
fill  the  vacancy  occasioned  by  the  death  of  John  0.
Calhoun,  and  his  own  life  closed  twenty-three  days
after  he  entered  the  senate.  He  had  been  selected
in  1838,  by  the  congressional  delegation,  to  obtain
authentic  information  concerning  the  anti-slavery
movement;  and  the  letters  that  passed  between
him  and  James  6.  Birney  were  printed,  under  the
title  of  the  "  Elmore  Correspondence." — His  broth-
er, Rush,  jurist,  b.  in  Alabama  about  1810,  was
educated  for  the  bar,  served  in  the  Mexican  war,
and  in  1854  was  appointed  an  associate  justice  of
the  U.  S.  court  in  Kansas,  residing  in  Lecompton.
He  died  during  the  civil  war.

ELMSLEY,  John,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1762 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  29  April,  1805.  He
was  a  nephew  of  the  noted  London  bookseller  of
i  he  same  name.  After  serving  for  a  time  as  puisne
judge  in  Upper  Canada,  he  became  speaker  of  the
legislative  council  of  Lower  Canada,  and  was
a  member  of  the  executive  council.  In  October,
1802,  he  was  appointed  chief  justice. — His  son,
John,  Canadian  legislator,  b.  in  Elmsley  House,
Toronto,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Toronto.  8  Aug.,  1863,  en-
tered the  British  navy,  attained  the  rank  of  cap-
tain, and  after  his  retirement  from  the  service  took
a  leading  part  in  the  public  affairs  of  Upper  Cana-
da. He  was  called  by  royal  mandamus  to  the  legis-
lative council,  and  sat  as  a  member  of  that  body
until  the  union  of  the  two  provinces  in  1840.  On
his  marriage  with  Miss  Sherwood,  a  Catholic  lady
of  Toronto,  he  went  over  to  the  Church  of  Rome,
and  henceforth  he  was  a  munificent  patron  of
Catholicism.  He  established  the  House  of  Provi-
dence at  Toronto,  and  in  a  great  measure  was  in-
strumental in  founding  the  College  of  St.  Michael
in  the  same  city.  He  also  established  the  first  Ro-
man Catholic  school  in  Upper  Canada.

ELPHINSTONE,  George  Keith,  Viscount,
British  naval  officer,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1746;  d.
10  March,  1823.  He  was  made  commander  in
1772,  and  as  post-captain  he  served  in  America  in
1 775-'6.  During  the  American  war  he  com  manded
the  "  Pearl,"  a  frigate  of  32  guns,  participated  in  the
attack  on  Mud  Island,  and  at  the  capture  of  Charles-
ton commanded  a  detachment  of  seamen.  In  1782
he  captured  the  French  frigate  "  L'Aigle,"  of  40
guns.  He  obtained  the  rank  of  vice-admiral  in
1795,  and  the  same  year  captured  Cape  Town.  In
1800  he  was  commander-in-chief  in  the  Mediterra-
nean, where  he  took  Malta  and  Genoa.  For  his
services  in  Egypt  he  was  raised  to  the  British  peer-
age, as  baron  (1801),  having  for  four  years  had  the
same  title  in  the  Irish  peerage.  In  1805  he  was
made  admiral  of  the  white,  and  in  1814  was  cre-
ated a  viscount  of  the  United  Kingdom.  He  was
a  son-in-law  of  the  noted  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,
friends  of  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson.

ELSBERG,  Louis,  physician,  b.  in  Iserlohn,
Prussia,  2  April,  lKJti;  d."  in  New  York  city.  19
Feb.,  1885.  Tie  emigrated  to  Phih-delphia  with
his  parents  in  1849,  was  educated  in  the  public
Schools  of  that  city,  and  was  graduated  at  Jeffer-
son medical  college  in  1857.  For  six  months  after
graduation  he  was  resident  physician  at  Blount
Sinai hospital,  New  York. He then  studied  in


Europe  for  a  year,  and  on  his  return  introduced
medio*]  larrngoaoopy  into  the  United  States.  Id-
settled  in  New  York  city,  delivered  ■  eooneoi  lect-
ures at  Cniver-ity  medical  college  in  1881,  and  in
1862  established  the  first  public  clinic  for  diseases  of
the  throat.  This  was  his  specialty,  and  he  contrib-
uted largely  to  the  literature  of  "the  subject.  both
by  lectures  and  published  papers.  In  1865  a  prize
gold  medal  was  awarded  by  the  American  medical
association  to  his  essay  on  "  Laryngoscopical  Sur-
gery, illustrated  in  the  Treatment  of  Morbid
Growths  within  the  Larynx."  From  1880  till  1884
he  published  the  "Archives  of  Laryngology,"  a
quarterly,  and  "A  Complete  Manual  of  Throat
Diseases."  He  also  wrote  many  essays  on  subjects
pertaining  to  music,  general  literature,  and  science.
among  which  are  the"  Discovery  of  a  New  Kind  of
Resultant  Tones,"  "  Explanation  of  Musical  Har-
mony," "  The  Preservation  of  Organic  Molecules,"
and  on  "  The  Plastidule  Hypothesis."

ELSON,  Louis  Charles,  musical  critic,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  17  April,  1848.  His  theoretical
knowledge  of  music  was  mostly  gained  from  Carl
Gloggner,  under  whom  he  studied  at  the  Conserva-
tory of  music  in  Leipsic.  In  1876  he  became  a
contributor  to  the  "Musician  and  Artist,"  and  in
1877  began  contributing  to  the  "  Vox  Humana."  of
which  he  became  editor  in  1879.  He  is  chiefly
known  as  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Boston  "  Musi-
cal Herald."  and  through  his  criticisms  in  the  Bos-
ton "Courier."  He  has  contributed  articles  to  the
Boston  "  Transcript,"  New  York  "  Tribune,"  and
"  St.  Nicholas  "  magazine,  and  has  translated  and
arranged  over  two  thousand  German,  French,  and
Italian  songs.  He  has  composed  songs  in  the  style
of  the  German  Lied,  has  published  "  Curiosities  of
Music  "  and  "  German  Songs  and  Song-Writers,"
and  is  now  (1887)  engaged  in  preparing  a  "  His-
tory of  German  Song."

ELTON,  John  Prince,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Watertown,  Conn.,  24  April,  1809 :  d.  in  Waterbury,
Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1864.  His  education  was  received
in  the  public  schools  and  in  the  academy  at  Farm-
ington,  Conn.  In  March.  1832,  he  went  into  business
in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  and  in  January,  1833,  his  firm
began  the  manufacture  of  brass  wire,  being  the  first
in  the  country  to  take  up  that  industry.  In  1836
the  manufacture  of  brass  and  copper  tubing  was
begun.  In  1840,  1849,  1851.  and  1863  he  served  in
the  state  legislature.  In  1858  he  engaged  in  private
banking,  under  the  style  of  the  Elton  loan  and  trust
company,  and  after  his  death  the  business  was  or-
ganized into  a  joint  stock  company.  In  1864  he
was  a  presidential  elector.

ELTON,  Romeo,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ellington,
Conn.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Boston,  5  Feb.,  1870.  He
spent  his  early  days  on  his  father's  farm,  and  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1813.  He  studied  theology,
was  ordained  in  June,  1817,  pastor  of  the  1st  Bap-
tist church  in  Rhode  Island,  and  in  1824  held  a
charge  in  Windsor,  Vt.  Failing  health  obliged
him  to  resign  each  pastorate.  After  his  roigna-
tion  at  Newport  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  Latin
and  Greek  at  Brown  in  1825,  and  passed  two  years
in  Europe  in  preparing  himself  for  the  duties  of
the  professorship.  Resigning  in  1843,  he  visited
England,  and  resided  in  Exeter  until  1867,  and  in
Bath  two  years.  On  returning  to  this  country,  he
was  again  pastor  in  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut,
resumed  his  residence  in  England  after  two  or  three
years,  and  returned  to  the  United  States  again  in
1869,  and  was  a  pastor  in  Boston.  He  was  one  of
the  editors  of  the  ••  Eclectic  Review,"  and  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Nashville  university  in
1 1  (J. Among  other  bequests  thaj  Dr.  Elton  made


i:i.i  ^  visa


B80


moiipot  $20,000  to  establish  a  professorship  of
natural philosophy  nt BlOWII,  and nearly  as  much

iluiubian  C,  to  establish  a  pi

■onhtpof  Intellectual  and  moral  i »tiil< >-»< »phy . lie

also endowed  some  scholarships  In  Brawn  uniur-

- published  works  include  "Callender'i

Sermon,"  edited  with  copious  notes  and

•ketches;  tin-  "  Works  <>f  Jonathan  Mav  y.  I  >.  I'..''

president  of  Hrown  uiu\<T»ity.  with  an  intro-
ductory memoir  (New  York,  1844):  and  e  "  Life  of

rNVilliams,  the  Earliest  legislator."  The  lat-
ter work  eontanm  mnofa  original  matter,  paitien*
larlv  the  letters  of  Mrs.  Saoliar,  daughter  ol  sir
Bdward  Coke,  to  Roger  Williams.— His  second  wife,
PratkaaU  v  Qoaa,  t>.  in  England  about  ik<h>;  ±

than  in  1*07,  wrote  "The  Philanthropist,"  "Spirit
p|  Sectarianism." and  "  Tin- Piedinontese  Envoy,

or  tin-  Men,  Manners,  and  RttHfttm  of  the  0oa>

mon  wealth"  (1844).

ELIYAR  Y  SUVISA  (erroneously  written
IPKLHM  \KT),  Fausto  de  (ay-loo-yar'-ee-soo-
ree'-sah).  Spanish  chemist,  b.  in  Logrofio,  Spain,  11
Oct..  1757;  d.  in  Madrid  in  18*1.  After  studying  in
Spain,  he  went  to  Puris,  devoted  himself  to  natural
science,  and  WM  appointed  professor  of  mineralogy
at  the  seminary  of  Vergara  when  he  was  scarcely
nineteen  years  old.  Two  years  afterward  he  was
sent  by  the  Royal  basque  society  to  make  special
studies  in  the  mineralogical  academy  of  Freiberg,
my, and  in  the  mineral  region  of  that  country,
whence  he  returned  in  1781  to  Vergara,  and  again
occupied  his  chair.  During  1783-4,  by  order  of
the  government,  he  made  scientific  explorations  of
the  mountains  of  Biscay  and  Navarra,  and,  in  com-
pany with  his  brother  Juan  (who  was  afterward
director-general  of  mines  in  New  Granada,  and  died
there),  analyzed  the  German  wolfram  ore,  discover-
ing the  new  metal  called  tungsten  in  1783.  in  the
same  year  he  was  sent  by  the  Spanish  government
|0  study  th«-  new  method  of  amalgamation,  used  by
Born  in  Ilungaria,  where  he  remained  two  years,
and  married  in  1 786  the  daughter  of  Maria  Theresa's
privy  counsellor,  Ka.i!>.  In  1788  he  went  to  New
Spain  as  president  of  the  royal  supreme  court  of
mines,  taking  with  him  twenty-five  German  miners,
to  teach  the  new  method  of  amalgamation.  He
improved  and  etdarged  the  mines  of  Zacatecas,
Guanajuato.  Sombrerete,  Bolanos,  Real  del  Monte,
Regla,  and  Pachuca,  and  in  17U2  established  in  the
city  of  Mexico  the  Royal  college  of  mines,  taking
the  chair  of  chemistry  until  a  special  professor
could  be  obtained.  During  his  presidency  he  es-
tablished a  complete  chemical  laboratory,  a  physi-
cal cabinet,  and  collections  of  minerals  and  of
models  of  machinery  constructed  in  Mexico  of
beautiful  native  woods.  Iluinboldt  visited  the  col-
lege in  1808,  and  admired  its  completeness  and  sci-
entihe  merit*.  Eluyar's  distinguished  qualities
were  so  much  appreciated  that,  in  171)7,  when  his
term  of  nine  years  was  about  to  expire,  the  junta
general  of  the  vice-royalty  petitioned  the  king  to
reappoint  him,  with  the  rank  of  minister  of  the
royal  council  of  commerce,  mines,  and  mints  for
Spam.  After  the  rebellion  of  Iturbide  and
the  independence  of  Mexico,  Eluyar  returned  to
Spain,  and  was  there  appointed  general  director
and  member  of  the  council  of  mines  (ls^>:{),  which
place  he  held  until  his  death.  Eluvar  was  the  in-
ventor of  a  hydraulic  machine  and  the  author  of
several  works  on  mineralogv,  uiiiiin^.  and  mints,
the  principal  ones  being  ••  Deacubrimiento  da  un
nuevo  metal  becho  en  al  anilisis  del  Wolfram"
(printed  by  the  Basque  society);  "Tiatado  ■obre
la  nueva  amalgamation  del  concejero  Horn  "  (print-
ed by the Mineralogical society of Germany):


distnl.ucion  par  a  .-1  <  .legio  Semi  nario  de
I >le Mijico";  "  Memoria  sobre  riot  i
miliar*"  (1708):  "Sobre  una  nueva  union ina  hidrau-
lica  del  ntoi  '  Dfaounoi  soon  la  Impor-

I  Real  cuerjx)  de  la  mirieria
an  Nueva  BapaBa"(1815);  ••  Diner
jer  la  moneda  provisional,  y  sobre  iascaaasde  mon-
e<la  provinciales  "  ■•  Disi  ursw  sobre  la  mirieria,  mi
gobierno  en  general,  su  cstado  actual  en
Es|iana  y  su  con\eiiiente  refonna";  and  "  ludaga-
cioiies  sobre  el  sistema  de  aiiioin-dacii'.n  ol*ervadoeu

Nu.'va  Kspafla,  n  actual  eatado  v  prodncto"  i  1818),

I  I.NYN, Alfred Lunirdon. philanthropist,  b.

in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  II  .Inly.  1804;  d.  in  Philadel-

Shia,  Pa..  b">  Man  h,  1884,  He  was  a  grand s<,n  of
ohn  l.aiiL,'<|on.  the  first  continental  governor  of
New  Hampshire.  Alfred  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  Ifflflr.  ttndkd  medicine  abroad  in  1884  "'•'.
and,  on  his  return,  at  the  [Jul  faulty  of  Pennsyl-
vania, where  he  received  his  degree  in  \xi\.  Dr.
Elw yn  never  practised  his  profession,  but  bu MM
widely  known  as  a  philanthropist,  lie  was  the
originator  of  the  Pennsylvania  agricultural  society
and  fann-school,  and  its  president  in  1850,  and  m
also  at  various  times  president  of  the  Pennsylvania
institution  for  the  instruction  of  the  blind,  of  the
Training-school  for  feeble-minded  children,  and  of
the  Society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals.
He  published  "  Bonaparte,"  a  poem  (Philadelphia.
1848);  "Glossary  of  Supposed  Americanisms"
(1800);  "Letters  to  the  Son.  John  Lnngdon,  dur-
ing and  after  the  Revolution "(1880);  "Melancholy,
and  its  Musings"  (1881);  ami  "A  Few  Hints  to
the  City  00  Intemperance."

EL\,  Alfred,  clergyman,  b.  in  West  Springfield,
Mass.,  8  Nov..  l??s;  d.  in  Monson,  Mass.,  (I  July,
lM(iO.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  Septem-
ber, 1804,  and  elected  a  tutor  in  that  collage,  where
he  remained  one  year.  He  then  returned  t<.  West
Springfield,  entered  on  the  study  of  tht-ologv,  was
licensed  to  preach  in  Eebruarv,  1806,  and  ordained
the  following  December.  His  pastorate  was  re-
markable for  its  success  as  well  as  for  lasting
through  his  life.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  trus-
tees of  Amherst  college,  anil  in  that  ofBoe  Maiated
in  sustaining  the  institution  in  the  difficulties  and
discouragements  of  its  early  history.  He  was
elected  in  1840  a  corporate  member  of  the  Ameri-
can board  of  foreign  missions.  Several  of  his  M-r-
inotis  have  lieen  published.

ELY,  Alfred,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lyme.  New  London
co..  Conn..  18  Feb..  1818.  He  received  an  academic
education,  removed  to  Rochester.  N.  Y..  in  1835,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar  in  1H41.  and
began  practice  in  Rochester.  Mr.  Ely  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican in  1858,  and

from  .*»  Dec,  1889,  till  8  March.  1868.  He  went  as
a  civilian  ipaotator  to  the  battle-field  of  Hull  Run
in  July,  1801,  where  he  was  captured  by  the  Con-
federates and  put  Into  Libby  prison.  Richmond.
After  nearly  six  months'  confinement  he  was  ex-
changed for  Charles  J.  Faulkner,  the  American
minister  to  France,  who  had  Urn  imprisoned  for
disloyalty.  During  his  term  of  imprisonment  he
kept  a  diary,  which  WM  edited  by  Charles  Lan-
inan.  with  the  title  "Journal  of  Alfred  Ely, a  Pris-
oner of  War  in  Richmond  "  iN.w  Fork,  lv

ELY,  Ezra  Stiles,  elergvinaii,  b.  in  Lebanon.
Conn..  18  June.  1788;  d.  In  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18
June,  I88L Be  wat  graduated  at  FalaooUan  in

1808.  studied  theology  with  his  father.  Rev.  Zebu-
Ion  Ely.  and  was  ordained  jiastor  of  the  Prcsbv-
terian  "church  in  Colchester.  Conn.,  in  LSHl.  lie
was  then  chaplain  of  the  New  York  city  hospital,
subsequently pastor of the Pine street church.


840


ELY


EMANGARD


Philadelphia,  till  1844,  and  <>f  the  Northern  Liber-
ties oharoh  in  thai  city  till  1851,  trhen  be  had  a

Kralytic  shock.  He  undertook  to  estal>li»h  a  col-
re  and  theological  seminary  in  Missouri,  in  1K34,
but  reverses  discontinued  his  efforts  while  others
euried  on  the  work.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
and  trustees  of  Jefferson  medical  college,  for,  in
its  pecuniary  straits  he  bought  the  lot  and  erected
the  building  where  the  institution  now  stands.
He  was  active  in  works  of  benevolence,  giving
daring  his  life  about  $50,000  to  various  institu-
tions, including  Jefferson  medical  college  and  Ma-
rion college,  Mo.  Washington  college,  Tenn.,  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.  Ely  edited  gratui-
tously for  several  years  a  religious  paper  called
the  "  Philadelphian."'  He  published  a  memoir  of
his  father,  Rev.  Zebolon  Ely;  "  Visits  of  Mercy":
"  The  Contrast " ;  "  Ely's  Journal " ;  "  Sermons  on
Faith " ;  "  The  Science'  of  the  Human  Mind  "
(1819);  "Contrast  between  Calvinism  and  Hop-
kinsianism  "  (1811);  and  "Endless  Punishment"
(1888).  He  also  edited,  with  William  McCorkle
and  Rev.  Gregory  Bedell,  a  "Collateral  Bible,  or
Key  to  the  Holy  Scriptures"  (3  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1826-'8) ;  and  left  in  manuscript  a  "  History
of  the  Churches  of  Philadelphia."

ELY,  Richard  Theodore,  political  economist,
b.  in  Ripley,  N.  Y.,  13  April,  1854  After  attend-
ing the  New  York  state  normal  school,  he  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1876,  and,  as  holder  of
the  graduate  fellowship  of  letters  in  that  institu-
tion, studied  at  Heidelberg  university,  Germany,  in
1876-'9,  receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  the  latter
year.  Since  1885  he  has  been  associate  in  political
economy  at  Johns  Hopkins,  secretary  of  the  Amer-
ican economic  association,  and  has  also  served  as
tax  commissioner  of  Maryland  since  1885.  He  has
contributed  to  periodical  literature,  and  has  pub-
lished "  French  and  German  Socialism  in  Modern
Times  "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  The  Past  and  Present
of  Political  Economy"  (Baltimore,  1884);  "The
Labor  Movement  in  America"  (New  York,  1886).
He  has  also  edited,  with  an  introduction,  "  Co-op-
eration in  America"  (Baltimore,  1887).

ELY,  Samuel  Rose,  clergyman,  b.  in  West
Springfield.  Mass.,  29  Dec,  1803;  d.  in  Roslvn.  L.
I.,  11  May,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1830,  studied  theology  at  Princeton,  and  held
Presbyterian  pastorates  in  Carmel,  N.  Y.,  and  East
Hampton.  Brooklyn,  and  Roslvn,  L.  I.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1865.

ELY,  William  G.,  soldier,  b.  about  1835.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  as  a
private  for  the  three  months'  call,  went  out  again
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  6th  Connecticut  infan-
try, and  was  afterward  elected  colonel  of  the  18th
regiment.  On  13  June,  1863,  in  charge  of  the  2d
brigade,  he  advanced  upon  the  Fort  Royal  pike,
and,  while  in  action,  was  made  a  prisoner.  He
was  confined  in  Libby  prison,  Richmond,  Va.,  till
the  following  February,  when,  with  108  other
officers,  he  escaped  through  the  famous  tunnel
dog  under  Twentieth  street.  About  fifty  of  the
party  were  recaptured,  among  them  Col.  Ely,  in
a  state  of  great  exhaustion.  lie  was  taken  by  cav-
alry forty-two  miles  out,  after  being  absent  four
days,  and.  returned  to  the  prison.  A  few  weeks
later  he  was  paroled,  and  returned  north,  his  ex-
change following.  On  17  May,  1864,  he  rejoined
his  regiment,  and  commanded  it  at  the  battle  of
Piedmont  on  4  June,  1864.  On  18  June,  in  the  ad-
vance toward  Lynchburg,  he  was  wounded  in  the
throat  and  temporarily  disabled.  In  Aligns!  lie  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade,  and  in  Sep-
tember was  brevetted  a  brigadier-general.


ELY,  William  Mather,  politician,  1>.  in  Hing-
liamton,  N.  Y.,  in  1H18;  d.  there.  5  I'd...  Hfl
lb-  irae  educated  at  Amherst  college,  but  was  not
graduated.  After  leaving  college  be  followed  mer-
cantile pursuits  for  a  time,  but  afterward  enga.
in  farming,  and  was  for  several  years  presid.-ut
of  the  State  agricultural  society.  In  1868  be  was
elected  to  the  legislature, and  served  till  his  death.
He  was  an  industrious  legislator,  and  had  aoqnired
extensive  knowledge  of  state  affairs.

ELZEY,  Arnold,  soldier,  b.  in  Somerset  coun-
ty, Md.,  18  Dec.,  1816;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  21
Feb.,  1871.  His  name  was  originally  Arnold  K
Jones,  but  he  dropped  the  last  name  shortly  after
his  graduation  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1837.  He  was  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  and
served  in  the  Florida  war  of  1837-'8  and  in  the
Canada  border  disturbances.  During  the  Mexican
war  he  was  brevetted  captain  for  gallantry  at  Con-
treras  and  Churubusco,  and  was  also  at  Fort
Brown,  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  San  Antonio,  Mo-
lino  del  Rev,  Chapultepec,  and  the  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  He  became  captain  in  the  2d  ar-
tillerv,  14  Feb.,  1849,  and  served  against  the  Serni-
noles  in  1849-'50  and  1856.  On  25  April,  1861,  he
resigned  and  entered  the  Confederate  service,  with
the  rank  of  colonel.  At  the  first  battle  of  Bull
Run  he  was  senior  colonel  of  Kirby  Smith's  bri-
gade, and  in  the  afternoon  after  Gen.  Smith  was
wounded,  led  a  successful  charge,  for  which  he  was
complimented  by  Gen.  Beauregard,  and  promoted
on  trie  field  to  a  brigadier-generalship  by  Jefferson
Davis.  He  commanded  a  brigade  through  Stone-
wall Jackson's  valley  campaign,  was  wounded  and
had  his  horse  shot  under  him  at  Port  Republic,
and  at  Cold  Harbor  was  shot  through  the  head.
This  last  wound  prevented  him  from  seeing  any
more  active  service,  but  after  his  recovery  he  was

Sromoted  to  major-general,  and  commanded  the
epartment  of  Richmond  till  just  before  the  close
of  the  war,  when  he  joined  Hood  in  Georgia,  and
was  with  him  at  Chattanooga.  After  the  close  of
the  war  he  retired- to  a  farm  near  Jessup's  Cut,
Anne  Arundel  co.,  Md.

EMANGARD,  or  ESMANGARD,  Charles,
West  Indian  jurist,  b.  in  Port  au  Prince,  Hayti,  in
1755 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1837.  He  studied  in  the  Jes-
uit college  of  Port  au  Prince,  and  after  gradua-
tion he  was  appointed  substitute  judge  of  the  po-
lice court  of  nis  native  city,  where  his  father  was
President  of  the  civil  court.  Young  Emangard
egan  to  administer  equal  justice  to  all  without
regard  to  persons,  and  thereby  made  enemies  of
the  rich  proprietors  of  the  island.  His  first  offence
against  the  privileged  classes  was  the  condemna-
tion of  a  rich  planter  to  a  large  fine  for  maltreat-
ing his  slaves.  In  1780  Emangard  volunteered  as
counsel  for  Elmira,  a  mulatto  girl  who  had  been
emancipated  by  her  former  master  at  his  death,
but  had  been  detained  and  atrociously  tortured  by
his  widow,  out  of  jealousy.  The  woman,  Madame
de  Laureal,  was  arrested,  and,  as  the  feeling  on
both  sides  ran  high,  she  was  sent  to  France  for  an
impartial  hearing.  The  case  was  submitted  in
privy  council  to  the  king,  who  ordered  the  widow's
estate  to  be  confiscated  and  given  to  Elmira  :  and
as  Emangard's  j>osition  in  Port  au  Prince  had  be-
come untenable  in  consequence,  he  was  promoted
judge  of  the  civil  court  of  the  island  of  Martin-
ique. At  the  outbreak  of  the  rebellion  of  the  ne-
groes in  Santo  Domingo  in  1800  he  was  sent  by
the  government  to  that  island,  where  he  wae  t  he
means  of  saving  from  death  a  great  number  <>f
prominent  proprietors,  some  of  them  formerly  his
enemies. Bonaparte,  in recompense,  pr<


EMBRY


EMEU


:*4l


him  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Sun  to  Domingo,
and  when  this  island  MM  finally  lost  to  France,  he
became  president  of  tin- court  of  .Martini. |iic,  which
position he  held till 1*27. He  then  remOYed  to

.  and,  on  the  noMiioa  of  Look  Philippe,  was
niic.i  member  ol  the  state council, lie  pub-
lished  -he la murine francaise" (1'nri-. It

-  colonies  frangaJeas,  ct  en  partieuliaf  do.  Befall
Domingui  : "  I*  vtSrite' sur les  affaires

d'Haiti,"  published  at  the  ex|M-nsc  of  the  former
planters  of  the  French  pnrt  of  the  island, a-  Einau-
gard  had  sustained  their  right  to  an  Indemnity
I);  and  "  N'ouvel  avis  aux  colons  de  Saint  Do-
ininguc  'in  le  pavement  de  l'iudeinnitc  "  |  !  -

EMBKY,  James  (ran  ford,  clergyman,  l>.  in
Kims  county.  In<l..  I  Nov.,  1884  He  is  of  African
descent,  and  was  brought  up  on  a  farm.  lie  was
admitted  to  the  ministry  of  the  African  Methodist
BpisoopeJ  church  in  I*** 5,  was  elected  by  the  gen-
eral conference  of  his  church  in  1H?G  to  hi  secre-
tary of  education,  and  chosen  also  financial  secre-
tary in  1H78.  lie  was  a  member  of  the  Methodist
ecumenical  conference  at  London  in  1881,  and  of
the  Halt imorc  centennial  conference  of  1884.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  made  general  manager  of  the
pabUebing  department  of  his  church.  lie  is  the
author  of  ••  Condition  and  Prospects  of  the  Colored
American  "  (Kansas  City.  Mo.).

EMBCRY,  Emma  Catherine,  author,  b.  in
New  York  citv  in  1806;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10
Fcl)..  1863.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  James  K.
Man  lev  of  New  York  city,  and  in  1828  became  the
wife  of  Daniel  Emburv.  afterward  president  of  the
Atlantic  bank  of  Brooklyn.  Fmni  girlhood  to  the
time  of  her  death  she  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  various  periodicals,  in  many  of  them  over  the
pen-name  "  Ianthe."  Her  printed  volumes  include
••(iuide  and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1828);
"  Female  Education  " ;  "  The  Blind  Girl  and  other
Tales":  "Glimpses  of  Home  Life";  "Token  of
Flowers  " ;  "  Pictures  of  Early  Life  ;  "  Nature's
Gems,  or  American  Wild  Flowers  "  (1845) ;  "  Love's
Token  Flowers"  (1846);  "The  Waldorf  Family,  a
Grandfather's,  legend"  (1848);  "Poems"  (18u!t).

EM B CRY.  Philip,  preacher,  b.  in  Ballygaran,
Ireland,  21  Sept.,  1720;  d.  in  Camden,  Washing-
ton co.,  N.  Y.,  in  August.  1775.  His  parents  were
members  of  the  colony  of  Germans  that  emigrated
from  the  Palatinate  "to  Ireland  early  "in  the  eigh-
teenth century,  ami  in  which  Wesley  labored  with
great  success.  Embury  was  educated  at  a  school
near  Ballygaran.  and  learned  the  carpenter's  trade.
He  was  converted  on  Christmas  day.  1752,  became
a  local  preacher  in  1758.  ami  in  17tK)  came  to  New
York  and  worked  at  his  trade.  In  common  with
his  fellow-emigrants,  he  began  to  lose  interest  in
religious  matters,  and  did  not  preach  in  New  York
till  17<»«i,  when,  moved  by  the  reproaches  of  Bar-
bam  Heck,  sometimes  called  the  "foundress  of
American  Methodism,"  he  began  to  hold  services
first  in  his  own  house  on  Barrack  street,  now  Park
place,  and  then  in  a  rigging  loft  on  what  is  now
William  street.  The  congregation  thus  formed
was  probably  the  first  Methodist  congregation  in
the  I  oiled  State-,  though  it  is  a  disputed  question
whether  precedence  should  not  be  given  to  RoU-rt
Stmwbriuge,  who  began  lalxiring  in  Maryland
altout  this  time.  The  Aral  Methodist  church  was
built  under  Embury's  charge in 1788,00 the  site

of  the  peasant  John  street  church,  and  behimoeH
worked  on  the  building  as  a  carpenter,  and  after-
ward preached  there  gratuitously. Be  resign*

1  and  went  to  Camden.  N.  Y..  where  he  con-
tinued to  work  at  his  trade  during  the  week.
preaching  every  Sunday. He  organized  asjnrng


Irish  emigraii'  .'rove,  near  Camden,  the

first Method  let BOOietj  within the  boOJBda  of  what

i>  now Troy  conference. He  died suddenly,  in

eonesttoenee  of  an  accident  in  mowing,  and  was

buried  on  a  neighboring  farm,  but  in  1882  his  re-
mains wen-  removed  to  Ashgrove  churchyard,  and
in  l*M  to  Woodland  cen

where  in  1*7:1  a  monument  to  him  was  BnreUod,
with  an  address  l>v  Hishop  Siui|ison.

EMERIAC,  Maurice  Julien.
naval  ofiiccr.  i>. in Carhaix,  Plnisterre, 20 Oct..  1
d.  in  Toulon, '2  Feb.,  1848.  On  his  mother's  side
he  belonged  to  a  creole  family  of  Santo  Domingo,
and  was  an  extensive  land-owner  then-  and  in  the
island  of  Martinique,  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he
entered  the  royal  nary  as  a  volunteer,  ami  took
|mrt  in  the  war  of  American  indapsajdeBJ  <-.  distin-
guishing himenlf  nndw  Oomta  Q'Eetaing  la  the
combats  of  the  island  of  Grenada  ami  of  Savan-
nah. He  took  part  in  twelve  -  ived  three
wounds,  and  in  1779  was  rewarded  with  the  rank
of  lieutenant.  In  1702  he  was  given  command  of
a  corvette  on  the  naval  station  of  Santo  Domingo,
and  while  cruising  in  the  waters  of  that  island,  as
well  as  on  the  coast  of  the  United  States,  he  ren-
dered important  services  during  the  revolt  of  the
negroes. He was then promoted to  captain,  ap-

SMiinted  chief  of  squadron,  ami  commanded  the
fast  division,  which  formed  the  vanguard  of  the
Egyptian  expedition.  For  his  brilliant  services
iii  the  battle  Of  Aboukir  he  was  appointed  rear-ad-
miral, and  was  for  some  time  maritime  prefect  of
Toulon.  In  1803  he  was  sent  to  Santo  Domingo
to  re-establish  communication  with  the  south  of
the  island,  and  successfully  accomplished  his  mis-
sion, forcing  Dessalines  to  raise  the  siege  of  Port
au  Prince.  In  1803-'ll  he  had  charge  of  the  de-
fence of  thecoastof  the  Mediterranean  against  the
English,  and  rendered  imj>ortant  services  to  his
country.  In  1811  he  was  appointed  commander  of
aflect  of  twenty-one  vessels  of  the  line  and  ten  frig-
ates, constructed  and  equipped  under  his  jnrsonal
inspection  while  he  was  prefect  of  Toulon.  He  had
frequent  engagements  with  the  English  fleets,  and
for  three  years  never  lost  a  ship.  lie  was  made
vice-admiral  in  1813,  and  in  1H14  defended  Toulon
against  the  attack  of  a  formidable  fleet.  Kineriau
was  made  a  peer  of  Frame  by  Napoleon  in  1818.
and  by  Louis  Philippe  in  1881.  I  le  was  engaged
in  writing  his  memoirs  when  he  died.

EMERSON,  Benjamin  Budley.  educator,  b.
in  Hainpstead.  N.  II..  in  1781 J  d.  in  .lamaica  Plain,
now  a  part  of  Boston,  8  ( ><  t..  1878.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1*05,  was  a  teacher  in  Ncw-
buryport.  Mart,  in  1810-1 7.  and  afterward  princi|ial
of  the  Adams  grammar-school,  Boston,  for  manv
years.  He  was  associate  with  his  brother  Fred-
erick in  the  preparation  of  school-l<ooks,  and  his
spelling-liooks,  readers,  ami  arithmetics  became
widely  popular.  He  also  published  an  "  Academ-
ical Speaker''  (Boston).  According  to  the  pro-
visions  of  his  will,  the  bulk  of  his  proUOltj  was
given  for  religious  and  educational  purposes.  In
it  he  provided  for  the  establishment  of  the  Help-
Stead  high-school,  and  left  $  100,000  to  Dartmouth
college.— His  brother.  Frederick,  author,  b.  in
Hainpstead.  N.  11..  'J*  Nov.,  1?*"<;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  is.">7,  WOO  for  many  years  a  well-known
teacher  in  Boston,  and  was  for  some  time  sii|xrin-
tcndetit  of  schools  there,  lie  published  a  scries  of
arithmetics,  which  were  largely  need  in  schools,
including  the  "North  American  Arithmetic,"  in
three  parts  (Boston,  l

EMERSON,  Benjamin  Kendall,  naturalist,  b.
in Nashua,  N.  EL,  80 !»-•..  1848. He was  gradu-


342


EMERSON


KMKRSON


■ted  nt  Amherst  in  1866,  and  (hen  sj>ont  two  years
at  the  University  of  <;<">ttingen,  receiving  tin-  de-
gree of  Ph.D.  in  1809.  <  >n  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  became  Instrootor  in  geology  and
zoology  in  Amherst,  and  in  1872  was  appointed
professor  <>f  these  branches.  Dr.  Emerson  is  a
member  of  several  ■cientMe  societies  at  home  and
abroad,  and  has  contributed  valuable  geological
papers  to  scientific  journals.

EMERSON,  Brown,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ash  by,
Mass.,  6  •Ian..  1778;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  25  July,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1802,
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  that  college  in
18:55.  and  at  his  death  was  its  oldest  graduate.
After  studying  theology  in  Hancock,  N.  H.,  he  was
ordained,  on  14  April,  1805,  as  Dr.  Daniel  Hopkins's
colleague  in  the  pastorate  of  the  old  South  church,
Salem,  where  he  remained  till  his  death,  a  period
of  sixty-seven  vears,  being  sole  pastor  from  1816
till  18*8.  Dr.  Emerson  was  an  able  and  vigorous
preacher,  and  published  various  sermons,  addresses,
and  orations,  including  a  sermon  on  the  fiftieth
anniversary  of  his  ordination.

EMERSON,  Charles  Franklin,  educator,  b.
in  Chelmsford,  Mass.,  28  Sept.,  1843.  He  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1808,  becoming  at  once
instructor  in  gymnastics,  and  also  instructor  in
mathematics  in  the  agricultural  department.  In
1869  he  became  instructor  in  mathematics  in  the
college  proper,  and  in  1872  associate  professor  of
natural  philosophy,  succeeding  in  1878  to  full  pos-
session of  that  chair.  His  work  has  consisted
largely  in  the  development  of  the  physical  labora-
tory in  Dartmouth,  for  which  purpose  he  travelled
extensively  through  Europe  during  1883-'4.  He
is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  of  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  is  an  cccasional  con-
tributor to  scientific  literature.

EMERSON,  Charles  Noble,  lawyer,  b.  in  Will-
iamstown,  Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1821;  d.  in  New  York
city,  15  April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1840,  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  there,  and  served  in  the  civil  war,  advancing  to
the  rank  of  major  of  volunteers.  He  delivered  a
poem  before  the  alumni  of  Williams  college  in  1860.
He  was  appointed  assessor  of  internal  revenue  in
Massachusetts  in  1865,  and  published  a  "  Hand-
book of  the  Internal  Revenue  "  (Springfield,  1868).

EMERSON,  George  Barrell,  educator,  b.  in
Kennebunk,  Me.,  12  Sept.,  1797;  d.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  14  March,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1817,  and  soon  afterward  took  charge  of
an  academy  in  Lancaster,  Mass.  He  was  tutor  in
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Harvard
in  1819— '21,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  chosen  prin-
cipal of  the  English  high-school  for  boys  in  Bos-
ton, after  declining  the  professorship  of  mathe-
matics in  Harvard.  In  1823  he  opened  a  private
school  for  girls  in  the  same  city,  and  conducted  it
until  1855,  when  he  retired  from  professional  life.
In  1831  he  assisted  in  organizing  the  Boston  soci-
ety of  natural  history,  of  which  he  became  presi-
dent in  1837.  He  was  instrumental  in  getting  the
legislature  to  authorize  the  geological  survey  of
the  state,  and  took  charge  with  Dr.  Dewey  of  the
botanical  department  of  the  survey,  under  appoint-
ment from  Glov.  Everett.  Mr.  Emerscm  was  also
president  of  the  American  institute  of  instruction,
and  aided  in  securing  the  establishment  of  the
state  board  of  education.  He  passed  forty  years
of  his  life  in  teaching,  thirtv-four  of  which  were
spent  in  Boston.  He  received"  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Harvard  in  1859,  and  was  a  member  and  as-
sociate of  many  learned  bodies.  He  wrote  the  sec-
ond part  of  the  "  School  and  School-master  "  (New


York,  1842),  of  which  the  first  part  was  written  by
Bishop  Putter,  of  Pennsylvania.  A  copy  of  this
work  was  placed  in  every  school  in  the  state-  <>f
New  Vurk  and  .Massachusetts.  He  was  als..  the
author  of  several  lectures  on  education,  and  a  con-
tributor to  various  periodicals,  and  published  a
"  Report  on  the  Trees  and  Shrubs  growing  natu-
rally in  the  Forests  of  Massachusctl
1846);  a  "Manual  of  Agriculture"  (1861);  and
"  Reminiscences  of  an  Old  Teacher"  (1878).

EMERSON,  Gonverneur,  nhvsician.  b.  in  Kent
county.  Del.,  in  1796;  d.  2  July,  1874.  He  was
graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1816,  and  began  practice  in  Philadel-
phia in  1820,  but  spent  many  years  in  retirement
on  a  farm,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  peach-cult-
ure, and  gave  much  attention  to  the  subject  of  fer-
tili/.ers.  He  wrote  extensively  on  the  subject  of
vital  statistics,  and  contributed  to  the  "American
Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  in  1827-'48,  tallies
of  the  mortality  of  Philadelphia  from  1807  till
1848,  showing,  among  other  things,  the  excessive
mortality  of  males  during  childhood.  He  also
adapted  Cuthbert  W.  Johnson's  "  Farmers  and
Planters'  Encyclopaedia  of  Rural  Life"  (London,
1842)  to  the  United  States  (Philadelphia,  1853).  and
published  a  translation  of  Le  Play's  treatise  on  the
"Organization  of  Labor."  He  also  contributed
numerous  scientific  papers  to  the  proceedings  of
the  American  philosophical  society,  of  which  he
became  a  member  in  1833.

EMERSON,  James  E.,  machinist,  b.  in  Maine,
2  Nov.,  1823.  His  youth  was  spent  in  farming
and  working  in  saw-mills,  and  he  was  a  carpenter
in  Bangor  for  several  years.  In  1850  he  removed
to  Lewiston,  where  he  established  a  manufactory
for  making  wood-working  machinery,  and  while
engaged  in  this  business  made  his  first  invention.
This  was  a  machine  for  boring,  turning,  and  cut-
ting the  heads  on  the  spools  or  bobbins  that  are
used  in  cotton  factories,  and  did  the  same  work
that  formerly  required  three  machines.  In  1852
he  removed  to  California,  where  he  was  first  em-
ployed as  superintendent  of  a  saw-mill,  and  after-
ward became  a  proprietor  of  mills  in  various  coun-
ties of  that  state.  Here  he  proved  the  advantages
of  circular  saws  with  movable  teeth.  For  several
years  he  was  occupied  in  the  introduction  of  his
new  saws,  but  subsequently  returned  to  the  east
and  manufactured  edge  tools  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,
receiving  large  contracts  for  swords  and  sabres
from  the  government  during  the  civil  war.  He
afterward  became  the  superintendent  of  the  Amer-
ican saw  company,  which  was  organized  to  manu-
facture his  circular  saws  with  movable  teeth.  A
circular  saw  88  inches  in  diameter,  and  costing
$2,000,  was  exhibited  by  this  company  at  the  Paris
exposition  of  1867.  Among  his  miscellaneous  in-
ventions are  a  combined  anvil,  shears,  and  punch-
ing machine  (1866),  and  a  swage  for  spreading
saw-teeth  to  a  uniform  width  and  shape,  and  cut-
ting the  edge  at  a  single  operation.

EMERSON,  John Smith,  missionary, h.  in
Chester,  N.  H.,  28  Dec.,  1800;  d.  in  Waialua,  Oahu,
Sandwich  Islands,  28  March,  1867. He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1826,  at  Aridover  theological
seminary  in  1830,  and  was  ordained  in  May,
having  acted  for  a  year  as  agent  of  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions. He
had  studied  with  the  intention  of  becoming  a  mis-
sionary in  India,  but.  yielding  to  a  special  call
from  the  Sandwich  Islands,  sailed  in  November,
1831,  for  Honolulu,  and  was  pastor  of  the  (
gational  church  at  Waialua  from  1832  til
with  the  exception  of  the  years  4842-'6,  when  he


:1  Pnol!  -V  Uw^cik


<n—


D  Applet  on  &  Co


i:mi .


mi  i:


wait  professor  in  the  xininnry  nt  Lahaimdunn  and
»r  of  tin- church  at Kaanapali. lb- visit, ,1  the

United  States  la  I860,  uml  took  tin  nT.  D.

there.  II.-  baptised  nearly  1,800  persons  during
hit  past. mil.-,  lit •  published  tl\<-  rohUDM  of  ele-
mentary work*,  three  of  tli.-m  m  tin-  Hawaiian
language,  and,  while  at  Ldiaiualumi.  «h<  joint  au-
oraas  Bishop,  "f  an  "Knglish-
Hawaiiaii Dictionary."  based  <>n  Wi  ridg-

mt-nt  (Lahainaluna.  1845). — His  wife,  1'rsnla M

phi. i  NewalL  b.  in  Nelson,  N.  II..  27  SepL,

;.-.| Mr.  Rmamon in  1881,  an. I  gave  him  cfll-
ci.-nt  .ml  in  hi*  work.

I  >1  I  KSON. Joseph, ducutor, b. in Hollia,
N.  II..  in  1777:  <1.  in  \V.-th.i>ti.-l.l.  Conn,  in
II'- was  graduated  at Harvanl in 17!»8,  and  wax

tnt..r  therein  1801  ':t.  mean  while  studying  theology.
He  was  pastor  <«t  Beverly,  Mass..  in  is<>:s  If.  and
delivered  than  ■  course  of  historical  lectures.
altar  Waiting  the  south,  and  daliTering  and  pub-
lishing ••  Lectures  upon  tin-  Millennium."  he  estab-
lish.-<l  an  academy  in  Myfield,  Mass..  and  afterward

laatarad  on  aetronomy  in  Beaton. II** tanghl

school  and  was  pastor  at  BnUgUB,  Mass..  in  l881-*8,
hut in  the  latter  year  tnou-d  t<>  ( 'baric-ton.  S.  ('.,

for  his  health.  After  returning  to  Bangna  he  gave
up  ministerial  duties  in  1825  and  engaged  in  teach-
ing in  W.-therstteld,  Conn.  During  Id*  residence
then  be  again  visited  Saugus,  and  delivered  lect-
■ffeaoo  I'ollok's  '•  ('ours.-  of  Time."  lit-  published
an  edition  <>f  ••  Watts  on  tin-  Mind." — His  brother.
Ralph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hollis,  N.  II.,  18  Aug.,
1  »7  :  <1.  in  Rod-lord,  111.,  20  May.  1863,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1811,  and  at  A  in  lover  theological
seminary  in  1H14,  and,  after  holding  a  tutorship  in
Yale  for  two  years,  was  ordained,  12  June,  1816,  as
pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  at  Nor-
folk, Conn.,  where  he  remained  till  1829.  He  was
professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  and  pastor  at
Andov.-r  from  1829  till  1853,  then  removed  to  New-
bnryport  and  in  1858  to  Rockford,  111.,  where  he
remained  till  his  death,  also  lecturing  at  the  Chica-
go hheotogioal  seminary.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1830. He  contributed  largely  to  reli-

f'ous  periodicals,  published  a  "  Life  of  Rev.  Joseph
nit-rsoii."  his  brother  (Boston,  1834),  and  trans-
lated, with  note-,  Wiggins's  ••  Augustinianfam  and
IVlagianism"  (Andov.-r.  1840).

EMKRSON,  Luther  Orlando,  mu  itian,  b.  in
Parsonsliehl.  Me.,  I  Aug..  1810.  II. •  began  the
study  of  music  at  the  age  of  twenty-four,  and  has
devoted  himself  to  teaching  singing-classes  and  to
writing  vocal  school-exercises  ami  church  music,
in  Boston.  Salem,  and  West  (Jrcenneld.  Mass.  Mr.
Emerson  is  well  known  as  the  conductor  of  numer-
ous muMcal  festivals  and  conventions  in  all  parts
of  the  I'nion.  Besides  occasional  pieces  in  the
form  of  sheet-music,  he  has  written  and  compiled
manv  collections  of  church  music.  Among  them
"The  Romlterg  Colled  ion"  (Boston.  1868):  "The
Golden  Wreath"  (1857);  "The  Golden  Harp"
(1858);  "The  Sabbath  Harmony"  (1860);  "The
Harn  of  .Imlah"  (1888);  "Merry  Chimes  "(1865);
"Jubilate  "  (1888);  and  sundry  other  collections.

I  MKKSOX.  Ralph  Waldo,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass..  88  May.  1803;  d.  in  Conct.nl.  Mass..  27
April.  lKX-J.  He  was  tin-  second  of  five  sons  of  the
Bar.  William  Kmerson.  minister  of  the  1st  church,
Boston.  His  grandfather  at  the  sixth  remove.
|{.v.  Joseph  Kmerson.  of  Mention,  Mass.,  married
tin-  granddaughter  of  Bar.  Peter  Bulkeley,  who
was  one  of  the  founders  of  Concord.  Mass.,  ami
minister  of  the  tiM  church  there.  Joseph's  grand-
aon,  of  the  Mime  name,  was  pastor  at  Maiden,  and
married  a  daughter  of  the  Be  v.  Samuel Moody,  of


York.  Me.,  and  three  of  the  m,h,  ,,f  thl*  union  were
clergymen;  among  them  William,  Balpi.
grandfather,  who  prodded  ovei  the  church  in  Con-
cord at the  time  of  the  first Imttlc  of  the I;,
lutiotiary  war.  which  t.N.k  place  close  by  the  m
t.-r's  mails.-. This  grandfather  also  had married
the  tlaughter  of  a  minister,  the Rev.  Daniel I-

his  predecessor  in  th<-  puli.it  at  Gonoord.  Thaatha

temleney  and  traditions  ,.f  Balj.h  Waldo  I
am-estrj  were  strong  in  tin-  direction  of  scholarly
piiisiuts  and  religions  thought. His  family  waa
..in- of  tlios.-  that  constitute,  as Mr. Holmes  says,
the "academic races" of New England.
fath-  :iks..n. Wiii.ii*)  was  a  sueoossful

hut  not  jKipuiar  preacher,  wlms-  sympathies  ware

far  removed  from  Calvinism.  Qe  published  several
sermons,  and  was  editor  of  the  "  Monthly  Antbolo-
frotn  1805  till  1811.  a  |»criodical  that  had  f-.r
oontrfbuton  John  Thornton  Kirkland,  Jt>sei»h  S.
Buckmiiister.  John  S.  J.  Gardiner,  William  Tudor,
and  Samuel  0.  Thacher.  It  was  largely  instru-
mental in  developing  a  taste  for  literature  in  New
England,  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  tin-
"North  American  Review."  The  mother  of  Waldo
was  a  woman  "of  great  patience  ami  fortitude,  of
the  serenes!  trust  in  God,  of  a  discerning  spirit,
ami  the  most  courteous  bearing."  II.-  rtrffnglj
resembled  his  father.  His  aunt.  Mary  Moody  Km-
erson, a  woman  <>f  high  intellectual  attainments,
was  one  of  his  early  companions;  and  in  some
printed  extracts  from  her  journals  a  mode  of
thought  and  expression  remarkably  similar  to  that
of  the  now  celebrated  essayist  is  traceable.  His
youngest  brother,  Charles  Chauncey,  who  died
young,  in  1834,  was  distinguished  by  a  singularly
pure  and  sweet  character,  and  contributed  t<>  the
"Harvard  Register"  three  articles  in  which  then-
are  passages  strikingly  like  portions  of  the  essays
afterward  produced  bv  Ralph  Waldo.  The  latter
concentrated  in  Mm— If  the  spiritual  and  intellect-
ual tendencies  of  several  generations.  lb-  entered
the  grammar-school  at  the  age  of  eight,  ami  the
Latin-school,  under  Master  Could,  in  1815;  but
neither  here  nor  at  Harvard  did  he  show  unu-
sual ability.  After  leaving  college  he  engaged
in  teaching,  and  began  the  study  of  theology  under
the  direction  of  Dr.  ('banning,  although  not  regu-
larly enrolled  at  the  Cambridge  dirmity-eohooL
He  read  Plato,  Augustine.  TBlotaon,  Jeremy  Tay-
lor, and  had  from  boyhood  I  teen  an  enthusiast  re-
garding Montaigne's  essays,  of  which  he  said  :  "  It
se.-ms  to  me  as  if  I  had  myself  written  the  booh  in
some  former  life."  In  1888  he  was"  appro!  «ated  to
preach"  by  the  Middlesex  association  of  minis-
but  his  health  forced  him  to  pass  the  winter  in
South  Carolina  and  Florida.  He  was  ordained  in
March.  1888,  a-  colleague  of  Rev.  Henry  Ware.  Jr.,

in  the  pastorate  of  the  8d  church.  Boston,  and  ma-

ceded  to  Ware's  place  within  eighteen  months.
His  preaching  was  eltxment.  simple,  ami  efTective.
He  took  part  actively  in  the  city's  public  affair-,
and  showed  a  deep  interest  in  philanthropic  move-
ments, opening  his  church,  also,  to  the  anti-slavery
agitators.  In  1888,  however,  he  resigned  his  pas-
torate, and  did  not  then-after  regularly  resume
ministerial  laltors.  Having  decided  that  the  useof
the  elements  in  the  communion  was  a  mistaken
formality— the  true  communion,  as  he  thought,
being  purely  spiritual— In-  refused  to  make  the  com-
promise proposed,  that  he  should  put  his  own  con-
struction on  the  Lord's  supper,  leaving  hhlO0n|
gation  tt>  retain  their  view.  The  parang  with  his
Book  was  friendly,  and,  although  long  misunder-
stood in  certain  quarters,  he  always  maintained  a
strong  sympathy  with  Christianity. For  several


:m


EMEKSON


KMEIJSnN


years  he  had  been  writing  poetry,  but  he  published
no  literary  work  (luring  the  term  of  his  jiastorate.
The  poem  "  Good-bye,  Proud  World,"  incorrectly
attributed  to  the  date  of  his  resignation,  was  writ-
ten before  he  entered  the  ministry.  Excepting
this  piece,  little  poetry  of  his  early  jwriod  has  been

fiven  to  the  world,  fie  had  married,  in  1829,  Miss
11  leu  Louisa  Tucker,  who  died  in  February,  1832.
In  1888  he  went  to  Europe  for  his  health,  visiting
Sicily.  Italv,  and  France,  and  preaching  in  Lon-
don and  Edinburgh.  At  this  time  he  met  Cole-
ridge, Wordsworth,  and  Thomas  Carlyle,  forming
with  the  last-named  writer  an  enduring  friendship,
which  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  in  literary  an-
nals. It  resulted  in  a  correspondence,  which  was
continued  for  thirty-six  years,  and  has  been  pub-
lished under  the  editorship  of  Charles  Eliot  Norton
(Boston,  1883).  Returning  to  the  United  States
in  1834,  Mr.  Emerson  preached  in  New  Bedford,
declined  a  call  to  settle  there,  and  went  to  Concord,
where  he  remained.  In  the  next  winter  he  began
lecturing,  the  subjects  of  his  choice  being,  curious-
ly enough,  "  Water  "  and  "  The  Relation  of  Man  to
tne  Globe."  But  he  soon  found  themes  better
suited  to  his  genius,  in  a  course  of  biographical
lectures  given  in  Boston,  discussing  Luther,  Milton,
Burke,  Michael  Angelo,  and  George  Fox.  Two  of
these  were  published  in  the  "  North  American  Re-
view." This  course  was  followed  by  ten  lectures
on  English  literature  in  1835,  twelve  on  the  phi-
losophy of  history  in  1836,  and  in  1837  ten  on
human  culture.  Much  of  the  matter  embraced  in
them  was  afterward  remoulded  and  brought  out
in  his  later  volumes  of  essays,  or  condensed  into
the  rhythmic  form  of  poems.  Mr.  Emerson  mar-
ried, in  September,  1835,  Miss  Lidian  Jackson,  of
Plymouth,  Mass.  He  then  left  the  "  Old  Manse,"
where  he  had  been  staying  with  Dr.  Ripley,  and
moved  into  a  house  on  the  old  Lexington  road,
along  which  the  British  had  retreated  from  Con-
cord in  1775.  In  this  "  plain,  square,  wooden  house,"
surrounded  by  horse-chestnut  and  pine  trees,  with
pleasant  garden-grounds  attached,  he.  made  his
home  for  the  rest  of  his  life;  and,  through  his

Sresence  there,  the  village  became  "  the  Delphi  of
;ew  England."  On  19  April,  1836,  the  anniver-
sary of  the  Concord  fight,  Emerson's  hymn,  com-
posed for  the  occasion  and  containing  those  lines
which  have  since  resounded  almost  as  widely  as
the  fame  of  the  deed,
"Here  once  the  embattled  farmers  stood,
And  fired  the  shot  heard  round  the  world,"
was  sung  at  the  dedication  of  the  battle-monu-
ment. In  September  of  the  same  year  his  first
book,  "  Nature,"  an  idealistic  prose  essay  in  eight
chapters — which  had  been  written  in  the  same
room  of  the  "Old  Manse"  in  which  Hawthorne
afterward  wrote  his  "Mosses" — was  published
anonymously  in  Boston.  During  the  summer  he
had  supplied  the  pulpit  of  the  Concord  Unitarian
church  for  three  months,  and  in  the  autumn  he
preached  a  while  for  a  new  society  at  East  Lexing-
ton ;  but  he  refused  to  become  its  pastor,  saying :
"  My  pulpit  is  the  lyceum  platform."  Doubts
had  arisen  in  his  mind,  as  to  the  wisdom  of  public
prayer,  the  propriety  of  offering  prayer  for  others,
and  the  rightfulness  of  adhering  to  any  formal
worship.  From  this  time  his  career  became  dis-
tinctively that  of  a  literary  man,  although  for
several  years  he  confined  himself  mainly  to  lectur-
ing, and  most  of  his  prose  writings  were  first  given
to  the  public  orally.  Carlyle  had  said  to  Long-
fellow that  when  Emerson  came  to  Craigenputtock
it  was  "like  the  visit  of  an  angel."  In  1836  he
edited  early  sheets  of  Carlyle's  "  Sartor  Resartus,"


and  in  1838  three  volumes  of  the  same  author's
essays,  all  of  these  appearing  in  book-form  in  this
country  before  they  did  so  in  England,  and  netting
a  comfortable  sum  for  Carlyle.  "  Nat  are,"  similar-
ly, met  with  considerable  appreciation  in  England,
but  in  the  United  States  it  took  twelve  years  to  sell
500  copies.  The  character  of  the  book  wai  both
methodical  and  rhapsodical.  It  taught  that  the
universe  consists  of  nature  and  the  soul,  and  that  ex-
ternal nature  serves  four  purposes — viz. :  commodi-
ty, beauty,  language,  and  discipline.  It  ministers
to  the  senses ;  then  to  the  love  of  beauty ;  then  it
gives  us  language — i.  e.,  supplies  words  as  the  signs
of  natural  facts,  by  whicn  we  interpret  our  own
spirits.  Natural  laws  applied  to  man  become  moral
laws ;  and  thus  we  perceive  the  highest  use  of  na-
ture, which  is  discipline.  It  trains  reason,  develops
the  intellect,  and  becomes  the  means  of  moral  cult-
ure. Thus  nature  speaks  always  of  spirit,  suggests
the  idea  of  the  absolute,  teaches  worship  of  God,
whom  we  cannot  describe,  and  shows  us  that  nature
itself  is  only  an  apparition  of  God.  "  The  mind
is  a  part  of  the  nature  of  things,"  and  God  is  re-
vealed directly  to  the  soul,  spirit  being  present  all
through  nature,  but  acting  upon  us  through  our-
selves and  not  from  without.  In  verbal  style  this
treatise  has  great  beauty,  and  rises  to  the  plane  of
a  prose  poem ;  but  the  contents  perplexed  theolo-
gians. The  author  was  accused  of  pantheism,
though  it  is  hard  to  see  how  the  belief  so  named
differs  from  the  professed  Christian  doctrine  of
the  omnipresence  of  God.  Most  of  the  practi-
cal people  in  the  community  regarded  Emerson  as
crazy,  revolutionary,  or  a  fool  who  did  not  know
his  own  meaning.  Ex-president  John  Quincy
Adams  wrote  concerning  him  in  1840 :  "  After
failing  in  the  every-day  vocations  of  a  Unitarian
preacher  and  school-master,  he  starts  a  new  doc-
trine of  transcendentalism,  declares  all  the  old
revelations  superannuated  and  worn  out,  and  an-
nounces the  approach  of  new  revelations."

The  term  transcendentalists  was  somewhat  vague-
ly applied  to  a  number  of  writers,  among  whom
Emerson  was  the  chief ;  but  they  did  not  consti-
tute a  regularly  organized  group,  and  had  no  very
well-defined  aims  in  common  that  could  warrant
the  classification.  Emerson  himself  disclaimed
it  later,  saying  "there  was  no  concert  of  doctri-
naires to  establish  certain  opinions  or  to  inau-
gurate some  movement  in  literature,  philosophy,
or  religion  .  .  .  but  only  two  or  three  men  and
women,  who  read  alone,  with  some  vivacity.  Per-
haps all  of  these  were  surprised  at  the  rumor  that
they  were  a  school  or  a  sect,  but  more  especially  at
the  name  of  '  Transcendentalism.' "  Nevertheless,
the  scholars  and  writers  of  the  period  under  notice,
who  numbered  considerably  more  than  two  or  three,
finally  adopted  the  name  that  had  been  forced  upon
them  by  changing  the  name  of  a  periodical  gather-
ing held  by  them  from  the  "  Symposium  "  to  "  The
Transcendental  Club."  A  period  of  new  intellect-
ual activity  had  begun  about  1820,  on  the  return  of
Edward  Everett  from  Europe,  laden  with  treasures
of  German  thought,  which  he  put  into  circulation.
Gradually  his  influence,  and  that  of  Coleridge  and
Carlyle  in  England,  produced  a  reaction  against
the  philosophy  of  Locke  and  Bentham,  which,  de-
nying all  innate  ideas,  and  insisting  upon  purely
mechanical  revelation,  had  hitherto  ruled  Unitari-
ans in  Old  and  New  England.  The  reactionists
affirmed  the  existence  of  innate  ideas,  and  a  faculty
in  man  that  transcends  the  senses  and  the  under-
standing. Supported  by  Goethe's  deep  love  of  na-
ture as  a  companion  of  man,  and  Wordsworth's
conception  of  it  as  interfused  with  spirit,  EmenaJI


KMKi;


KMKKSON


840


nude  a  in'w  advance,  reiterated  the  idea  of  a  Iran-
•eeiKlfiii  (acuity,  intuitive  religion,  and  perception
i.f  <m.<i.  and  embodied  in  an  original  form  the  spir-
itual interpretation  of  nature.  'I'll.-  Symposium,
.■r  Tramnmlwittl  club,  began  t.»  meet  in
first  at  tin-  bows  of  Dr.  George  Ripley.  Among
the  Bonbon  wofo  Kmerson,  Frederic  II.  Hedge,

James  Freeman  Clarke.  Oonren  Francis. ThoodoN
Parker.  Brousoo  Alontt.  Rev.  Cyrus  A.  Bartol,
ites  A.  Browneon,  Manjnral  Puller,  and  Him
IHmboth  P.  PSebody.  Dr.  ('banning  unco  at-
tonded,  ami  mil  in  ■Vmpitbj  with  the  eluli,  whieh

discussed religion,  impersonality,  justice,  truth.

myMi.iMii. pontbetsm, ami the development <>f
American  genius. In  this  la>t  theme  perha|>s  lay
the  germ  <>f Kmerson 's  oration.  "The  American
Sholar."  delivered  before  the  I'hi  Beta  Kappa  so-
ciety at  Cambridge in  August,  1887. Tins  has
been well  netted  "our  intellectual Declaration  of
Inde|K-mlence,"  an  event  without  any  former  par-
allel  in  our  literary  annals. After  eloquently  dc-
■orlhtog  thi-  education  and  duties  of  tne  scholar,
it  protested against  the prevailing subserviency
to  European  teste,  sus|>ected  the  American  free-
man of  being  "timid,  imitative,  tame,"  and  de-
mamled that the individual man  "plant  himself
indomitably  on  his  instincts  and  there  abide.  .  .  .
We  will  walk  on  our  own  feet;  we  will  work  with
our  own  hands;  we  will  speak  our  own  minds.  .  .  .
A  nation  of  freemen  will  for  the  first  time  exist.
because  each  believes  himself  inspired  by  the  Di-
vine Sivd which  inspires  all men." Mi's friend,
Bronson  Alcott,  boring  set up  a  school  in  Boston
for  teaching  young  children  by  methods  based  on
a  new  theory  of  education,  published in 1837  a
book  reporting  his  own  conversations  with  the
children  on  the  gospels,  which  excited  severe  criti-
cism, and  Emerson  defended  him in  the  Bo-ton
"  Courier." He was  destined to  rouse  a  much
greater hostility himself  by his  address to  the
senior  .-hiss  in  the  Divinity  college,  Cambridge,  15
July,  IKiS. With  great  force  and  beauty  of  lan-
guage he  attacked  the  formalism  of  contemporary
religion,  and  the  traditional  limited  way  of  using
the  mind  of  Christ. "  Men  have  come  to  s|>eak  of
the  revelation  as  somewhat  long  ago  given  and
done,  as  if  God  were  dead.  .  .  .  The  soul  is  not
preached.  ...  It  is  the  office  of  a  true  teacher  to
show  us  that  God  is,  not  was;  that  he  speak. th.
not  spake. The  true  Christianity — a  faith like
Christ's  in the infinitude  of  man— is  lost." To
each  of  the  graduates  he  said:  "Yourself  a  new-
born bard  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  cast  behind  you  all
conformity,  and  acquaint  men  at  first  hands  with
the  Deity. The  address,  pronounced  with  strong
conviction,  led  to  lively  controversy,  in  which  bu-
rn took  no  part. Ten  lectures  were  given  by
him.  in  the  winter  of  1838-'9,  on  "The  Doctrine
of the S>ul." "Home." "The School," ••  Love,"
etc.  followed  later  by  "Man  the  Reformer."  "The
Method  of  Nature."  and  a  "  Lecture  on  the  Times."
In  these  he  treated  some  of  the  reforms  then  agi-
tated— temperance,  anti-slavery,  imn  rroiitOIMM.  BO
government,  ami  equal lab>r. Having  come  to
old  the  position  of  a  religious  reformer,  he  was
looked  to  for  sympathy  with  other  reforms:  bnl
he  dealt  with  them  in  the  same  spirit  as  with  re-
ligion, and  proceeded  to  reform  the  reformers. II.-
pointed  out that  "reforms  have their  higher  ori-
gin in  an  ideal justice,  but they  do  not  retain  the
purity of  an idea." Their  work "is done  pro-
fanely,  not  piously:  by management, by  tactics,
and  by  clamor." Any  end  panned  for  Itself,  by

the practical faculty, most l>ecome an offence.
The end should l>e *  inapprehensible to the


|  senses":  then  it would  always  be  a  go«id.  always
gtvfaf  health. Briefly,  it was Km.Txm'.  mission
not  to  do  practical  work  for  r.  f..nns.  hut to  nip-
ply  Impulses  and  a  high  inspiration  to  taewon>
in  1041  he  leetured  on  "The  Coupon ■(

and  th.'  next  year  ot)  "The  TraiiscemlentalUt,"
•tying  that  "transcendentalism"  was  simply  mod-
em idealism,  and  that  the  "nOWViewe"  WON  the
oldest  of  thoughts  cast  in  a  new  mould.  Yet,
seven  years  before,  he  had  consulted  with  oil
■boot  establishing  a  journal  to  In-  known  ej  ••  The
Traitsceiideiitalist."  and  in  July,  imn,  it  was  be-
gun, under  the  name  of  •The  Dial."  Kmerson
succeeded  Margaret  Fuller  as  the  editor,  and  dur-
ing its  continuance,  until  April.  1K-H.  published
more  than  forty  of  his  own  pieces,  prose  and  v.
in  its  columns.  The  DOOme  included  BUOfa  famous
ones  as  "The  Problem/1  "Wood-notes,"  "The
Sphinx."  and  "  Kate."  This  periodioa]  contained
much  delicate  and valuable  writing,  but failed  of

psonniorj  sup|M.rt. Associated  a>  be  wot  with  the

idealists,  in  the  capacity  of  chief  intellectual  '.■
er,  he  took  a  cordial  interest  in  the  mm!  OOflialletic)
experiment  at  Brook  Farm  (1840  to  18471  with
which  some  of  the  brightest  New  Kngland  men
and  women  of  that  day  were  connected  :  but  he  did
not  join  the  community.  Hawthorne,  who  wa-
tusily  a  member  and  lost  money  in  the  under-
taking, has  been  much  criticised  for  having  viewed
it  independently:  but  Kmerson,  outside,  held  a
similar  neutral  attitude,  and  wrote  an  account  of
the  affair,  in  which,  touching  it  humorously  at
points,  he  called  it  "a  French  Revolution  in
small,  an  Age  of  Reason  in  a  patty-pan."  In
1841 ap|>eared the first volume of hi- essays,

made  up  from  lectures.  It  embraced  "  History,
"Compensation,"  "S-lf-  Reliance,"  "Heroism,"
"The  Over-Soul,"  "Spiritual  Lows,"  ••!.■
"Friendship,"  "Prudence,"  "Intellect."  "Circles,"
and  "Art."  A  second  series  was  published  in  IK44,
containing  "Character,"  "(JifK"  "  Manners."  ••  The
Poet,"  "Politics,"  "  New  Kngland  Reformers,"  ami
anew  one  on  "Nature."  These  made  a  favorable
Impression  in  France  and  Kngland.  and  laid  the
basis  of  his  lofty  reputation  in  this  country  as  a
prose-writer.  Two  years  later  he  collected  in  a
volume  of  "Poems  "his  scattered  metrical  pieces,
many  of  which  hail  been printed In  periodicals.

He  did  not  e-cape  sharp  criticism,  but  the  circle  of
his  admirers  rapidly  widened.  A  new  periodical,
"The  Massachusetts  (Quarterly  Review,"  begun  its
caner  at  Boston  in  1847,  edited  by  Theodore  Par-
ker, a  disciple  <>f  Kmerson,  who  expounded  the
"  new  views"  in  a  more  combative  way;  and  Km-
erson wrote  for  it  an  "  Editor's  Address,  inculcat-
ing a  wise  and  sincere  spirit  in  meeting  the  prob-
lem! of  the  state,  of  slavery,  and  socialism.  In
October  <»f  that  year  he  sailed  to  Kngland  on  a
lecturing  tour,  repeated  a  course  on  "  Representa-
tive Men  "  in  various  places,  read  a  special  series
in  Ixmdon  on  "The  Mind  and  Manners  in  the
Nineteenth  Century."  and  lectured  frequently  in
Scotland.  He  was  enthusiastically  received  by
large  audiences,  nut  a  great  numlier  of  the  fore-
most men  ami  women  of  the  time,  and  was  a  guest
in  many  private  houses.  In  1H49  he  returned
home  and  published  "  Kepresentative  Men  "(183
Mere  he  coiit  ributed  to  the  "  Memoirs  "of  Margaret
Fuller  Ossoli  (1M52)  an  account  of  her  conversa-
tions in  Boston  and  her  Concord  life.  He  also,
having  visited  Paris  while  abroad,  gave  a  lecture
on  -  Krance,"  which  has  never  bean  printed  ;  ami
at  the  Woman's  Bights  convention  in  1888 deliv-
ered an  address  that  took  advanced  ground,  for
that  date,  in  favor  of  larger  lilierty  for  women. In


346


EMERSON


EMERSON


tin's  vt>ar  the  result  <>f  liis  observations  in  England
was  published in  the volume entitled "  English

Traits,"  which  nteed  oordiaJ  recognition  both  at
home  and  abroad, and  ha-  beea  translated  into  sev-
eral foreign  languages.  It  is  certainly  the  best
Analysis  <>f  the  English  people  that  has  been  writ-
ten by  an  American,  and  probably  the  bsst  pro-
duced in  any  country.  The  style  is  succinct  and
exact,  sown  with  epigram,  as  in  most  of  Emerson's
writings;  but,  the  purpose  being  more  objective
than  that  of  his  essays  the  saving  common  sense
that  underlies  all  of  his  thinking  is  here  brought
constantly  and  predominantly  into  view.  Pre-
viously to  this  publication  he  had  given  seven
lectures  in  Freeman  place  chapel,  Boston,  and
another  in  New  York, and  had  also  made  addresses
l>efore  the  Anti-slavery  society  in  both  cities.
While  in  the  ministry  he  alone  had  opened  a
church  to  abolition  speakers,  and  his  sympathies
were  always  on  the  side  of  emancipation.  In  1835
he  countenanced  Harriet  Martineau  in  her  out-
spoken condemnation  of  slavery,  and  in  the  height
of  her  unpopularity  invited  her  to  his  house.
Again,  in  1844,  he  spoke  stirringly  on  the  anniver-
sary of  West  Indian  emancipation,  and  scourged
his  countrymen  for  tolerating  negro  servitude.
His  own  plan  was  to  buy  the  slaves,  at  a  cost  of
*•_>.<  H)O.<)OO,(K)0,  and  he  put  faith  in  moral  and  spir-
itual influences  to  remove  the  evil,  rather  than  in
legislation.  He  never  formally  united  with  the
abolition  party,  but  he  encouraged  it,  and  his  influ-
ence was  gnat.  As  the  contest  grew  warmer,  he
rose  to  the  emergency  and  took  a  more  active  part,
even  making  campaign  speeches  for  John  G.  Pal-
frey, who.  having  missed  re-election  to  congress
on  account  of  his  anti-slavery  course  in  that  body,
was  nominated  as  free-soil  candidate  for  governor
of  Massachusetts.  The  assault  on  Charles  Sumner
by  Preston  S.  Brooks  called  forth  another  vigorous
speech.  In  November,  1859,  he  said  before  the
Parker  fraternity  that  John  Brown,  were  he  to  be
hanged,  would  "  make  the  gallows  glorious,  like
the  cross."  A  few  days  afterward  he  spoke  at  a
John  Brown  meeting  at  Tremont  temple,  with
Wendell  Phillips,  and  took  part  in  another  at  Con-
cord, and  in  still  a  third  at  Salem,  Mass.  In  Janu-
uary,  1861,  also,  he  addressed  the  Anti-slavery  so-
ciety at  Boston,  in  the  face  of  disturbance  by  a
mob.  Though  he  was  not  a  chief  agitator  of  the
cause,  these  efforts,  so  alien  to  his  retired  habits  as
a  student,  poet,  and  meditative  writer,  made  him  a
marked  advocate  of  freedom.

The  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  made  its  first  appear-
ance in  November,  1857,  with  James  Russell  Low-
ell as  the  editor,  and  Emerson  l>ecame  a  con-
tributor, printing  in  all  twenty-eight  poems  and
prose  articles  in  the  first  thirtv-seven  volumes.
"  The  Romany  Girl,"  "  Days."  "  Brahma,"  "  Wald-
einsamkeit,"  "  The  Titmouse,"  "  Boston  Hymn,"
"  Saadi,"  and  "  Terminus,"  which  are  among  his
best-known  poems,  belong  to  this  period ;  and  in
the  "  Atlantic "  in  1858  appeared  his  essay  on
Persian  poetry,  which  is  instructive  as  to  the  in-
fluence of  oriental  verse  upon  Emerson's.  He
continued  to  lecture  in  different  parts  of  the  coun-
try, and  at  the  Burns  festival  in  Boston  in  January.
1859,  made  an  after-dinner  speech  which  is  de-
scribed as  imbued  with  a  passion  uncommon  in
his  utterances.  Its  effect  on  the  assembly  was
said,  by  a  competent  judge  who  had  heard  the
chief  orators  of  the  time,  to  have  surpassed  any-
thing accomplished  by  them,  and  it  seems  to  have
indicated  a  reserve  power  in  Emerson  seldom  sus-
pected. In  1860  and  1862  he  lost  by  death  his
friend  Theodore Parker  and his  intimate  com-


panion Thoreau,  l>oth  of  whom  he  celebrated  in
memorial  addresses.  The  "  Conduct  of  Life"  was
published  in  the  former  year— a  serie-  of  essays  on
fate,  power,  wealth,  culture,  behavior,  worship,
considerations  bv  the  way,  beauty,  and  illusions.
With  a  diminished  admixture  of  mysticism,  it
offered  a  larger  proportion  of  practical  philosophy,
and  stated  the  limitations  of  fate  in  life,  while  but
reaffirming  the  liberty  of  the  individual.  Hither-
to Emerson's  books  had  sold  verv  slowlv;  but  of
the  "Conduct  of  Life  "the  whole  edition,  2,500
copies,  was  sold  in  two  days.  This  is  an  index  of
the  great  change  that  had  occurred  in  the  popular


estimate  of  him  since  the  issuing  of  his  first  vol-
ume, "Nature,"  twenty-seven  years  before.  He
who  had  been  feared  as  a  revolutionist,  or  laughed
at  as  erratic,  was  now,  at  the  age  of  fifty-seven,  ac-
cepted as  a  veritable  prophet  and  sage.  The
people  and  the  times  had,  in  a  measure,  grown  up
to  him.  A  new  "  Dial "  having  been  established  in
Cincinnati  about  this  time,  he  wrote  for  its  pages.
During  the  civil  war  he  delivered  a  lecture  on
"  American  Civilization  "  at  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution in  February,  1862 ;  an  address  in  Boston  on
the  emancipation  proclamation,  September  of  the
same  year;  and  at  Concord,  19  April,  1865,  he  pro-
nounced a  brief  eulogy  on  Abraham  Lincoln.

On  30  May,  1867,  he  attended  at  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Free  religious  association  in  Boston,  and
stated  his  view  as  to  religion  briefly  thus :  As  soon
as  every  man  is  apprised  of  the  Divine  presence  in
his  mind,  and  sees  that  the  law  of  duty  corresponds
with  the  laws  of  physical  nature — that  duty,  social
order,  power  of  character,  wealth  of  culture,  per-
fection of  taste,  all  draw  their  essence  from  this
moral  sentiment — "  then  we  have  a  religion  that
exalts,  that  commands  all  the  social  and  all  the
private  action."  Emerson  passed  many  severe
criticisms  on  his  countrymen,  publicly  accused
America  of  wanting  in  faith,  hope,  enthusiasm,
and  in  a  letter  to  Carlyle  called  it  an  intelligent
but  sensual,  avaricious  America.  The  war,  with
its  heroisms  and  exhibitions  of  moral  strength,
gave  him  new  courage,  new  belief  in  the  national
future.  His  Phi  Beta  Kappa  oration  of  1867
on  "  The  Progress  of  Culture  "  expressed  even
more  sanguine  expectation  than  "  The  American
Scholar,"  thirty  years  before.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D\  from  Harvard  in  1866,  and  was
elected  to  the  board  of  overseers  in  1867.  He
began  to  feel  the  approach  of  age,  and  in  1866
wrote  the  noble  poem  "  Terminus.
"  It  is  time  to  be  old,
To  take  in  sail ;

I  trim  myself  to  the  storm  of  time,

I  man  the  rudder,  reef  the  sail,

Obey  the  voice  at  eve  obeyed  *t  prime."


BMKUSON


:u:


STthekeS,  in  the  Mfewtflg  yiir  In-  htUMhl  out

■•  M  . long  [>oein.  the freshest and most

youthful in tOUS  of  any  that he  had  written,  nc-

iipanied by  inriiv other pieces. sOBM Of  which

had  mmimI  pravioualy. In  the  m-xt  three  J

v  ln«  read  nt  llarvnnl  11  number  of  lectures

on  ••Tin- Natural Bistory  of t h<- MiimI,"  which

have nut Urn ooUeoted. 'I'Ih' mhti  entitled

locloty  ami  Solitude"  ware  published  in  1910k

They  an-  BOtlosable  for  an  easy,  almost  conversa-

tional  tone,  differing  remarkably  from  the  earlier

published essays and "  blgtttu Traits." The

same  is  true  of  "  Letters  end  Social  Aims'1  (1875).

BBMnon'l  method  of  coin|X)sition  was  to  jot  <lo\vn
notes  from  reading  and  observation,  which  were
entered  in  a  coin monplaoe  Inxik,  with  a  memoran-
dum on  the  margin.  From  this  he  drew  the  ma-
terial for  his  lectures,  which,  heard  from  the  plat-
form, were  Bowing  in  style  and  clear  in  sequence.
When  he  prepared  them  for  publication,  much  of
the  incidental  matter  and  connecting  links  were
struck  out.  The  latest  two  volumes  were  arranged
for  the  press  when  the  author,  growing  old.  gave
them  a  less  rigorous  revision,  ana  relied  anon  help
from  others.  In  1870  and  1871  he  wrote  introduc-
tions to  a  translation  of  Plutarch's  ■  Morals"  and
W.  E.  Channing's  poem  "The  Wanderer."  *•  Par-
nassus" ■  00 licet  ion  of  poems  by  British  and
American  authors,  was  brought  out,  with  a  short
introduction,  in  1874.  Emerson  was  nominated  in
the  latter  year  for  the  lord-rectorship  of  Glasgow
university  by  the  independents,  and  was  defeated
by  a  vote  of '500  in  his  favor  against  ?<*>  for  Ben-
jamin Disraeli.  In  1875  he  made  a  short  address
at  the  unveiling  of  French's  statue  of  "The
Minute-Man"  on  the  Concord  battle-field.  He  re-
sponded to  an  invitation  from  two  societies  of  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1876  by  lecturing  to
them  on  "The  Boholar."  In  March",  1878,  he  read
a  paper  at  the  Old  South  church,  Boston,  on  "  The
Fortune  of  the  Republic."  in  which,  commenting
with  sagacity  on  current  tendencies  in  the  national
life,  he  said  :  "  Ijet  the  passion  for  America  cast  onl
the passion for Europe." The same year he

gristed  in  the  "  North  American  Review"  "The
overeignty  of  Ethics";  in  1870  he  read  "The
Preacher"  in  Divinity  OoUegS,  Cambridge,  and  an
essay  on  "Superlatives"  was  published  in  "The
Century"  magazine  for  February,  1882, shortly  be-
fore his  death.  Two  posthumous  volumes  of  es-
says and  reminiscences  have  appeared :  "  Miscella-
nies," and  "  Lectures  and  Biographical  Sketches";
and  many  brief  poems  heretofore  unpublished  have
been  included  in  a  new  edition.

In  July,  1872,  Emerson's  house  at  Concord  was
partly  destroyed  by  Are.  This  shock  hastened  the
decline  of  his  mental  powers,  which  had  already
set  in,  and  impaired  his  health.  His  friends  spon-
taneously asked  to  be  allowed  !o  rebuild  the  hoosa,
and  deposited  in  bank  for  him  over  $11,000,  at
the  same  time  suggesting  that  he  go  abroad  f>>r
rest  and  change.  With  his  daughter  Ellen  he
visited  England  and  the  Nile,  and  returned  to
Concord  in  May.  1x7:5.  to  find  his  house  rebuilt.
and  so  perfectly  restored  to  its  former  state  that
few  could  have  discovered  sny  change  (see  view  on
page  346).  Welcomed  by  the  citizens  eo  a  mass,  he
drove  to  his  home,  passing  beneath  a  triumphal
arch  erected  in  his  honor,  amid  general  rejoicing.

After  isr,7  Emerson  wrote  no  poems,  and  little
prose, I. nt revised his poetry  and  arranged the

looted Poems.'1 Always incli 1 to slow

speech,  sometimes pausing for  a  won!, he
Combed  to  a  gradual  aphasia,  which  made  it  difli-
cult  for  him  to  converse. Me  forgot  the  names  of


f>cp*oiis  and things. He had miiiic
discriminating  printed  letters,  and  for  the  last  lira
years  of  his  life  was  unable  to  conduct
enoe. Yet  he  read  through  all  his  own  published
•with  much  interest  and  ■urpriee,"  and
triad  to  arrange  his  mannseripta,  which  hi
Ined  thoroughly. lb-  also,  foil,

of  reading  a pajN-r  annuallv before the  Concord

lyccuin.  pre  th'-re.  in  |sjsa  |,j„  hundredth  leetara
to  the  local  audience. On  that  occasion  the
hundred  people  In  the  hall  spontaneously  ai

liisentrai and  remained ItatldlngimtB  he  had

taken  his  place  on  the  platform,  lb-  loot  an  in-
terest in  the  Concord  school  of  philosophy,  organ-
ized in  1880,  and  supplied  t<>  its  sessions  an  essay
on  "Natural Aristocracy." Most of these later

productions  wan  put  together  from  porUflm  of

earlier  «'oui|M.sit ions.  Throughout  this  time  of  de-
cline he  retained  the  perfect  courtesy  „,,(j  comU^
eratioti  for  others  that  had  always  characterized
him.  Be  was  apparently  quite  able  to  comprehend
the  essence  of  things  around  him.  and.  to  ■  certain
extent,  ideas;  but  the  verbal  means  of  commu-
nication were  lost.  He  had  so  Ion-.'  n  .
language  and  visible  objects  as  mere  symbols,  that
the  symbols  at  last  melted  away  and  eluded  him.
lb- continued  to  read  everything  in  printed  form
that  he  found  upon  his  table,  whispering  the
word- over  like  a  child,  and  was  fond  of  [minting
out  pictures  In  l>ooks.  In  April,  1KS2.  he  took  a
severe  cold.  and.  attended  by  his  son,  I»r.  Ed  wan!
Waldo  Emerson,  died  of  pneumonia.  He  was
buried  in  the  cemetery  at  Concord,  near  the  craves
of  Hawthorne  and  Thoreau,  in  ground  over  which
he  had  often  walked  and  talked  with  them  and
with  Margaret  Fuller.

Emerson was  tall and slender,  not  of robust

tihysiipie,  rather  sallow  in  the  face,  with  an  aqui-
ine  nose,  brown  hair,  and  eyes  of  the  "strongest
and  brightest  blue."  His  head  was  below  the  aver-
age  in  circumference,  long,  narrow,  but  more  near-
ly equal  in  anterior  and  posterior  breadth  than
most  heads.  His  appearance  was  majestic.  Be
was  calm,  kindly  in  expression,  and  frequently

smiled,  but  seldom  laughed.  His  manners  were
dignified  but  exquisitely  simple.  He  was  a  ready
listener,  and  often  seemed  to  prefer  listening,  as  if
he  were  t<>  be  instructed  rather  than  to  instruct.
He  rarely  showed  irritation.  His  hospitality  was
almost  unbounded,  ami  he  frequently  waited  uj>on
the  humblest  of  his  guests  with  his  own  hands.
He  was  never  well-to-do  until  in  his  latest  years.
In  is:;s  he  wrote  to  Carlyle  that  he  possessed  al>out
$22,000  at  interest,  and  could  earn  fH00  in  a  win-
ter by  lecturing,  but  never  had  a  dollar  "to  spend
on  a  fancy."  He  worked  bard  every  summer  writ-
ing, and  every  winter  travelling  and  lecturing.
His  habits  were  regular  and  his  dial  frugal,  the
only  peptic  luxury  in  which  he  Indulged  bang  |>ie
at  breakfast.  Every  morning  was  s|>ent  in  his
study,  and  he  would  go  all  day  without  food  un-
less called  to  eat.  Hi*  bed-time  was  ten  o'clock,
but.  If  engaged  in  literary  work,  he  would  sit  up
until  one  or  two,  and  was  able  to  do  this  night
after  night  He  fultllled  the  duties  of  a  citizen
by  attending  town-meetings  punctiliously.  Much
question  has  Ihvii  made  whether  Emerson  was  rath-
er a  poet  than  a  philosopher,  or  whether  he  was  a
philosopher  at  all.  An  exact  philosopher  he  was
not  :  but  all  that  he  wrote  ami  said  was  based  ajpon
philosophic  ideas.  He  was  an  intellectual  rather
than  an  emotional  mystic,  an  idealist  who  instated
upon  the  application  of  idealism  to  the  affairs  of
daily  life.  He  bsHsvad  that  "  Nature  is  the  incar-
nation of  a  thought.  .  .  .  The  world  is  mind  pre-


MB


EMERSON


EMERSON


cipitated." He  believed  in  the  Over-Soul  as  a  light

Sliding  man,  the  light  of  intuitive  perception,  in
ixl  as  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  in  the  human
soul  as  one  with  that  Over-Soul.  He  was  not  able
to  formulate  these  or  other  beliefs  of  his  logically.
Writing  to  his  former  colleague,  Henry  Ware.  he
said :  "  I  could  not  give  an  account  of  myself  if
challenged.  ...  I  do  not  know  what  arguments
are  in  reference  to  any  expression  of  a  thought.  1
delight  in  telling  what  I  think;  but  if  you  ask  mc
how  I  dare  say  so,  or  why  it  is  so,  I  am  the  most
helpless  of  mortal  men."  This  continued  to  be  his
position  to  the  end.  He  relied  upon  intuition,  and
thought  that  every  one  might  bring  himself  into
accord  with  God  on  that  basis.  He  expressed  what
he  felt  at  the  moment,  and  some  of  his  sayings,
even  in  a  single  essay,  seem  to  be  mutually  op-
posed. But,  if  the  whole  of  his  works  be  taken
together,  a  type  of  thought  may  be  discerned  in
the  conflicting  expressions,  coherent  and  suggest-
ive, like  that  presented  by  the  photographs  of  sev-
eral generations  of  a  family  superimposed  on  one
plate.  In  the  beginning  he  seems  to  have  looked
somewhat  askance  at  science ;  but  in  the  1849  edi-
tion of  "  Nature  "  he  prefixed  some  verses  that  said :
"  And,  striving  to  be  man,  the  worm
Mounts  through  all  the  spires  of  form."
This  came  out  ten  years  before  Darwin's  "  Origin
of  Species,"  and  twenty  years  sooner  than  "The
Descent  of  Man."  Lamarck's  theories,  however,
had  been  popularized  in  1844.  But  Emerson  here
showed  how  quick  he  was  to  seize  upon  the  newest
thought  in  science  or  elsewhere  if  it  seemed  to  be
true.  Eleven  years  passed,  and  he  declared  in  the
essay  on  "  Worship,"  in  "  Conduct  of  Life  " :  "  The
religion  which  is  to  guide  and  fulfil  the  present  and
coming  ages  must  be  intellectual.  The  scientific
mind  must  have  a  faith  which  is  science.  .  .  .  There
will  be  a  new  church  founded  on  moral  science,  at
first  cold  and  naked  .  .  .  but  it  will  have  heaven
and  earth  for  its  beams  and  rafters,  science  for
symbol  and  illustration.  It  will  fast  enough  gather
beauty,  music,  picture,  poetry."  While  he  thus  ad-
vanced in  viewing  science,  he  advanced  also  in
viewing  all  other  subjects;  but  it  was  from  the

Eoint  of  view  of  intuition  and  oneness  with  what
e  called  the  Over-Soul.  Everything  that  he  said
must  be  looked  at  in  the  light  of  his  own  remark,
"  Life  is  a  train  of  moods."  But  his  moods  rest
upon  the  certainty,  to  him,  of  his  own  intuition.
Emerson's  presentation  of  his  views  is  generally  in
a  large  degree  poetic.  His  poems  sum  up  and  also
expand  his  prose.  The  seeming  want  of  technical
skill  in  his  verse  is  frequently  due  to  a  more  sub-
tile art  of  natural  melody  which  defied  conven-
tional rules  of  versification.  The  irregular  lines,
the  flaws  of  metre  and  rhyme,  remind  us  of  the
intermittent  breathings  of  an  jEolian  harp.  Em-
erson's poetic  instrument  may  have  been  a  rustic
contrivance,  but  it  answered  to  ever}'  impulse  of
the  winds  and  the  sighs  of  human  feeling,  from
"  Monadnoc  "  to  the  "Threnody  "  upon  the  death
of  his  child-son.  Sometimes  he  unconsciously  so
perfected  his  poetic  lines  that,  as  Dr.  Holmes  says,
a  moment  after  they  were  written  they  "seemed
as  if  they  had  been  carved  on  marble  for  a  thou-
sand years,"  as  this  in  "  Voluntaries  " :
"  So  nigh  is  grandeur  to  our  dust,
So  near  is  God  to  man,
When  duty  whispers  low,  Thou  must,
The  youth  replies,  /  can."
Matthew  Arnold  has  pronounced  his  essays  "the
most  important  work  done  in  prose  "  in  this  cent-
ury ;  but  Prof.  C.  C.  Everett,  discussing  the  quali-
ties of  Emerson  in  the  "  Andover  Review  *  for


March.  1887.  describes  his  philosophy  as  that  of  a
poet)  and  add.--,  "so  hi-  ethics  is  the  ctlii>
poet."  He  regards  the  poems  aj  the  most  com-
plete and  worthy  expression  of  Emerson's  genius.
But  Dr.  Everett's  discovery  of  passion  in  Emer-
son*! poetry  is  not  generally  accepted  by  other
a 'i lies.  As  has  been  well  remarked  by  another
writer,  the  verse,  in  general  abstractly  and  intel-
lectually beautiful,  kindles  to  passion  only  when
the  chosen  theme  is  distinctly  American  or  patri-
otic. Emerson  constantly  preached  by  life  and  pen
a  new  revelation,  a  new  teacher  of  religion  and
morals,  putting  himself  always  in  the  place  of  a
harbinger,  a  John  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Julian
Hawthorne  has  written  of  him  :  "  He  is  our  future
living  in  our  present,  and  showing  the  world,  by
anticipation,  what  sort  of  excellence  we  are  capa-
ble of."  His  own  life  conformed  perfectly  to  the
idealism  that  he  taught ;  but  he  regarded  himself
as  a  modest  link  in  the  chain  of  progress.  He
made  his  generation  turn  their  eyes  forward  instead
of  backward.  He  enforced  upon  them  courage,
self-reliance,  patriotism,  hope.  People  flocked  to
him  from  all  quarters,  finally,  for  advice  and  guid-
ance. The  influence  that  he  exercised  not  only
upon  persons  since  grown  eminent,  such  as  Prof,
lyndall,  who  found  a  life's  inspiration  in  his
thought,  but  also  upon  thousands  unknown,  is  one
of  his  claims  to  recognition.  Another  is  that,  at
a  time  when,  it  is  conceded,  the  people  of  the
United  States  were  largely  materialistic  in  their
aims,  he  came  forward  as  the  most  idealistic  writer
of  the  age,  and  also  as  a  plain  American  citizen.
He  was  greatly  indebted  to  preceding  authors.  It
has  been  ascertained  that  he  named  in  his  writ-
ings 3,393  quotations  from  868  individuals,  mostly
writers.  "  The  inventor  onlv  knows  how  to  quote,
said  Emerson ;  and,  notwithstanding  his  drafts
upon  the  treasury  of  the  past,  he  is  the  most  orig-
inal writer  as  a  poet,  seer,  and  thinker  that  Ameri-
ca possesses.  The  doctrine  of  the  "  many  in  one,"
which  he  incessantly  taught,  is  exemplified  in  him-
self and  his  works.  The  best  extant  accounts  of
Emerson  are  "  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  his  Life,
Writings,  and  Philosophy,"  by  George  Willis  Cooke
(Boston,  1881);  "Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,"  by  Oliver
Wendell  Holmes  (Boston,  1884) ;  "  Emerson  at
Home  and  Abroad,"  by  Moncure  D.  Conway ;  "  Bi-
ographical Sketch,"  by  Alexander  Ireland;  "The
Genius  and  Character  of  Emerson,  Lectures  at  the
Concord  School  of  Philosophy,"  edited  by  F.  B.
Sanborn  (Boston,  1885).  See,  also,  F.  B.  Sanborn's
"  Homes  and  Haunts  of  Emerson."  J.  E.  Cabot,
of  Boston,  has  in  charge  a  life  authorized  by  Em-
erson's family,  which  may  include  extracts  from
his  diaries  and  other  unpublished  matter.

EMERSON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  6  May,  1769;  d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  12
May,  1811.  He  was  the  father  of  Ralph  Waldo
Emerson.  William  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1789,  and  after  teaching  for  two  years  returned  to
Cambridge  as  a  student  of  divinity.  He  had  been
there  but  a  few  months  when  he  began  preach-
ing, and  on  23  May,  1792,  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Unitarian  church  at  Harvard,  Mass.  In  1799
he  received  a  call  from  the  1st  church  in  Boston,
and  remained  there  until  his  death.  Of  his  abili-
ties as  a  pulpit  orator,  Mr.  George  Ticknor  wrote
in  1S4!) :  "  Mr.  Emerson  possessed  a  graceful  and
dignified  style  of  speaking,  which  was  by  no  means
without  its  attraction,  but  he  lacked  the  fervor
that  could  rouse  the  masses,  and  the  original  re-
sources that  could  command  the  few."  He  was
the  founder  and  active  promoter  of  the  "  Christian
Monitor "  society,  whose  publications  were


KMMKT


M0


-licallv  for m:uiv  WW. In 1*01 he  undcr-
in  conjunction  with  •emend  friend*,  a  literary

K nodical,  the  precursor  of  "  The  North  American
titled  "The  Monthly  Anthotofj
Bost  ■'•."  which  was  published  until 1810,

and  enlisted  some  of  the  licst  talent  in  Sew  Kng-
land. Mr. Kmerson's  theological ffewi  were  lib-

Jeranl  toward  those  who
differed  from  him  most  widely.  In  addition  to
numerous  aermons,  he  printed  n  "Oration  1'ro-
nounoed  at  Boston,  4  July,  1809";  a  "Discourse
before  tli«'  Hnmane  Society "(1807);  and  a  "Se-
lection of  Psalms  ami  RyUUM  '*  for  use  in  churches
\ft.-r  his  death,  hi*  ■•  History  <>f  the  First
Ohuroh  iii  Boston,"  with  two  sermons  appended,

was  issued  1 1M1'2).

EMERTON,  James  Honey,  b,  in  Salem,  Mass.,

in  1*17.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  began  the  study
of  natunil  history  in  the  milium  of  the  Bam  in-
stitute in  Salem,  became  assistant  at  the  museum
Of  tin'  Boston  -oeiety  of  natural  history  in  l878-*4,
took  Charge  "f  the  Satan  museum  in  i*7!>,  and  in
1MH0  became  an  assistant  at  the  Yale  college,  inuse-
um.  and  also  an  assistant  on  the  U.  8.  fish  cominis-
sioii.  He  stamls  at  the  head  of  natural  history
artists  in  the  United  States,  and  has  drawn  the  il-
lustrations for  many  scientific  works,  including
Packard's  "(iuide  to  the  Study  of  Insects"  and
most  of  Prof.  Verrill's  later  publications.  Mr.  Km-
erton  is  the  author  of  "Notes  and  Additions  to  a
Second  Kdition  of  Hentz's  Spiders  of  the  1'nited
Stat.s"  (1878);  "Structures  and  Habits  of  Spi-
ders" [1877);  and  "  Life  on  the  Seashore "  (1880).

EM  FRY,  Charles  Edward,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Aurora.  X.  V..  N  March,  1838.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  academy  in  Canandaigua,  X.  Y.,  and
early  developed  a  taste  for  engineering.  In  July.
1861,  he  entered  the  V.  S.  navy  as  third  assistant
engineer,  and  served  on  the  "  Richmond  "  during
engagements  at  Pensacola,  the  Mississippi  river
passes,  and  finally  under  Farragut.  In  December,
1888,  he  was  promoted  to  second  assistant  engineer,
and  participated  in  the  blockading  of  Charleston.
In  December.  1867,  he  resigned,  entered  the  em-
ploy of  the  Novelty  iron  works  In  Now  York  city.
and  was  general  superintendent  of  the  first  fair  of
the  American  institute  in  its  |>ermanent  quarters.
In  1K69  he  engaged  in  business  for  himself,  but
soon  afterward  l>ecame  consulting  engineer  of  the
U.  S.  coast  survey  and  the  IT.  S.  revenue  marine,
and  had  charge  of  the  (instruction  of  the  vessels
of  the  former  service  until  its  engineering  depart-
ment was  put  in  the  hands  of  the  navy.  In  con-
neetion  with  chief-engineer  Charles  H.  Loring.  be
instituted  a  series  of  experiments  to  determine  the
relative  value  of  OOSapoond  and  non-compound
engines,  and  his  results  were  published  in  scien-
tific  journal*  at  home  and  abroad.  In  1879  he
was  appointed  engineer  of  the  New  York  steam
company,  and  the  entire  plant  of •  that  company
»;i-  constructed  from  his  designs,  and  is  now
-7)  under  his  direction.  The  details  were  en-
tirely new,  as  the  similar  work  that  had  been  done
previously  was  on  a  small  scale.  He  invented  for
this  work  expansion-joints  made  with  thin  00p*
|mt  corrugated  diaphragms  supported  <>n  backing
plates,  and  a  meter  for  registering  steam  when
moving  at  a  velocity  of  eighty  feet  a  second  ami
upward,  together  with  numerous  devices  for  over-
eoming  difficulties  encountered  in  the  transmission
through  the  streets,  generation  in  the  building, and
the  return  of  the  water  of  condensation.  Mr.
Binary  has  made  several  inventions  in  connection
with  steam  engines,  and  has  conducted  ttperi-
ments  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  practicability


Of  lining  steam  oyUndstl  with  non-conducting  ma-
terials, lb-  is  one  of  the  non-resident i
of  Cornell  university,  and  his  |<<<-turee  have  h
published  in the  ••  Scientific American "  mp|
ments. In 1N7'.»  |,e  received  the  hoimra'
of  Ph.D.  from  the  DniTattJtj  of New  Y.irk. lb
is  the  author  >>f  technical paper*,  principal)!
lating  to  steam  engineering,  most  ,,f  sjfluah I

Ih-.ii  oontrfimted  to  the  "TnMsjeci  the

American society  of  civil sngfa rs.  or  thoSJ

the  American  society  of  mechanical  engim-cni,  of

which  organisations  he  i*  a  BMsabsr.

KMMERTUX.  .lames  Arthur.
in  Salem.  lb- was  graduated

at  Harvard  in  1868  and  at  the  im-dnal  Bflhool  in
1858)  ind  then  studied  abroad  for  at]  months,  lb-
sctv.il  as  soldier  and  surgeon  in  the  civil  war  in
!sc,l-'5,  WM  assistant  at  tin- State  lunatic  asylum.
Ctica,  X.  Y.,  in  18(MJ-'7.  and  since  then  has  prac-
tised his  profession.  He  baa  contributed  papers  to
the  BasM  institute  historical  collections,  including
"Cleanings  from  Knglish  Records,"  and  has  puh-
lished  "  Deacon  Richard  Prince,  of  Satan,  and
some  of  His  Descendants  "  (Salem,  1s7Ti:  "C. ma-
logical  Account  of  Henry  SUsbee"  i1shi):  ••  Mate-
rials toward  a  Genealogy  of  the  Kinuiertoii  Fami-
ly" (1881);  u  Eighteenth  Century  Baptisms  in  Sa-
lem, Mass."  (1868);  and  "Record  of  the  28d
Itsaaachnaetta  Regiment  "  (Boston,  1886

EM.HET,  Thomas  Addis.  Irish  patriot,  b.  in
Cork,  Ireland,  24  April.  17<>4:  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  Xov.,  1887.  He  was  an  elder  brother  of
the  famous  Irish  patriot,  Robert  Kmmet.  who  was
executed  in  Dublin  in  lNtM.  The  father  of  the
Emmets  was  an  eminent  physician  in  Dublin.
Thomas  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college.  Dublin,
and  studied  medicine  in  Edinburgh  university.
where  he  received  his  degree  in  17*1.  After  trav-
elling through  Italy  and  Germany,  and  returning
to  Dublin, he  decided  to  adopt  the  legal  profession,

for  which  he  had  always  had  a  fondness.  He
studied  law  in  the  Temple.  London,  for  two  years,
and  in  1791  was  admitted  to  the  Dublin  bar.  of
which  he  soon  became  a  prominent  member.  He
early  became  a  leader  of  the  "United  Irishmen,"
an  association  whose  object  was  to  make  Inland
an  independent  republic,  and  was  one  <>f  the  com-
mittee whose  duty  it  was  to  supervise  all  branches
of  the  society  through  the  country.  Disclosures
being  made  to  the  government,  Emmet  was  appre-
hended by  order
of  the  privy  coun-
cil in  17!»H.  con-
fined in  Kilmain-
bam  jail,  Dublin.
and,  being  prom-
ised his  liberty,
made  a  full  con-
fession, but  with-
out implicating
other  persona,  be-
fore a  committee

Of  the  Irish  bouse
of  commons  |
few  months  later.
Xot  withstanding
this,  he  was  OOn*
fined  for  two
years  and  a  half
in Fort George,

Scotland, but was  liU-rated after the treaty  of
Amiens,  and permitted  to  go  to  France  with  his
wife,  who  had bean  with him in his imprison-
ment. In.th  Wing  forbidden to  set foot  ml:
Irish  sod. Emmet epejri  the  winter  of 1161 ;


ty&Ji^  -£-~^


800


EMMET


KMMOXS


in  Brussels,  whence  he  saw  his  brother,  Robert,
undertake  the  rash  enterprise  that  led  to  his
death.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1804  in-
tending to  go  to  Ohio,  hut,  bv  the  advice  of  Gov.
George  Clinton,  remained  in  Kew  York  city,  where
he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life,  attaining  gnat  emi-
nence at  the  bar.  He  identified  himself  with  the
Democratic  party,  and  became  attorney-general  of
the  state  in  1812.  Mr.  Emmet  was  a  hard  worker,
devoting  more  than  thirteen  hours  a  day  to  study
and  business,  mingling  but  little  in  society,  and
resorting  to  mathematics  for  diversion.  He  ex-
celled as  an  advocate.  "  His  mind,"  says  Judge
Story,  "  was  quick,  vigorous,  searching,  and  buoy-
ant. He  kindled  as  ne  spoke.  His  rhetoric  was
never  florid,  and  his  diction,  though  select  and
pure,  seemed  the  common  dress  of  his  thoughts,  as
they  arose,  rather  than  any  studied  effort  at  adorn-
ment." He  was  seized  with  an  apoplectic  fit  in
the  court-room,  and  died  on  the  same  day.  He  is
buried  in  Marble  cemetery  in  Second  street,  be-
tween First  and  Second  avenues.  New  York  city,
next  to  the  vault  occupied  for  twenty-seven  years
by  the  remains  of  President  Monroe,  and  a  monu-
ment to  his  memory  stands  in  St.  Paul's  church-
yard. While  in  prison  in  Scotland,  Mr.  Emmet
wrote  sketches  of  Irish  history,  particularly  of
events  in  which  he  had  taken  part,  which  he
afterward  published  in  connection  with  Dr.  Will-
iam J.  McNevin,  under  the  title  "  Pieces  of  Irish
History "  (New  York,  1807).  His  memoirs  were
written  by  Charles  G.  Haynes  (London,  1829).
— His  son,  Robert,  lawver,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1792 :  d.  in  New  Rochelle,'N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1873,  came
to  this  country  with  his  father?  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  attaining  high  rank  in  his  profession,  and  be-
came a  justice  of  the  state  superior  court.  At  the
time  of  the  contemplated  Irish  insurrection  of
1848  he  was  one  of  the  directory  formed  in  New
York  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  it,  and  made  an
eloquent  address  at  a  mass-meeting  held  on  6  June,
1848.— Another  son,  John  Pal  ton.  chemist,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  8  April,  1797;  d.  in  New  York
city,  13  Aug.,  1842,  also  came  to  New  York  with
his  father.  He  left  school  in  1813  on  account  of
his  health,  was  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1814-'7,  spent  a  year  in  Naples,  and  on  his  return
studied  medicine  in  New  York  for  four  years  with
Dr.  William  J.  McNevin.  He  received  his  degree
at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  and  prac-
tised in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1822-4,  also  giving
popular  lectures  on  chemistry  there.  In  the  latter
year  he  accepted  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  natu-
ral history  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  where
his  lectures  were  noted  for  simplicity  of  style  and
beauty  and  novelty  of  illustration.  Several  months
before  his  death  his  health,  which  had  never  been
good,  failed  completely,  and  after  a  visit  to  Florida
he  returned  to  New  York  to  die.  Dr.  Emmet  was
a  good  draughtsman,  and  did  some  work  as  a  sculp-
tor, including  an  excellent  bust  of  his  father.  He
also  occasionally  attempted  musical  composition.
His  chemical  papers,  published  in  "  Silliman's  Jour-
nal," include  "Iodide  of  Potassium  as  a  Test  for
Arsenic  "  (1830) : "  Solidification  of  Gypsum  "  (1833) ;
a  description  of  a  new  mode  of  producing  electro-
magnet currents  (1833) ;  an  inquiry  into  the  cause
of  such  currents,  in  which  he  concludes  that  it  is
induction  (1835) ;  and  one  on  "  Formic  Acid  "  (1837).
—Another  son,  Thomas  Addis,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1798 ;  d.  in  Astoria,  L.  I.,  12  Aug.,  1863,  also  came
to  this  country  with  his  father,  was  well  known  as
a  lawyer,  and  for  many  years  filled  with  credit  the
office  of  master  in  chancery. — Robert's  son,  Thomas
Addis,  engineer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  4  June,  1818 ;


d.  in  Carmel,  Putnam  co..  N  V..  IS  Jan.,  1880,  en-
tered Columbia  in  1*3-1.  but  left  iii  the  following
year  and  became  a  civil  engineer.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  e. >nst ruction  of  various  railroads,  but
was  employed  chiefly  on  the  Erie.  From  1870  till
his  death  he  was  an  assistant  in  the  Croton  a«pu-
duct  department,  and  superintended  the  construc-
tion of  the  large  reservoir  near  Brewster's.  N.  V.  He
was  one  of  the  twelve  founders  of  the  American
society  of  civil  engineers.  —  John  Patton's  son,
Thomas  Addis,  physician,  b.  at  the  University  of
Virginia,  29  May,  1828,  took  a  partial  course  there,
and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Jefferson  medi-
cal college,  Philadelphia,  in  1850.  He  began  prac-
tice in  New  York  city  in  1852.  and  in  1802  became
surgeon-in-chief  to  the  Women's  hospital,  of  which
he  had  been  assistant  surgeon  since  1855.  He  re-
tained this  office  till  1872,  and  since  then  has  been
visiting  surgeon.  Dr.  Emmet  is  a  member  of  vari-
ous medical  associations.  Since  1859  he  has  made
a  specialty  of  the  diseases  of  women,  and  has  in-
troduced new  operations  and  methods  of  treatment
that  are  important  in  the  history  of  medical  science.
He  has  contributed  largely  to  the  literature  of  that
branch  of  medicine,  his  important  papers  in  medi-
cal journals  numbering  nearly  forty.  His  publica-
tions in  book-form  are  "  Vesico-vaginal  Fistula? "
(New  York,  1868) ;  "  Risse  des  Cervix  Uteri  als  eine
hailfige  und  nicht  erkannte  Krankheitsursache "
(Berlin,  1875);  "Treatment  and  Removal  of  Fibroids
from  the  Uterus  by  Traction  "  (New  York,  1875);
and  "Principles  and  Practice  of  Gynecology"
(Philadelphia,  1879 ;  3d  ed.,  revised,  1884).  The
last-named  work  has  passed  through  three  editions
in  London,  has  been  translated  into  German  (Leip-
sic,  1881),  and  is  now  (1887)  in  course  of  translation
into  French.  Dr.  Emmet's  later  papers  include  one
on  "  Certain  Mooted  Points  in  Gynecology,"  read
before  the  British  medical  association  in  August,
1886,  and  "Pelvic  Inflammations,"  before  the
American  gynecological  society,  Baltimore,  in  Sep-
tember, 1886. — Robert's  grandson,  Robert  Tem-
ple, soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  13  Dec.,  1854,  is
the  son  of  William  J.  Emmet,  lie  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1877,  assigned  to
the  9th  cavalry,  and  served  with  distinction  as  com-
mander of  Indian  scouts  through  the  four-years
campaign  against  the  Apaches. — His  twin-sister,
Rosin  a,  artist,  was  educated  at  Pelham  Priory,
Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  and  studied  art  under
William  M.  Chase  in  1879-'80,  and  in  Paris  in
1885-'6.  She  received  the  first  prize  in  Prang's
Christmas-card  competition  in  1879,  and  a  first
prize  medal  in  London  in  1878,  for  heads  on  china.
She  has  illustrated  a  book  for  children,  entitled
"Pretty  Peggy,"  collecting  and  arranging  for  it
the  poems  and  music  (New  York,  1880),  and  Mrs.
Burton  Harrison's  "Old- Fashioned  Tales "  (1884).
She  is  a  member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists,
and  has  exhibited  many  paintings,  both  in  oil  and
water-colors.  In  1887  she  married  Arthur  II.  Sher-
wood, of  New  York.

EMMONS,  Ebenezer,  geologist,  b.  in  Middle-
field,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  16  May,  1799;  d.  in
Brunswick,  N.  C.  1  Oct..  1863.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1818,  and,  after  studying  medicine
and  the  natural  sciences  in  various  places,  received
his  diploma  from  the  Berkshire  medical  institute.
Pittsfield,  Mass..  in  1830,  and  in  1833  became  pro-
fessor of  natural  history  at  Williams,  being  one  of
the  first  in  the  country  to  occupy  such  a  chair.
Here  he  made  important  contributions  to  the  bot-
any, geology,  and  mineralogy  of  the  northern  states,
and  prepared  a  report  on  the  "  Quadrupeds  of  Mas-
sachusetts.'" He  was  then  appointed  geologist-in-


KM.M


EMORY


an


chief  of  the  second  «li-t rici  of  the  geologios]  nrvw

nf  tli.-  state  of  S<  w  York,  and  while  thus  engaged
to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  received  opinion  that
tlu>  Silurian  system  was  the  oldest  stratified  fov-il-
U-aring  System  of  rocks  mi  tin-  continent.  After
continuing  his  investigations  for  several  yean,  he
aiinniiiic.il  his  belief  that  the  rookl  forming  the
i  face  <>(  the  Green  mountains,  extending
from  Canada  to  Georgia,  the  well-known  Berkshire
ami  Vermont  Hnnetom  i  nnil  tin  i  imiifl  il  rocks,
holonfrrt  to  ■  lystem  underlying  tad  therefore

older  than  the  Silurian.  This  be  named  tin-  "  T.i-
coiiic  "  system,  from  the  ratine  of  hills  traversing
Berkahin  county.  This  *»"»  ~  IMIMUJ  whs  re-
ceived l>y  other  geologists  with  skepticism,  iui'1
Dr.  Kimnons  was  looked  u|miii  for  years  alino-t  SJ
I  scientific  ImnuSSflf  Hut  later  discoveries  in
Canada  and  OB  the  continent  of  BWDM  seemed  to
confirm  his  theory,  and  lie  fore  his  death  it  was  re-
ceived, either  wholly  or  partially,  by  most  Ameri-
can  geologists.  In  ls;{s  he  removed  to  Albany  to
oceupv  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  medical  col-
lege there,  but  continued  to  lecture  at  Williams.
In  1H58  he  was  appointed  by  the  North  Carolina
legislature  to  conduct  the  geological  survey  of  that
state,  and  rendered  further  seilles  to  science  by
determining  the  probable  age  of  the  red  sandstone
Ix'lt  that  stretches  from  the  Connecticut  valley  to
North  Carolina.  After  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  Dr.  Emmons  remained  in  the  south,  either
because  he  was  not  permitted  to  leave,  or  from  a
desire  to  protect  certain  mining  property.  He
published  valuable  reports  in  connection  with  the
surveys  of  New  York  and  North  Carolina,  a
"  Manual  of  Mineralogy  and  Geology"  (1826),  and
"  American  Geology  "  (ia56).

KMMONS.  George  Foster,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Clarendon,  Rutland  co.,  Vt.,  28  Aug.,  1811 :  d.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  2  July,  1884  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  1  April,  1828,  was  promoted
to  passed  midshipman  in  1831,  and  was  attached
to  Cant.  Charles  Wilkes's  exploring  expedition  in
1838-42.  He  was  made  lieutenant  on  25  Feb.,
1841.  and  after  the  loss  of  his  vessel,  the  "  Pea-
cock," otf  Columbia  river,  Oregon,  in  July  of  that
year,  had  charge  of  a  party  that  explored  the
country  south  of  the  Columbia  to  the  head-waters
of  the  Sacramento,  and  went  thence  to  San  Fran-
cisco. He  then  served  in  various  vessels,  taking
part  in  several  engagements  on  shore  in  California,
during  the  Mexican  war.  He  became  commander
"M  89  Jan.,  1856.  commanded  the  "  Hatteras,"  of
the  western  gulf  squadron,  in  1862.  and  in  that
year  captured  Cellar  Keys.  Fla.,  and  Pass  Chris-
tian. Miss.,  and  about  twenty  prizes.  He  after-
ward commanded  the  "  R.  R.  Cuyler,"  of  the  mum
squadron,  ami  after  being  commissioned  captain,
7  Feb.,  1KM.  was  fleet-captain  under  Admiral  Dahl-
gnn  otT  Charleston.  He  commanded  the  "  Lacka-
wanna," and  a  division  of  from  fire  to  fifteen  femek
in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1884-%  and  while  at  New
Orleans  assisted  in  destroying  the  ram  "  Webb,"
and  [in-venting  the  destruction  of  the  city  and
■hipping.  In  lH66-'8  he  commanded  the"<>ssi-
|h-c,'  carrying  the  V.  S.  commissioners  to  Alaska.
and  hoisting  the  American  flag  over  that  country.
He  was  made  commodore,  80  Sept.  1888,  appoint-
ed  senior  immUr  of  the  ordnance  l>oard  in  Wash-
ington in  1869,  and  given  charge  of  the  hydro-
graphic  otlice  in  l*?o.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-
admiral,  88  Nov.,  1878, end  retired  from  eel
vice  on  •-':{  Aug..  1*7:1.  He  published  "  Tl
of  the  United  States  from  177.")  t«.  1858"
ington,  1858).— His  cousin.  Ilulmcr  Hull,  lawyer,
b.  in  Glens  Falls.  N.  Y.,  in 1818;  d.  in Detroit,


'  Mich..  It May.  H77,  was  educated in Rutland.

Vt.  After  mmitmg  his  father,  a  journalist.  he
studi.il  law,  and  wa»  admitted  to  the  bar.  but  won
removed  to  Detroit,  whither  his  father  hail  already
gone,  and  the  two  formed  a  law  partnership  al
Is 10.  Balmer  acquired  distinction  In
the  right  of  a  Protestant  clergyman  to  preach
against  whatever  ha  believed  injurious  |o  the  nej|>
fare  of  his  fel|.,w-citi/.ens.  H,.  putieJlj  retired
from  practice  in  1853. on  account  of  failing  health,
but  in  1*70  was  appointed  V.  S.  circuit  judge  f,,r
tin-  sixth  district  :  including  Michigan,  nhio,  K.n-
tuckv.  and  Tennessee,

KMMONS,  Nathaiiael.  theologian,  b.  in  East
Iladdam.  Conn..  20  April.  174*> ;  d.  in  Franklin.
Mass.,  2: 1  Sept.,  IhKi.  He  was  graduated.,
in  1767.  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1768,  al-
though holding  doctrines  that  were  uiisatisf,,,  ton.
to  many  of  his  examiners.  He  was  iOOttetomed  to
call  himself  a  "genuine  Calvinist,"  though  hi  ex-
cepted to  the  received  Calvinistie  doctrines  in  sev-
eral important  respects.  From  1773  till  his  re-
tirement from  active  duties  in  1827  he  was  paotot
at  Franklin,  Mass.,  and  during  this  Jong  pastorate

Brepared  fifty  seven  young  men  for  the  ministry.
»r.  Kmmoiis  was  one  of  the  founders  and  the  firM
president  of  the  Massachusetts  missionary  society,
and  an editor  of  the  Massachusetts  "  Missionary

Magazine." Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degr '<(

D.  D.  in  1798.  He  was  noted  for  shrew. i
mingled  with  oddity.  Among  his  aphorisms  is
the  well-known  rule  for  clergymen  ■  ••  First  have
something  to  say:  then  sav  it."  Another  is:  "The
worst  books  are  the  best:  they  compel  us  to  think."
Dr.  Hmmonswasa  zealous  patriot  during  tin-  Revo-
lution, and  afterward  an  ardent  Federalist.  On
"  fast-day,"  in  1801.  he  delivered  a  sermon  on  Jere-
boam.  picturing  Thomas  Jefferson  in  the  guise  of
that  king,  so  that  the  portrait  was  easily  recog-
nized. He  published  ai»<>ut  two  hundred  sermons,
besidea  essays  and  dissertations.  His  collected
works  were  published  by  his  son-in-law.  Dr.  Jeoofa
Ide,  with  a  memoir  (6  vols..  Hoston.  18481  Set-
also  "  Memoir  of  Nathanael  Kninions,"  bv  Bdwarda
A.  Park.  D.  D.  (Andover.  1S<«>  1  >.

KMMONS,  Samuel  Franklin,  geologist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mas-..  89  March,  1841.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1861.  and  then  studied  at  1 1  j -
dee  mines.  Paris,  during  1868-'4,  and  el  the  Frei-
berg (Saxon v)  mining-school  during  1K64-  •"».  In
May,  1867.  lie  was  appointed  assistant  geologist
under  Clarence  King  on  the  l*.  S.  geological  ex-
ploration of  the  fortieth  parallel,  and  in  July,  1879,
became  geologist  in  charge  of  the  Colorado  divi-
sion of  the  L.  S.  geological  survey.  He  has  trav-
elled extensively  throughout  the  I'nited  States  in
connection  with  his  work,  and  in  1S70  made  a  sur-
vey of  Mount  Rainbow,  the  highest  and  BMSt  in-
aocceaible  peak  in  Washington  territory.  During
the  autumn  of  1872.  with  Clarence  King,  he  dis-
covered the  locality  of  the  supposed  diamond-fields
in  Arizona,  and  was  active  in  exposing  their  fraudu-
lent character.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  soci-
eties, and  an  occasional  contributor  of  }>a;
their transactions. His larger  publication

'•  Descriptive  Geology."  in  rot  ii.  of  the"  Hearts  of

the  Exploration  of  the  Fortieth  Parallel  "  (Wash-
ington. 1*77):  "Statistics  and  Technology  of  the
Precious  Metals."  written  in  conjunction  with
Qeotve  P.  Becker  (1888};  and  M Geology  and  fif-
ing Industries  of  LeadviUe,  Colorado (1886).

KMORY.  John.  M.  K.  bishop,  b.  in  (jooefl  Anne

county.  Md..  11 April.  17W;  d.  in  Rcisterstown,

Md..  1?  Dec..  is:{*>. He  was  e.lucated  under  tutors

|  at  RoftoSJ  and I  *a  master,  Pa.,  ami  in  Washington


862


K.MoKY


KMOTT


college,  Md.  He  began  to  study  law  in  1805,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1808,  but  his  attention
was  tnnied  t<>  the  pulpit,  and  he  entered  the  uiin-
tatrrof  the  Methodist  Kpiseopal  church  in  1810.
He  became  well  known,  and  his  services  were  much
in  demand  throughout  the  middle  states.  He  was
chosen  to  the  general  conference  of  1816,  and  to
each  succeeding  conference  with  a  single  except  inn
till  1832,  when  ne  was  elected  and  ordained  Hehop.
He  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  British  Wesleyan
conference  in  1820,  and  in  1824  was  apjMiinted
l>ook  agent  and  editor  for  his  denomination  at
New  York.  His  episcopal  appointment  did  not
take  him  away  from  the  book  concern,  and  during
his  management  he  was  successful  in  paying  all  its
debts  and  putting  it  on  a  solid  and  satisfactory
foundation.  He  was  active  in  promoting  the  im-
provement of  the  literature  of  his  church.  The
M  Methodist  (Quarterly  -Review  "  was  founded  by
him,  and  nearly  all  the  original  articles  in  the  first
two  volumes  are  from  his  pen.  His  services  and
ex|>erience  were  made  available  in  the  founding  of
the  University  of  New  York  and  Wesleyan  uni-
vcrsity.  and  he  was  one  of  the  principal  organizers
of  Dickinson  college.  In  his  dav  he  was  an  able
debater,  and  in  1817,  in  a  pamphlet  controversy,
he  used  literary  weapons,  not  unsuccessfully,  with
Bishop  White,  of  Pennsylvania.  In  the  contro-
versy of  1828  he  was  the  chief  defender  of  the
existing  church  government.  He  was  of  a  logical
turn  of  mind,  and  had  command  of  a  pure,  clear,
and  vigorous  style.  After  his  election  to  the  epis-
copacy he  was  largely  influential  in  giving  to  the
church  code  known  as  the  Methodist  discipline  its
present  form.  He  met  his  death  by  being  thrown
irom  his  carriage.  He  left  several  works,  includ-
ing "  The  Divinity  of  Christ  Vindicated,"  and
"Defence  of  Our  Fathers,"  in  which  he  upholds
Wesley's  policy. — His  son,  Robert,  educator,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  29  July,  1814 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  18  May,  1848,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1831,  and  studied  law.  He  was  appointed  profes-
sor of  ancient  languages  in  Dickinson  college  in
1834,  but  resigned  in  1839,  and  entered  the  Balti-
more annual  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church.  In  1842  he  was  recalled  to  Dickinson
college  and  made  president  pro  tempore,  and  after
the  retirement  of  Dr.  Durbin  became  president,
holding  the  office  the  rest  of  his  life. Columbia

f;ave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1846.  He  pub-
ished  a  "  Life  of  Bishop  Emory,"  with  a  collection
of  his  writings  (New  York,  1841),  and  "  History  of
the  Discipline  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  "
(1843) ;  and  left  behind  him  an  unfinished  "  Analy-
sis of  Butler's  Analogy,"  which  was  afterward  com-
Eleted  and  published  bv  Dr.  Crooks  (1850). — Bishop
Imory's  first  cousin,  William  Hemsley,  soldier,
b.  in  Queen  Anne  county,  Md.,  9  Sept.,  1811 ;  d.  in
Washington.  D.C.,  1  Dec",  1887,  was  graduated  at  the
U.S.  military  academv  in  1831, and  appointed  lieu-
tenant of  artillery.  He  was  chiefly  at  sea-ports  in
1831-'6,  and  was  in  Charleston  harbor  during  the
nullification  trouble  in  South  Carolina.  He  was
in  the  Creek  nation  in  1836-'8,  was  appointed  1st
lieutenant  of  topographical  engineers  in  the  latter
year,  and  employed  successively  on  the  improve-
ments of  Delaware  river,  and  on  the  northeast
Ixmndary  survev.  He  went  with  Gen.  Stephen  W.
Kearny  to  California  in  1846,  and  was  on  his  staff
during  the  Mexican  war,  when  he  was  successively
made  captain  and  brevet-major.  He  was  on  the
Mexican  and  Californian  border  in  1848-'53,  and
in  those  years  was  commissioner  and  astronomer
to  run  the  boundary  between  Mexico  and  the
United  States,  especially  under  the  Gadsden  treaty


4lP^>wy


of  1858.  He  was  in  Kansas  in  1854,  in  Utah  in
1858,  and  remained  on  border  duty  till  !»  May,
is(')i.  when  he  resigned  Be  m  reappointed  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  6th  cavalry  on  14  May,
and  he  took  part  in  the  j)eninsular  campaign,  being
engaged  at  Yorktown,  Williamsburg,  and  Han-
over Court -House.
He  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  vol-
unteers, 17  March,
1862,  commanded
a  division  under
Hanks  in  Louisiana
in  1863,  and,  hav-
ing been  raised  to
the  command  of  the
19th  corps,  was  with
the  same  command-
er in  1864  in  the
Red  river  expedi-
tion, in  which  lie
displayed  unwonted
bravery  and  skill,
winning  distinction
especially  at  Sa-
bine Cross  -  Roads,
at  Pleasant  Hill. and
at  Cane  River.  Later  in  the  same  year,  at  the
head  of  the  19th  corps,  he  offered  a  splendid  and
successful  resistance  to  Early  in  the  Shenandoah
valley,  especially  at  Opequan  Creek,  19  Sept.,  at
Fisher's  Hill,  22  Sept.,  and  at  Cedar  Creek  in  Octo-
l>er.  He  received  the  successive  brevets  of  major-
general  of  volunteers,  23  July,  1864,  and  brigadier-
general  and  major-general  in  the  regular  army,  13
March,  1865,  and  on  25  Sept.,  1865,  was  commis-
sioned full  major-general  of  volunteers.  After  the
war  he  was  successively  in  command  of  the  Depart-
ment of  West  Virginia  in  1865-'6,  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Washington  in  1869-'71,  and  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Gulf  in  1871-5.  He  retired  in  1876
with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  Gen.  Emory
has  published  "  Notes  of  a  Military  Reconnoissance
in  Missouri  and  California"  (New  York,  1848) ;  and
"  Report  of  the  United  States  and  Mexican  Bound-
ary Commission"  (Washington). — His  son,  Will-
iam Hemsley,  naval  officer,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1866,  became  master  in
1869,  and  lieutenant  in  1870,  and  in  1884  command-
ed the  "  Bear,"  of  the  Greely  relief  expedition.

EMOTT,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.
Y.,  14  March,  1771 :  d.  there,  7  April,  1850.  He
did  not  receive  a  collegiate  education,  but  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Union  in
1800.  He  studied  law,  began  to  practise  at  Ball-
ston  Centre,  and  soon  became  a  distinguished
member  of  the  bar.  He  was  a  commissioner  to
settle  disputes  concerning  titles  to  lands  in  the
military  tract  of  Onondaga  county  in  1797.  and
about  1800  removed  to  Albany,  which  he  repre-
sented in  the  legislature  of  1804.  He  was  a  leader
of  the  Federalist  party  in  congress  from  1809  till
1813 ;  a  member  of  the  New  York  assembly  from
1814  till  1817,  and  its  speaker  in  1814 ;  first  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Dutchess  c  unity
from  1817  till  1823,  and  judge  of  the  second  judi-
cial circuit  court  from  1827  till  his  resignation,
about  1831.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I>.  fmin
Columbia  in  1833. — His  son,  James,  jurist.  1>.  in
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y,  23  April.  1828;  d.  there,  11
Sept.,  1884,  received  his  early  education  in  Pough-
keepsie, and  in  1888  was  graduated  at  the  head  of
his  class  at  Columbia.  He  then  studied  law  in
Poughkeepsie,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  there,  and
at  once  began  active  practice  in  his  native


Jdaf  •  prominent  |M.siti<>M  in  the  profession.

When  r.'ughkeepsie  received  its  .barter,  bl  ems

tint  mayor,  holding  the  ottos  from

April, 1854,  to  Janm.  she*  he  resigned

to  accept  tin-  of-
fice of  justice  of
tin-  New  York
supreme  court
for the HOOuod

Judicial  district
l<\Ml>llp|M.i|ltr<l

presiding  judge

of  his  district  in
lWJ.  1111(1  judge
of  tin1  court  of
appeals  in  \*M.
when  his  term
dosed. Ho  then

mmd the

practice  of  law
in  I'oughkeepsie,
hut  removed  to
New  York  city
yj  in  1H70. He  was

fj  /r>  a vice-president

w  i  t  ry*& ^  *  a  warm  supi>ort-

er  of  the  1  nion
cause  during  the  civil  war,  having  taken  a  promi-
nent oart  in  organizing  the  first  regiment  sent  from
I  hit  chess  countv.  lie  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  New  York  fmr  association,  and  a  member  of
the  committee  of  seventy,  so  largely  instrumental  in
the  overthrow  of  the  Tweed  ring  in  18101  From
I8M  till  his  death  he  was  president  of  the  Mer-
chant's hank  of  Poughkeepsie.  Judge  Emott  was
considered  by  his  associates  a  man  of  wide  riffling
and  large  culture,  thorough  professional  training,
sound  judgment,  and  masterly  clearness  in  the
SXposftton  of  the  law.  lie  was  a  member  of  the
Protectant  Kpiscopal  church.

KM  PAR  AN,  1)1  ego  de  (em-par'-an),  Mexican
author,  h.  in  Puebla,  Mexico,  5  April,  1718;  d.  in
Ravenna,  Italy,  after  1807.  He  came  of  a  noble  and
rich  family,  studied  in  the  seminary  of  his  native
city,  and  in  \7M>\  was  sent  to  Rome  to  complete  his
education  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  the  Trinity.  He
received  consecration  as  priest  in  1745,  and  soon
published  his  first  work,  "Los  Jcsuitas  y  el  Papa"
(17 Mi),  which  appeared  at  the  same  time  in  Latin,
Srianish,  and  Italian,  and  was  soon  translated  into
English  and  French.  In  this  work  he  attacked
Louis  XIV.,  and,  on  the  demand  of  the  French
government  for  his  punishment,  he  was  confined
in  the  ecclesiastical  prison,  where  he  remained  tot
nearly  five  years.  After  his  release  he  published
"La  orden  de  los  templarios  y  la  de  los  jesuitas
bajoel  punto  de  vista  historioo ;  Santiago  de  Mo-
lay  e  Ignacio  de  Loyola"  (Bologna,  lc51),  which
attracted  a  censure  from  the  holy  office,  and  a  mi—
pension  for  a  year  of  his  functions  as  priest.  Hut
r'.  m  pa  ran  was  not  to  lie  subdued,  and  soon  issued
"  Los  apostoles  de  sayal  y  los  apostoles  de  tunica,"
containing  a  panegyric  of  the  company  of  Jam
and  a  hitter  critic  of  the  princes  of  the  church  and
their  vices  (1762),  This  time  he  had  gone  too  far.
and  the  clamors  of  the  church  dignitaries  were  so
powerful  that  the  im»|h«  demised  him  from  the
priesthood  and  condemned  him  to  pcr|>ctual  im-
prisonment in  the  fortress  of  San  Angela  Ili-
work  was  pubuoly  luirnt  by  the  executioner,  bul

was  saved,  and  exists  to-day  in  tie
tional  academy  "f  Mexico. Bmpsran  Snail]
ed pardon through the intercession of hi-

VOL. D.— M


MIHV


an


mother,  and  remame.l  f..r  some  years  in  obscuntv.
but,  unaiile  to  remain  silent  fore  long  time.

lishcd  the  BjQsJ  BOtaWOlthj  of  all  his  bool

goms.  Bmpedoi  This  book

attnictcd  the  censure  .if  the  holv  oil  t  on

tl Index  ■■xpurgatorius."  ami it-,  uuthor  inter

dieted; but he. foreseeing  |,|s fate, had  BJ|SjM

France  and  hid  in  I'aris  (of  estwrsl  months,  OSSSt)
reduced to absolute poverty. In 17H1 another

book, MLe  Diablo,  le*  femmes,  ,t  Saint  Ptiimnl,'1

caused  him  to  be  arreste<l  and  imprisoned  in  the
H.i-tilc  In  lTUJ,  thanks  to  the  influence  .>f  \'<,|.
taire,  he  was  set  at  liberty,  and  acquainted  with  the
principal  philosophers  and  snoyokmssdlstl  ..f  the
IStfa  century  living  at  the  court.'  He  soon  l-.nme
DM  of  the  leaders  of  the  philosophy  of  that  age,
and  for  several  years,  together  with  (Vmdoroet,  was
a  contributor  to  different  scientific  review*  under
the  pen-name  of  "Zoroaster."  He  received  a  rich
inheritance  from  his  parents  in  17!Mi,  and.  after
several  years  of  foreign  travel.  lOttM  in  England
in  17M.  He  removed  again  to  Paris  in  1 7l'-">.  ami
in  1H06  made  a  voyage  to  Mexico,  but  lturripiray.
at  that  time  viceroy,  considering  Fmpar  i
ence  in  New  Spain  dangerous  for  the  public  order,
expelled  him. without  consideration  forhisad\aii<cd
age  and  infirmities.  He  then  returned  to  KnropSj
and  went  to  BokMfflS,  and  afterward  to  Havenna.
whero  he  died.  Emparan  was  an  accomplished
linguist.  s|>eaking  and  writing  correctly  (ii
Ijatin,  Spanish,  French,  Italian,  ami  English.  Hi*
other  works  include  "The  Tombs  of  Mohammed
and  Christ";  "Voltaire  and  his  Bohool  ";  "Si.nci
and  Superstition";  and  "  Religion  and  Hygiene"
(London,  1794-'5);  and  "La  Virgen  India."  pi.
dieting  the  independence  of  Mexico  (Bologna,  1807).
BNAHBUC,  Pierre  Vaudrosmics  iii.-i  d\
founder  of  French  colonies  in  the  West  Indies,  b.
in  Dieppe  in  156S;  <l.  in  1636.  He  was  a  younger
son,  and  became  a  captain  in  the  French  navy,
but,  wishing  to  better  liis  fortune,  he  fitted  out  a
small  armed  brig,  and  with  about  forty  milon
sailed  from  Dieppe  in  the  spring  of  lt»2.~»  for  tin-
West  Indies.  When  op|>o.sitc  the  Cayman  islands
he  met  and  vanquished  a  Spanish  ship  of  thirty-
five  guns,  but  was  obliged  to  put  into  St.  Chris-
topher for  repairs.  Here  he  found  some  French
settlers,  and,  after  deciding  to  remain  with  them.
was  elected  their  chief.  He  subsequently  defeated
an  attempt  of  the  Indians  to  massacre  all  Euro-
peans 00  the  island,  and.  eighl  months  after  his
arrival  in  St.  Christopher,  sailed  for  Kuroj>e,  taking
with  bin  tobacco  and  mahogany.  Cardinal  Riche-
lieu authorized  D'Knainbuc  to  found  French  colo-
nies in  all  the  Antilles  from  11°  to  1M°  north  lati-
ti.de. appointing  him  governor-general  and  lieuten-
ant of  the  king.  On  14  Feb.,  1(»27.  H'Enamhuc
and  his  second.  DurOSSSy,  sailed  again  for  the  West
Indies,  taking  with  them  <HM)  colonists.  D'Knam-
buc  and  his  followers  met  with  reverses,  and  I>u-
p.ssey  was  sent  to  France  for  assistance.  Hut,  as
he  returned  without  supplies,  D'F.namhuc  went  to
France. and  he  brought  back  to  St.  Christopher  six
royal  ships  and  six  traiis|M.rts,  so  that  the  English
were  defeated,  but  soon  afterward  the  Spaniards
landed in the  island  and destroyed the  French

iOBjBSsions,  .lust  then  DttTOSBSy  pro|>oscd  t<>
)'Fnainbuc  to  atwtndou  St.  Christopher,  and  to
found  a  new  colony  at  Antiguu.  «nd.  although
the  latter  was  Opposed  kO  this  \enturv.  they
■died  away,  arriving  at  St.  Martin  altera  VO]
of  three  weeks.  There  Durossey  left  the  expecB-
ti>>n  and  sailed  for  France,  where  he  was  impris-
oned in  the  Ilastile  for  abandoning  his  chief.  Af-
ter a  short sojourn  at Antigua, D'Enambuc  re-


354


ENCALADA


KXCISO


turned  to  St.  Christopher,  where  he  took  possession
of  tlu*  land  hehiul  abandoned  three  immths  before.
The  colony  soon  flourished,  and  D'Euamhuc  pre-
pared to  eoluiii/.e  the  neighboring  islands  II*-  mil
ins  lieutenants  to  GuadeTou|M>,  and  set  out  in  1035
for  Martinique,  where  he  built  Fort  Saint  I'ierre.
The  colonies  thrived,  and  D'Enambiic  was  about
to  found  others  when  he  died.

KNCALABA,  Manuel  Blanco  (en-eahdah -da).
South  American  soldier,  b,  in  Buenos  Avres.  21
April,  1790;  d.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  5  Sept,  18T8.
He  was  the  son  of  Blanco  Ciceron,  a  Spaniard,
who  for  some  time  acted  as  judge  of  the  supreme
courts  in  Peru,  La  Plata,  and  Bolivia.  Blanco  En-
calada  was  sent  to  Spain  in  1803,  entered  the
"  Seininario  de  Xobles  at  Madrid,  and  from  there
went  to  the  naval  academy  of  the  island  of  Leon,
In  1807.  when  the  French  blockaded  the  port  of
Cadiz,  Encalada  distinguished  himself  as  second
gunner  on  board  the  "Carmen."  Wishing  to  re-
turn to  America,  he  was  sent  in  1808,  through  the
influence  of  his  uncle,  the  Count  of  Villa  1 'alma,  to
the  port  of  El  Callao  as  an  ensign,  which  rank  he
had  obtained  as  a  reward  for  his  conduct  at  Cadiz.
In  1811  he  began  to  show  revolutionary  ideas,  and
was  sent  to  Spain  by  the  Viceroy  Abascal,  but  re-
turned to  Montevideo  at  the  end  of  two  years.
Soon  afterward  he  left  his  post,  and,  after  flying  to
the  woods  and  overcoming  great  dangers,  swam
across  the  Uruguay  river  and  rode  240  miles  to
Buenos  Ayres,  whence  in  1813  he  started  for  Chili,
arriving  there  in  March,  at  the  same  time  of  the
landing  of  Pareja  in  Talcahuana.  Encalada  was
appointed  captain  of  artillery,  and  in  March,  1814,
had  been  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  for  his  ser-
vices to  his  party.  About  that  date  he  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  royalists,  degraded  as  a  deserter
from  Montevideo,  and  confined  to  a  garrison,
whence,  in  March,  1817,  he  was  liberated  by  the
revolutionary  forces  of  Chacabuco.  In  July,  En-
calada entered  the  Chilian  army  as  sergeant-major
of  artillery,  and  on  19  March,  1818,  at  the  attack
of  Cancha  Rayada,  which  was  so  disastrous  for  the
liberal  forces,  he  had  under  his  charge  twelve  pieces
of  artillery.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-colo-
nel, and  in  the  following  June  was  given  command
of  the  naval  force  that  captured,  in  the  month  of
December,  five  ships  belonging  to  the  Spanish  ex-
pedition against  Chili.  Soon  afterward  he  was
made  rear-admiral,  and  appointed  second  to  Lord
Cochrane,  who  had  begun  his  Pacific  campaign.  In
1820  Encalada  was  appointed  major-general  of  in-
fantry. In  August,  1821,  after  having  been  a  sena-
tor, he  was  tried  for  bringing  charges  against  the
fovernment,  but  was  absolved  by  O'niggins.  In
anuary,  1822,  Encalada  served  under  Bolivar  in
the  expeditions  from  Guayaquil  and  El  Callao,
greatly  contributing  toward  the  victory  of  Ayacu-
cho  in  December,  1824.  In  July,  1825,  he  was  ap-
pointed general-in-chief  of  the  navy  of  Chili.  In
July,  1820,  Encalada  became  president  of  the  repub-
lic of  Chili,  but  tendered  his  resignation  two  months
afterward,  and  during  the  civil  war  of  1827-30  took
no  active  part  in  public  affairs.  He  was  in  the  Chi-
lian expedition  against  Peru  in  1837,  after  which
he  again  disappeared  from  public  life  for  ten  years,
visiting  Europe  in  1844-'o.  In  1847  he  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  Valparaiso,  and  contributed
greatly  to  the  progress  of  that  city,  laying  in  1852
the  first  rail  of  the  railroad  between  it  and  Santiago.
He  was  appointed  Chilian  minister  to  France  in
1853,  but  returned  in  1858,  and  retired  again  to
private  life.  In  1805,  notwithstanding  his  age,  he
protested  against  the  so-called  war  with  Spain.  To
commemorate  his  services  for  his  adopted  country,


the  Chilian  government  hail  in  1N75  a  powerful
Iron-dad  of  '',"><''>  tons  named  "Blanco  Encalada,*'
which,  together  with  her  sister  ship  "  Aluiiraute
Cochrane,"  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  tin  war
against  Peru  and  Bolivia  in  1879  and  I860.

ENCISO,  Martin  Fernandez  de,  Spanish  cos-
mographer,  b.  in  Seville  about  the  middle  of  the-  15th
century;  d.  10  the  same  city  about  1525.  It  is  imt
known  in  what  year  or  in  what  capacity  he  went  t<>
America,  but  he  had  established  himself  in  1508  in
the  island  of  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  made  a
fortune  as  a  lawyer,  and  had  the  title  of  "  bachiller
y  letrado."  The  government  of  that  part  of
America  along  the  isthmus  of  Darien  and  east  of
the  gulf  of  Uraba  had  just  been  granted  to  Ojeda,
but,  to  get  possession  of  the  lands  which  were
granted  and  to  colonize  them,  money  was  needed,
and  he  addressed  Enciso,  who  had  then  the  repu-
tation of  being  rich  and  adventurous.  A  bargain
was  soon  made  between  them;  Ojeda  gave  Encieo
the  title  of  alcalde  mayor  of  his  government,  and
the  latter  agreed  to  furnish  a  ship  with  provisions
and  men.  After  a  visit  to  the  gulf  of  Uraba,
where  he  found  his  companions  a  prey  to  famine,
Ojeda  determined  to  return  to  Santo  Domingo  and
hasten  the  arrival  of  the  succors  promised  by  En-
ciso, leaving  Francisco  Pizarro  in  the  new  colony.
Xearly  two  months  had  passed,  when  Enciso  ap-
peared at  last  in  the  harbor  of  Carthagena  with  a
ship  loaded  with  provisions,  and  having  on  board
twelve  mares,  several  stallions,  sows  and  boars,
ammunition,  spears,  swords,  and  other  arms,  and
over  150  men.  At  Carthagena  he  was  joined  by
a  ship,  under  the  orders  of  Pizarro,  which  had  left
Uraba  some  fifty  days  after  the  departure  of  Ojeda
and  was  carrying  to  Santo  Domingo  the  few  colon-
ists who  had  survived  the  famine.  After  many  ad-
ventures from  shipwreck  and  with  hostile  savages
the  party  reached  Darien  (1510),  and  set  about
building  a  city,  when  Enciso  excited  a  mutiny  by
forbidding  them  to  trade  with  the  Indians  for  CON
under  pain  of  death,  and  was  finally  deposed  by
Vasco  Xufiez  de  Balboa  (see  Balboa).  Enciso
sailed  for  Spain  (1512),  brought  the  arbitrary  con-
duct of  Balboa  before  the  court,  and  Pedrarias
Davila  was  sent  out  as  governor  of  Darien  (1514),
with  instructions  to  do  justice  between  the  con-
testants. Enciso  accompanied  him  as  alguacil
mayor,  and  after  his  arrival  obtained  a  decree  con-
demning Balboa  to  pay  him  a  large  sum  as  an
indemnity  for  the  wrongs  he  had  suffered.  In
1515  he  was  sent  at  the  head  of  an  expedition
into  the  province  of  Cenu,  where  it  was  reported
there  was  much  gold,  and  unsuccessfully  tried  first
to  persuade  and  then  to  force  the  caciques  to  sub-
mit to  the  king  of  Spain.  Shortly  after  this  event
he  returned  to  Spain  and  devoted  his  time  to  the
arrangement  and  publication  of  the  materials
which  he  had  gathered  during  his  stay  in  the  Xew
World.  He  published  a  memoir  in  favor  of  the
commanderies  established  and  about  to  be  estab-
lished in  the  West  Indies,  which  met  with  much
opposition  from  the  Franciscans,  and  "Suma  de
geografia  que  t rata  de  todos  las  partidas  y  pro-
vinciasdel  raundo;  en  especial  de  las  Indias  y  trata
largamente  del  arte  de  marear"  (Seville,  1519;  new
editions,  1530  and  1549).  "  Enciso,"  says  Xavar-
rete.  "  has  embraced  in  this  work  all  that  was  then
known  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  pilotage."  lie
gives  a  dissertation  on  the  sphere  according  to  the
Ptolemaic  system,  with  tables  of  declination,  the
method  of  taking  the  height,  of  the  polar  star  and
its  use.  and  the  construction  of  the  mariner's  com-
pass with  thirty-two  rhumb-lines,  Enciso  was  not
ignorant  of  the  inaccuracies  that  resulted  from


i:\im.


KNDK50TT


806


tin-.' prnjistimis, hikI "f tlM  dilliciilty of rvpn-
flgure  on  a  p|  .•.  though

■  III. I lint Bad the MM "f c.'tTcctioll. 'I'll.'

geographical  |M>rtimi  nf  tin-  WOTI  is  written  with
great  exactness,  and  contain*  tin-  lirM  description
<>f  the  recall  of  Spanish  exploration  up  t<>  151ft,

lie  fixed  tin*  latitudes  of  tin-  islands  ilisrnvir.il,
ami  >>f  several  |>«>ints  OH  tin-  main-land.  < 'u|h-
into  Domingo,  is  marked  90*,  and
Gape Crux  88*, and those  podtiona.  although  lneor>
reet,  are  lees  an  than  thorn  found  in  Ruysch,  IVtcr
Mnrtvr  dfl  AiiKhicmi,  ami  nth.

ENDICOTT,  <  hurles  Mows,  autlmr.  I.,  in
Denvera,  Mas*.,  in  1796;  d.  iii  Northampton,  Mass.,
in  1868.  He  was  a  descendant  in  the  eighth  gen-
eration nf  Qor.  John  Kmlicntt.  His  education  was
received  mainly  at  the  Phillins  Andover  academy
ami  at  a  school  in  Salmi,  luaa  At  tin-  AM  nf
fifteen  hi'  entered  the  count ing-m<>m  of  hi-  iiiirli-.
Samiu'l  Kndicott,  nf  Sah-m,  whin-  In-  remained  two
or  three  years,  ami  whence  hi-  won!  by  invitation
to  tin-  counting-mom  nf  William  Rojies,  of  Boston.
Influenced  l»y  a  desire  to  see  somewhat  of  the  out-
side world,  in-  vent  as  supercargo  to  St.  Patera*

burg.  Buaaia,  in  181ft,  and  afterward  nmilc  a  voy-
age to  tin-  cast  in  the  same  capacity,  visiting  Cal-
cutta ami  Sumatru.  ami  returning  to  Salem  in
is Is.  After  this  he  liecame  captain  of  a  merchant-
man, ami  traded  for  many  years,  being  engaged
extensively  in  the  ini|»ortation  of  pepper.  letter,
from  1886  till  1868,  he  was  cashier  of  the  Salem
bank,  Satan,  Ham.  He  tree  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  ••  New  England  Historical  and  (icncalogical

Register,"  and  to  the  Boston  "(Ja/ette,"  under  the
pen-name  of  "Junius  Aniericanus."  Some  of  his
paiH'rs  are  to  be  found  in  the  "  Collections  of  the
Salem  Institute."  He  wrote  a  "  Life  of  John  Kmli-
cott"  (privately  printed,  1847):  "The  Persian  Pool  :
a  Tragedy  " ;  "  Essay  on  the  Rights  and  Duties  of
Nations";  and  "Three  Orations."

ENDICOTT,  John,  colonial  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, b.  in  Dorchester,  England,  in  1558;  d,  in
Boston,  Mass..  15  March,  1605.  He  was  one  of  the
six  patentees  of  the  Dorchester  company,  which
succeeded,  by  purchase  in  1027,  to  the  projiertv
and  all  the  rights  and  privileges  that  had  former-
ly belonged  to  the  Plymouth  company. Among

those  whn.aliimsi
immediately  af-
ter the  purchase,
moored  proprie-
tary rights  in
the  company,  ami
who  became  re-
s|Kitivelv  gover-
nor and  deputy-
governor  of  the
company  in  Lon-
don, were  Mat-
thew C  radi  H-k  and
Roger  Ludlow.
Bamg  related  to

ixith  of  them  by

marriage,  Kndi-
cott  was  sent  out
with  full  powers
to  take  charge
of  the  plantation
at  Naumkeag  (af-
terward Salem),  where  he  arrived  in  Boptomber,
1828,  naeoanaanied  by  bit  family  ami  namefona
anion  lots,  Heoontinued  toexercfae  the  chief  au-
thority till  April,  1680,  when,  the  charter  ami  < mn-

pany  baring  been  tranafonod  to  New  England,
John  Wittthrop  arrived  and  t«M>k  charge. In  1684,


when  meinUr  ..f  the  cmirt  nf  assistants,  inflamed,
it  is  mo. I.  by  thi  Ben  eloquence  of  Roger  Willi  i
he  publicly  cut  out  t  he  red  cross  of  s  from

the  king's  colon,  which  hung  before  the  governor's
gata, for  Umreaeon,m  be  mid, thai  thecroasse-
vered  of  popery,  fcndloott  ami  reprimanded,  re-
im.viii  from  ins  ..nice,  and  dfaqualifted  t"  hold  any

Othm fnr  the  s|,ace  nf  ..He  year. It  was  not long

baftsri  it  beeame  mmdftml  thai  be  was  not  aritb-

mit  sympathizer*. Some  nf the  militia refuted to
march  under  a  flag  that  displayed  what th.  .
garded  as  an  idnlatnuis figure;  and.  after  BO  little

controversy, the  military comuiissimi.  i

that,  while  the  orom  shmild  Ik'  retained  on  hai,-
of  forts  ami  ships,  it should bt  omitted fmin  tin-
OOlon  Of  the militia. In 1688,  Kmlicntt.  in 09B*

junctinn  with  (apt.  John  Underbill,  oonduetad  »t

sanguinary  but  inetTei  tual  expedition  against  the
Blmk  Island  and  iVipiot  Indians.  Ufa  harsh
measures  mi this  oeeasmn wen- instruineiital in

bringing  nn  the  Peqnol  war. He  was  deputy-t
amor  in  1841-4,  In  166ft,  and  in  1664,  and  -

ernor  in  1044,  164ft,  and frmn  16V)  till 1666,  with
the  except  ion  of  1664 In  addition  to  them  boa
he  was  made  in  1646  sergeant  major-general,  Urn

highest  military  office  in  the  colony,  and  in
president  of  tbeoolonia]  commfasjonera  Kmlicntt
was  a  fair  specimen  <>f  the  men  who  made  New
England.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  man  that.
to  meet  the  monetary  requirements  of  the  time,  In-
established  a  mint  which,  contrary  to  law,  contin-
ued to  coin  money  for  a  period  of  thirty  years.
With  all  his  many  excellences,  however,  he  had  his
faults,  of  strong  cmivictinns.  and  <>f  gnat  deci-
sion nf  character,  he  was  impatient  of  any  resistance
to  his  authority,  and  hasty  of  temper.  <>n  ona  oc-
casion, In  the  early  part  of  his  career,  be  so  far
forgot  himself  as  to  strike  a  man.  for  which  offence
be  was  fined  forty  shillings.  He  was  a  Puritan  of
the  Puritans,  and  would  allow  no  divergence  frmn
what  he  conceived  to  Ik-  the  straight  line  of  ortho-
doxy. He  had  as  little  respect  for  epfaoopai
he  had  fnr  popery,  es  some  of  the  prelatio  clergy
found  to  their  cost.  His  hand  fell  heavilv  ii|>on
the  unfortunate  Quakers,  of  whom,  under  dis  ad-
ministration, fmir  were  executed  el  Boston  fnr  so-
called  disobedience  <>f  the  laws.  But  be  aimed  f<»r
good,  and  he  sought.  BS  he  Inst  knew  how.  to  secure
the  highest  welfare  of  the  colony.  He  had  been
ami  out,  in  the  first  instance,  because  he  was  be-
lieved to  be  a  "lit  Instrument  to  begin  the  wilderness
work."  "A  man  of  dauntless  courage,"  myi  Ban-
croft, "and  that  cheerfulness  which  a<  >  "inpanies
courage;  benevolent,  though  austere  ;  firm,  though
choleric ;  of  a  rugged  nature,  which  his  stem  princi-
ples of  Don-Conformity  had  not  served  to  mellow."

ENDICOTT,  William  Crewaiashield,  secre-
tary of  war,  l>.  in  Salem.  Mass..  1!)  Nov..  1*27.  He
is  a  direct  descendant  of  Gov.  John  Kmlicntt.  and
i-  a  grandson  <>f  Jacob  Crowninshieid,  notmed
afaewnera Ha  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1847,

and.  after  studying  in  the  law-schnnl  and  with
Nathanael  J.  Iy>rd,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  186ft

lie  was  aleotad  a  member  <»f  the  Salem  amnmon

cnuncil  in 188ft,  and  five  years  later  U-came  city

solicitor. He  retired  frmn  this  office  in  1884,  mm

reanmed  practice,  but  in  lH7:t  he  was  ap|x. iiited  by
Q«rr.  William  B.  Washburn  to  the  bench  of  the  sii-
preii >urt  of  Massachusetts. This  office  he  held

fnr  ten  ream,  whan  ha  raahjnad  «>n  account  of  ill
health.  He  was  originally  a  Whig,  but  joined  the
Demnernts  when  the  Whig  BUTty  was  broken  up.

and  in  N'nvemluT,  1SJS4,  was  the  unsuccessful  candi-
date fnr  givernnr  nf  Massachusetts.  In  1885  he
became  secretary  of  war.


3f>6


ENDRESS


KNGKLMANN


EXDRESS.  Christian,  clergyman,  b,  in  Phila-
delphia. I'a..  1'J  March.  1775 i  d.  in  Lancaster.  IV,
80  Sept..  1807.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1790,  and  began  to  study
theology.  He  was  tutor  in  the  university  from
1792  till  171)5,  when  ho  was  elected  principal  of
the  Congregational  school  of  Zion  and  St.  Mi-
chael, lie  resigned  in  1801,  accepted  a  pastor-
ate at  Easton,  Pa.,  was  ordained  at  Reading  in
1802.  and  afterward  held  pastorates  at  various
places  in  Pennsylvania.  On  the  death  of  Henry
E.  Michlenberg  in  1815,  he  was  chosen  to  suc-
ceed him  as  pastor  of  the  Lutheran  congregation
in  I^ancaster.  Here  he  conducted  services  in
English,  and  in  consequence  the  Germans  with-
drew from  his  congregation.  The  University  of
Pennsylvania  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1819.  Dr.  Endress  was  a  contributor  to  the  "Lu-
theran Intelligencer,"  and  after  his  death  several
of  his  sermons  were  published  in  the  "  Lutheran
Preacher."  He  published,  in  the  German  lan-
guage, "The  Kingdom  of  Christ  not  Susceptible
of  Union  with  Teni|)oral  Monarchy  and  Aristoc-
racy" (1791),  and  left  in  manuscript  a  "  Commen-
tary on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans. '

ENGELHARD,  Joseph  Adolphns,  soldier,  b.
in  Monticello.  Miss.,  27  Sept.,  1832;  d.  in  Raleigh,
N.  C,  17  Feb.,  1879.  After  attending  schools  in
Mississippi  and  New  Albany,  Ind.,  he  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1854.
He  studied  law  at  Harvard,  and  subsequently  at
Chapel  Hill,  and  was  licensed  to  practise  in  the
county  courts  in  1850.  He  then  removed  to  Tar-
boro,  where  he  remained  until  the  beginning  of
the  war.  He  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  cap-
tain and  quartermaster  of  the  33d  regiment  in
May,  18(51,  and  in  April,  1802,  was  promoted  to  be
major  and  quartermaster  of  Branch's  brigade,  in
December  of  that  year  he  was  transferred  to  Gen.
Pender's  brigade  as  its  adjutant-general,  and  served
in  this  capacity  till  Lee's  surrender.  He  became
the  editor  of  the  Wilmington  "Journal"  in  1865,
and  was  afterward  elected  secretary  of  state,  which
office  he  held  till  his  death.

ENGELHARDT,  Francis  Ernest,  chemist,  b.
in  Gieboldehausen,  Hanover,  23  June,  1835.  He  was
educated  at  the  gymnasium  in  Duderstadt  and  Hil-
desheini,  and  in  the  University  of  Gottingen.  In
1856  he  became  assistant  to  Prof.  Frederick  Wohler
in  the  chemical  laboratories  in  Gottingen,  where  he
remained  until  he  came  to  the  United  States  in  1857.
He  was  assistant  in  chemistry  to  Prof.  William  S.
Clark  at  Amherst  in  1857-'8,  and  to  Prof.  Charles
A.  Joy  at  Columbia  in  1860.  From  1861  till  1866
he  was  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  College  of  St.
Francis  Xavier  in  New  York  city,  and  from  1869
till  1886  chemist  to  the  Onondaga  salt  reservation
and  the  salt  companies  of  Onondaga.  In  1886  he
became  chemist  to  the  Genesee  salt  company,  and
is  one  of  the  experts  for  the  State  board  of  health,
having  special  charge  of  the  examination  of  all
wines,  beer*,  and  liquors.  In  1864  he  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  I),  from  St.  Francis  Xavier.  His
contributions  to  chemical  literature  have  been
large,  but  are  mostly  in  the  form  of  technical  re-
ports bearing  on  his  special  work.

ENGELMANN,  George,  botanist,  b.  in  Frank-
fort-ou-t  he-Main,  Germany,  2  Feb.,  1809 ;  d.  in  St.
Louis.  Mo..  11  Feb.,  1884.  His  uncle,  Friedrich
Theodor,  a  German  pioneer  of  Illinois,  was  one  of
the  early  American  viticulturists.  He  received  his
early  education  at  the  gymnasium  in  Frankfort,  and
■tamed  the  sciences  in  the  University  of  Heidel-
berg, where  he  met  Karl  Schimper  and  Alexander
I »rau  1 1. Later  he  was  connected  with  the  University


of  Berlin,  and  received  in  1H31  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  the  University  of  Wurzburg.  In  1882  ha
went  to  Paris,  where  he  again  became  associated
with  Hraun.  and  also  with  Louis  Agassi/..  M.-an-
while  he  was  induced  to  come  to  the  United  St.ites.
and  in  September.  1888,  Bailed  from  Bremen  for
l5altiniore.  He  settled  in  St.  Clair  county,  n.-ar
Belleville,  111.,  but  three  years  later  removed  to
St.  Ijouis,  where
he  soon  became
prominent as a

Chysician.  In  1836
e  founded  a  Ger-


newsnapcr
"Das  West-


man
called '

land,"  which  con-
tained valuable
articles  on  life  and
manners  in  the
United  States,and
gained  a  high  rep-
utation both  here
and  in  Europe.
Dr.  Engelmann
made  a  specialty
of  botany,  and  ob-
tained a  wide  rec-
ognition for  his  services  in  that  branch  of  natural
history.  He  made  special  studies  of  the  cacti,  dod-
ders, pines,  rushes,  spurges,  and  other  little-known
and  difficult  groups,  contributing  numerous  articles
on  them  to  the  St.  Louis  academy  of  sciences,  to  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  to  gov*
eminent  reports.  His  opinion  became  so  valuable
that  much  of  the  material  in  his  specialties  collected
by  the  National  government  was  sent  to  him  for
examination.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  to  study
the  North  American  vines,  and  nearly  all  that  is
known  scientifically  of  the  American  species  and
forms  is  due  to  his  investigations.  His  first  mono-
graph on  "The  Grape-vines  of  Missouri"  was
published  in  1860,  and  his  latest  on  this  subject
shortly  before  his  death.  A  monotypical  genus  of
plants  bears  his  name,  and  a  splendid  species  of
spruce  from  the  Rocky  mountains  is  called  J-Jiu/rl-
nutnn.  He  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies
both  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  and  was
one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  A  list  of  his  botanical  pa-
pers, containing  about  100  titles,  is  published  in
Coulter's  "  Botanical  Gazette "  for  May,  1884,  and
his  writings  are  now  (1887)  being  collected  under
the  direction  of  Prof.  Asa  Grav  for  publication  by
Henry  Shaw  of  St.  Louis.  Dr.  Engelmann's  botan-
ical collection,  valuable  as  containing  the  original
specimens  from  which  many  or  most  of  our  west-
ern plants  have  been  named  and  described,  will  be
given  to  Shaw's  botanical  garden  as  soon  as  a  fire-
proof building  can  be  erected.  This  gift  has  led
to  the  founding  of  the  Shaw  school  of  botany  as  a
department  of  Washington  university.  St.  Louis,
where  an  Engelmann  professorship  of  botany  has
been  established  by  Mr.  Shaw  in  nis  honor. — His
son,  George  Julius,  physician,  b.  in  St  Louis,
Mo.,  2  July,  1847,  was  graduated  with  the  vale-
dictory at  Washington  university  in  1867,  then
studied  at  the  universities  of  Ttibingcn.  Vienna,
Paris,  and  received  his  medical  degree  at  Berlin  in
1871.  During  the  Franco-Prussian  war  of  1870-'l
he  aarved  as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  German  army,
and  subsequently  returned  to  St.  Louis,  where  he
settled  in  the  practice  of  medicine.  In  1883  he
turned  his  attention  to  gynecology,  and  has  since
occupied  himself  exclusively  in  efforts  to  introduce
more  rational,  effective,  and  safe  methods  of  prac-


.  \  \  I .


MTI


in  diseases  ..f  WOUMU. Toward this  end he

founded  tin- si.  Louis  school  of  BoVtwirea,  ti
L.nii-  1\  Ing-in  hospital,  and  the  St.  Louie  polyclinic
ami  luatc  school  of  medicine,  holding  the

chair  of  gj  mycology  and  obstetric*  in  tin-  latter  in-
stitution, lie  is  u  iminUr  nf  medical  and  scien-
tific societies,  was  OM  of  tin-  founder*  of  the
American  gynecological  society,  being  it-
president  in  1886,  of  the  St.  Louis  obstetric  and
gynecological  society,  of  which  he  was  vice-presi-
dent in  [887,  and  also  <>f  the  St.  Louts  BMdioO-
chirurgieal  society.  Dr.  Kiigclinann  has  U-enactivc
in  archaeology,  having  Opened  nioundsaud  ftffllffltfd
>[«  <  iiinn-  in  southern  Missouri.  He  has  a  valu-
able museum  of  the  material  which  he  has  gath-
ered, and  has  exchanged  s|>c<  imens  with  UMUM
in  Berlin  ami  Vienna,  and  with  the  IVahodr  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  the  Natural  history  in  Sew
York,  and  the  National  museum  in  Washington,
D.  ('.  I >r.  Engelmann  is  the  author  of  numerous
papers  contributed  to  mwHftl  journals  in  his
Specialty,  some  of  which  have  been  translated  into
French  ami  German.

ENGLAND,  John,  K.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Cork,
Ireland.  88  Bent,  ITsti;  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  C,  11
April,  1842.  lie  was  educated  in  the  schools  of
Cork,  and  studied  law  for  two  years,  but  in  1886
entered  the  theological  college  of  Carlow.  Here
his  progress  in  his  studies  was  so  brilliant  that
after  his  second  year  he  was  selected  to  deliver
public  lectures  on  religious  subjects.  He  also  de-
1  much  of  the  time  given  him  for  recreation  to
the  instruction  of  the  militia  Stationed  in  the  town.
He  also  founded  an  asylum  for  unprotected  females
which  afterward  suggested  the  plan  of  the  Presen-
tation convent,  and  established  free  schools  for
the  education  of  poor  boys.  In  1808  he  was  recalled
by  his  bishop  ana  appointed  president  of  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Cork.  lie  took  a  leading  part
in  the  agitation  for  Catholic  emancipation,  and,
with  the  view  of  helping  the  cause  of  religious
liUrtv,  founded  the  "Chronicle,"  which  he  con-
tinued to  edit  till  his  departure  from  Ireland.
When  the  see  of  Charleston,  embracing  the  states  of
North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia,  was
founded,  Dr.  England  was  nominated  its  first
bishop.  As  he  had  determined  to  become  an
American  citizen,  he  refused  to  take  the  oath  of
allegiance  exacted  from  Irish  bishops  on  their  con-
secration. After  some  difficulty  he  was  consecrated
in  Cork  in  1820,  and  arrived"  in  Charleston  the
same  year.  Bishop  England  had  many  obstacles
to  contend  with.  There  were  only  two  priests  and
two  churches  in  the  three  states  under  his  jurisdic-
tion, and  his  flock  was  made  up  chiefly  of  |><>or
Irish  emigrants  and  refugees  from  Santo  Domingo.
In  order  to  provide  priests  for  his  diocese.he  opened
a  classical  school  in  Charleston,  and  the  BttOOSBI  that
attended  his  efforts  in  this  respect  enabled  him  to

support  several  of  his  eeolsslasaoal  students. n..i

only  did  he  succeed  in  training  a  bodj  of  educated
missionaries  for  his  church,  but  he  largely  con-
tributed to  the  revival  of  classical  learning  in  South
Carolina.  Several  schools  were  reopened,  and  the
College  of  Charleston,  which  had  siis|  tended  for
some  time,  resumed  its  studies.  ||c  infused  new
life  into  the  Philosophical  literary  association  of
Charleston  as  soon  as  be  became  a  member,  and
did  much  to  suppress  duelling,  not  by  intemperate
denunciations,  but  by  forming  the  most  influential
gentlemen  of  the  state  into  an  anti-duelling  asso-
ciation. His  address  in  reprobation  of  tin
tice  before  this  body  is  considered  s  masterpiece
of  argument  and  persuasion.  He  was  Invited  by
-s  to  preach  in  the  hall  <>f  representatives  at


nd  was  the  first  Catholic  clergyman
on whom  this honor  was  conferred. To  explain
and  defend  the  doctrines  of  Ins  oharea  be  set
lished  the  "Unite*]  State*  Catholic  Miaeellany  "  at

Chariest,, n. It  was  through  the  columns  of  this
period  ted  that  most  .,f  Bishop  England's  \*  rr
found  their  way  to  the  public. HE  influence  was

felt in  every  part  of  the  Catholic  church  n,
countrv,  and  his  influence  at  Boms  *ns  deeaaV
all  ecclesiastical  affairs  connoted  with  the  United
States. His  Bourses  of  lectures,  which  In-  delivered
in  all  the  great  cities  of  the Union,  were  attended

bj  citizens  of  every  oreed.  Nothing,  bowevar,  en-
deared him  to  the  people  Of  Charleston  s,,  much
as  his  heroism  during  the  DWUUOUl  visitation
the  yellow  fever,  when  he  continued  at  Ins  j»,vt
night  and  day.  In  1N34  he  visited  Ireland  and
obtained  the  services  of  three  nuns  of  the  HlBUlhsS
order,  by  whose  aid  he  established  tin-  Irsuline
schools  of  Charleston.  Be  also  founded  orphan
asylums,  Itoarding-sehools,  and  free  schools,  which
he  nlaced  under  the  charge  of  Sisters  of  Our  I^idy
of  Merey.  He  conceived  the  plan  ,,f  assembling
the  prelates  iii  council  for  mutual  aid. and  has  been
Styled "the author  of  our provincial councils."

He  visited  Europe  four  times  in  the  intersstsof

his  diocese,  was  sent  twice  as  apostolic  delegate
from  the  pope  to  Hayti,  and  was  offered  an  Irish
bishopric,  which  he  declined.  On  his  return  from
Europe  m  1841  malignant  dysentery  broke  out
among  the  steerage  |>assengers,  and  his  attendance
on  them  was  incessant  until  be  was  attacked  by  the
disease  himself.  He  finally  died  from  its  effects,
which  were  heightened  by  overwork,  immediately
after  landing.  Dr.  England  increased  the  Dumber
of  churches  in  his  diocese  to  seventeen,  and  left  a
numerous  and  well-organised  clergy  behind  him.
His  principal  works  are  "Discourse  before  the
Hibernian  Society  of  Savannah  "(Charleston,  iv
" Explanation  of  the  Construction.  Furniture,  and
Ornaments  of  a  Church"  (Baltimore);  "letters  on
Slaverv";  and  "Works."  edited  by  Hishop  Rey-
nolds ('.-,  vols..  Baltimore,  1848  .
ENGLAND,  Sir  Richard. British  soldier,  b.

about  1  ?.">(! ;  d.  7  Nov.,  1812.  He  was  a  resident  of
Clifford,  County  Clan-,  Ireland,  served  with  distinc-
tion in  the  American  campaigns  from  17?.")  till
1781,  and  was  at  one  time  commandant  of  Detroit,
He  was  efficient  in  aiding  the  colonisation  of  the
extreme  western  port  ion  of  Upper  Canada.— His
son.  Sir  Richard,  b.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1793:
d.  1!)  Jan.,  1883,  joined  the  British  army,  and  in
recognition  Of  his  services  in  the  Crimean  war  was
made  a  lieutenant-general  in  1H.V>.

EN6LE,  Frederick,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Dela-
ware county.  Pa.,  in 17W: d.  in Philadelphia,  12

Feb.,  1868. He  entered  the  nary  as  a  midshipman

on  :{()  Nov.,  1814,  ami  became  lieutenant  OB  18
Jan..  1885.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  command-
ed the  "  Princeton"  and  served  in  the  blockading
squadron.  He  was  promoted  to  captain  in  lv
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  was  sent  to
China  to  bring  BOOM  the  "Hartford."  He  was
then  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Philadelphia
navy-yard,  and  subsequently  became  governor  of
the  naval  asylum  in  that  city. He  wa«.  promoted

to  1k>  rear-admiral  on  the  retired  list.  88  July,  186ft,
EN6LE8, William Morrison,  author,  b.  in

Philadelphia.  Pa..  12  Oct.  lW7j  d.  27  Nov.,  It
He  was  graduated  at  the  I'niversity  of  Pennsylva-
nia in  1815,  and  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Samuel
H.  Wylie.  receiving  his  licence  to  preach  in  1818.
after  spending  some  time  in  missionary  laU«rs  in
Wyoming,  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  If
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  7th Presbyterian


368


ENGLISH


ENGLISH


church.  He  resigned  in  1884  on  account  of  im-
paired health,  and  was  editor  of  the  "Presbyterian  "
till  his  death,  giving  it  a  reputation  as  an  organ
of  the  old-school  party.  In  1838  he  was  appointed
editor  of  the  books  and  tracts  issued  by  the  Pres-
byterian board  of  publication,  and  held  this  office
till  1863,  when  he  was  chosen  to  be  president  of
the  board.  His  books  were  prepared  in  connection
with  the  board  of  publication,  and  are  chiefly  de-
votional. Among  them  are  "  Records  of  the  Pres-
byterian Church7,  (Philadelphia,  1840);  "English
Martyrology  "  (1843) ;  "  Sick-Room  Devotion  "
(1846);  "  Bible  Dictionary"  (1850);  "Sailors'  Com-
panion "'  (1857);  and  "(Soldiers'  Pocket- Book,"  of
which  800,000  copies  were  circulated,  principally
in  the  army,  during  the  civil  war  (1861).

I.NG  1,1  S II .  Earl,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Crosswicks,
Burlington  co.,  N.  J.,  18  Feb.,  1824.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  "and  entered  the  naval  ser-
vice, 25  Feb.,  1840.  His  first  cruise  was  in  the
U.  S.  frigate  "  Constellation  "  around  the  world,  re-
turning after  an  absence  of  four  years,  then  being
ordered  to  the  naval  academy  in  Annapolis,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1846.  He  joined  the  U.  S.
frigate  "  Independence,"  and  was  actively  employed
on  the  Pacific  coast,  principally  in  California.  He
was  at  the  capture  of  Mazatlan,  Mexico,  in  Novem-
ber, 1847,  ana  remained  there  till  the  close  of  the
Mexican  war.  In  1852  he  was  attached  to  the
U.  S.  brig  "  Dolphin,"  which  was  engaged  in  "  deep-
sea  soundings"  across  the  Atlantic  ocean  from
Newfoundland.  He  was  appointed  master,  1  March,
1855,  and  lieutenant  on  14  Sept.  In  1857  he
cruised  in  the  East  Indies,  and  took  part  in  the  en-
gagement with  the  barrier  forts,  seven  miles  below
Canton,  China,  in  which  he  was  wounded.  He  was
made  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,  and
served  throughout  the  civil  war,  being  employed

Srincipally  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  sounds  of
orth  Carolina,  and  commanding  at  different  pe-
riods the  "  Somerset,"  "  Sagamore,"  and  "  Wyalu-
sing."  In  1866  he  was  appointed  commander,  and
after  the  war  served  four  years  on  the  East  India
station.  He  was  then  employed  in  Japanese  waters
during  the  struggle  that  resulted  in  tne  overthrow
of  the  Tycoon.  When  the  latter  was  defeated  at
Osaka,  18  Feb.,  1868,  he  received  him  on  board  the
"  Iroquois,"  which  was  then  anchored  in  the  Osaka
river.  He  was  commissioned  captain,  28  Sept.,
1871,  commodore,  25  March,  1880,  and  rear-ad-
miral, 4  Sept.,  1884,  at  which  time  he  resigned  the
office  of  chief  of  the  bureau  of  equipment  and  re-
cruiting, which  he  had  held  for  six  years.  He  then
took  command  of  the  European  station,  and  was
retired,  18  Feb..  1886.

ENGLISH,  George  Bethnne,  adventurer,  b.  in
Cambridge,  .Mass.,  7  March,  1787;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  20  Sept.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1807,  and  then  studied  law,  but  neg-
lected his  practice  and  turned  his  attention  to
theology.  While  studying  Hebrew  in  Cambridge
he  began  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  Christian  relig-
ion, which  he  attacked  in  a  book  entitled  "  The
Grounds  of  Christianity  Examined  "  (Boston,  1813).
This  was  answered  by  Edward  Everett  in  1814,  and
in  reply  English  wrote  "  Five  Smooth  Stones  out
of  the  Brook."  Subsequently  he  edited  a  western
paper  for  a  time,  and  then  sailed  to  the  Mediter-
ranean as  a  lieutenant  of  U.  S.  marines.  On  his
arrival  in  Egypt  he  resigned  his  commission  and
joined  Ismail  Pacha  in  an  expedition  against  Sen-
naar  in  1N-J0,  winning  distinction  as  an  officer  of  ar-
tillery. As  an  experiment,  he  revived  the  ancient
scythe-armed  war-chariot,  which  was  destroyed  by
being  driven  against  a  stone  wall  in  Cairo,  and  he


also  employed  camels  for  dragging  cannon.  He  next
became  an  agent  of  the  U.  S.  government  in  the  Le-
vant, but  in  1827  he  returned  to  the  United  States
and  went  to  Washington,  where  he  remained  until
hie  death.  His  friend.  Samuel  L.  Knapp,  has  com-
posed an  ingenious  epitaph  recounting  the  inch-
dents  of  his  life.  His  genius  was  versatile,  and  he
possessed  remarkable  facility  for  acquiring  lan-
guages. Besides  the  works  mentioned  above,  he
published  replies  to  William  E.  Channing's  two
sermons  on  infidelity  (1813),  and  a  "  Narrative  of
the  Expedition  to  Dongola  and  Sennaar  "  (London,
1822 ;  Boston,  1823).

ENGLISH,  James  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  13  March,  1812;  d.  there,  2
March,  1890.  For  several  years  he  served  an  ap-
prenticeship in  a  carpenter's  shop.  Here  his  en-
ergy and  capacity  were  such  that  before  he  had
attained  his  majority  he  was  made  master  builder.
He  then  engaged  in  the  lumber-trade,  and  subse-
quently in  real  estate,  banking,  and  manufacturing
enterprises,  and  became  one  of  the  richest  men  in
Connecticut.  In  1848  he  was  a  member  of  the
New  Haven  common  council,  and  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  general  assembly  in  1855,  and
elected  to  the  senate  in  1856-'8.  He  was  then
elected  to  congress  as  a  War- Democrat,  and  served
from  1861  till  1865,  voting  with  the  Republicans  for
the  abolition  of  slavery.  He  was  a  delogate  to  the
Philadelphia  national  union  convention  in  1866,
and  was  governor  of  Connecticut  in  1867-'70.
He  then  travelled  extensively  in  Europe  and  the
United  States.  In  1875  he  was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  till  the  following
spring.  He  was  president  of  the  New  Haven  sav-
ings bank,  and  a  manager  of  Adams  express  co.

ENGLISH,  Thomas  Dnnn,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  29  June,  1819.  His  ancestors  were
Quakers,  who  settled  in  Mount  Pleasant,  N.  J.,  in
1684.  The  name  was  originally  Angelos,  which
has  been  corrupted  to  the  present  form.  He  was
educated  chiefly  in  private  academies  and  at  the
Friends'  boarding-school  in  Burlington,  N.  J.
When  only  seventeen  years  of  age  he  wrote  for  the
Philadelphia  press.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1839,  but
after  a  short  practice  he  studied  law  in  Philadel-
phia, and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842.  He
edited  a  daily  paper  in  New  York  in  1844,  and  in
the  following  year  began  the  publication  of  a  literr
ary  magazine,  "  The  Aristidean,"  of  which  only  a
single  volume  was  issued.  In  1848  he  edited  a
humorous  periodical  entitled  "John  Donkev,"  and
in  the  same  year  he  wrote  a  work  on  the  French
Revolution  of  that  period,  in  conjunction  with  G.
G.  Foster.  He  removed  to  Virginia  in  1852,  where
he  remained  five  years,  after  which  he  wrote  in
New  York  the  "  Logan  Grazier  "  and  other  poems
descriptive  of  life  and  character  in  that  region.  In
1859  he  settled  in  New  Jersey,  where  he  has  since
practised  medicine.  He  has  been  actively  engaged
in  politics,  and  served  in  the  New  Jersey  legislature
in  1863-'4.  William  and  Mary  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1876.  He  is  the  author  of  several
novels,  mostly  psuedonymous,  and  of  more  than
twenty  dramas,  of  which  " The  Mormons "  is  the
only  one  printed.  He  wrote  "  Ben  Bolt,"  a  popu-
lar song,  which  first  appeared  in  the  New  York
"Mirror"  in  1843,  and  the  "  Gallows-Goo-."  a
rough  but  vigorous  poem,  which  had  an  immense
circulation  during  the  agitation  of  the  quoit  ion  of
capital  punishment  from  1S45  till  1S50.  His  other
publications  are  "Walter  Woolfe"  (Philadelphia,
1842) ;  "  MDCCCXLI V..  or  the  Power  of  the  S.  F.,"
a  political  satire  (New  York,  1845) ;  ;4  Poems  "  (New


LIS!!


mtiqPB  Dl \i.m  II  |0g


155;  edition mpprMwd) j  "Ambroee  I
be  Peer  and  the  Painter  tmerican

Ball  .1;  and  "  Book  of  Battle  Lyrke  "  and

Millions  "  i  !**<'>). llo  h.i
written  numerous  pamphlets,  and  ha*  contributed
lyrics  and  essavs  to  various  |>criodicals.
I  m.I.IMI. William Hayden,  lawyer,  l>. in

n  (■<>..  itni..  'j?  Aii^'.,  166&  Hi-  fa-

thi-r.  Elisha  (J.  English,  one  of  tin-  peoneeri  >>f  In-
diana, was  bonorad  with  man?  public  trust*  during
a  period  of  forty  years.  William  was  educated  in
tin-  common  ><  IiimiIs  and  at  Ilanovaf  eoUtm,
studied  law,  and  was  admit  to!  to  practice  in  t  It**
U.  S.  supreme  court  In-fore  he  was  twenty-three
jean  of  age.  He  served  as  deputy  clerk  of  his
native  county,  and  as  |>ost  master  of  Lexington,
before  reaching  his  majority.  In  184.*— '4  he  was  a
principal  clerk  in  the  Indiana  BOOM  Oi  representa-
tives. He  was  principal  secretary  of  the  State  con-
vent  ion  of  1850,  which  famed  the  constitution  of
Indiana,  and  W8J  a  member  and  speaker  of  the  first
house  Of  representatives  after  its  adoption  in  1851.
lie  was  a  clerk  in  the  V.  S.  treasury  department
during  I'olk's  administnition.  and  held  a  clerkship
in  the  l'.  S.  senate  about  ls.V).  Ho  was  elected  to
ns-  in  ik.">2  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from
1858  till  1861,  when  he  resigned  and  engaged  in
banking.  He  was  prominently  identified  with  the
legislation  of  that  period,  and  was  the  author  of  a
compromise  measure,  in  relation  to  khandmimlon
of  Kansas  as  a  state,  which  l>ecame  a  law,  and  was
a  prolific  theme  of  controversy  in  the  heated  politi-
cal contests  of  that  dav,  under  the  name  of  "the  Eng-
lish  MIL"  From  1Ko3  till  1861  he  was  one  of  the
regents  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  in  Washing-
ton. D.  ('.  In  1880  Mr.  English  was  unanimously
nominated  for  vice-president,  on  the  ticket  with
Gen.  Hancock,  by  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion. He  is  president  of  the  Indiana  historical
society,  and  author  of  an  historical  and  biographi-
cal work  on  the  constitution  and  law-makers  of
that  state  (Indianapolis,  1887).

KNNKKIMJ.  John  Joseph,  artist,  b.  in  Min-
ster, Auglaize  co.,  Ohio,  4  Oct.,  1841.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Cincinnati.
Ohio,  and  studied  art  in  Europe  in  1878-'6,  most
of  the  time  in  the  art-schools  of  Munich  and  Paris.
He  was  a  pupil  of  Bonnats  and  D'Aubigny.  After
his  return  to  this  country  he  opened  a  studio  in
Boston,  and  his  works  are  frequently  shown  in  the
exhibitions  of  the  Boston  art  club.  For  several
years  he  has  made  a  specialty  of  New  England
landscapes  in  November  and  winter  twilights.  He
has  also  been  successful  as  a  painter  of  children's
portmits.  Among  his  works  are  "The  Drove,"
Cattle  crossing  a  brook  on  a  November  morning
iIhth);  h  lam  "November  Twilight'.'  (I-
••  Winter  Twilight"  (1882);  "Summer Twilight"

38);  "Cloudy  Day  in  Summer"  (1884);  "Th-
Coming  Storm."  "Indian  Summer,"  and  another
*•  Novemlier  Twilight  "  (1865}  The  most  suco—
ful  of  his  figure-paintings  are  "Spring-time  "  and
■Old  Lady  darning  BtoeJanga."

KNOS.  Itosrer.  soldier,  b.  in  Simsburv.  Conn.,
in  1799;  d.  in  Colchester,  Vt..  (i  Oct..  1n<>n.  He
was  in  the  colonial  ■ervioe  during  the  French  war
in  1759,  beoame  ensign  in  March.  L 760,  lieutenant

in  September,  adjutant  of  his  regiment  and  cap-
tain-lieutenant in  1761.  1st  lieutenant  in  1  Tti-.'.  and
captain  in  Israel  Putnam's  regiment  in  17M.  He
was  in  the  expedition  against  the  Indians,  served
in  the  Havana  campaign  in  1?«52.  and  was  a  mem-
ber, with  Israel  and  Rttfoj  Putnam  and  Phfheoa
Lyman,  of  the  oommbvioa  ien1  by  the  colony  of
Connecticut to  survey  lands  in  the  Mississippi  val-


ley that  had  been  given  l>y  the  orown  to  those  who

d  in  tin-  French  war  and  the  Havana  cam-
•1.  He  was  |« Hint  Qlliisjel  of  the  22d  regi-
ment, in  Arnold's  expedition  to  Canada,  in  I"
returned  with  his  command,  I
■  >n  H  Oot  of  tlmt  year,  and  ..n  I  Dae,  was  court-
martialed  for  "•putting  with. nit  leave,"  and  "h0s>
oral.lv  admitted."  He  was  afterward  licutenant-
aolonaj oi tht 16th Connecticut regiment.

ned  on  18  Jan..  177»>.  but  was  colonel  of  a
regiment  in  1777-'1».  when  be  removed  to  Vermont,
settling  the  town  of  Bnoaburg  in  March,  \>\  II.
was  ap(M)iiited  brigadier-general  in  command  of  all
the  \  ermont  troops  in  that  year,  became  inaj-.r-
general  of  the  1st  \  ermont  division  in  17h7,  and  n-
signed  in  171U.  after  thirty-two  yean of  continuous
military  service.  He  was  ii  m  QUI  DOT  of  the  Vermont
board  of  war  in  1781-'U2,  and  of  the  state  amemMv,
and  was  on  the  committee  to  set  tie  the  N.w  Hamp-
shire and  Vermont  eontfDvefay,  He  was  also  a
trustee  of  the  I'nivetsity  of  Vermont,  and  one  of
the  committee  to  consider  the  Vermont  resolutions
itasscd  by  the  Continental  congress.  In  177:'
lie  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  actor*  and  most
honored  figures  in  Vermont  history. —  His  sen,
Pascal  I'uoli.  became  one  of  the  four  proprietor!
of  the  present  site  of  Springfield,  111.

ENKItJl'K  (also  called  EnriutIi.lo  «r  Hksri-
qvllAAt)  (en-ree  -kay),  llaytian  cacique.  l».  in  the  l*Vt  li
century.  He  was  the  son  of  the  cacique  of  Bahoru-
co,  but  was  educated  in  the  Christian  religion  bv  the
monks  of  the  convent  of  San  Francisco,  in  Mana-
gua, Santo  Domingo.  When  he  was  of  age.  Enri-
?ue  took  upon  himself  the  government  of  his  triU-.
n  1519  Valenzuela,  a  Spaniard,  Inherited  an  In-
dian commandcry  situated  in  Enrique's  domains,
and  obtained  from  this  chief  all  the  assistance  pre-
scritied  by  law.  But  the  cruel  conduct  of  Valen-
zuela toward  the  Indians  was  such  that  Enrique
had  to  make  rejieated  complaints  to  the  Spanish
authorities;  obtaining  no  redress,  the  cacique  final-
ly took  to  the  mountains  with  a  small  Dumber  of
his  followers.  There  Valenzuela,  with  twelve  colo-
nists, went  to  attack  him,  and  was  defeated  and
taken  prisoner,  but  generously  set  at  liberty  by
Enrique.  Other  forces  sent  by  the  Spanish  govern-
ment were  also  unsuccessful,  and  finally  Fray
Kcmigio,  who  had  been  Enrique's  teacher,  was  sent
to  exhort  him  to  surrender.  Enrique  answered  that
he  would  give  up  the  struggle  if  be  should  In- al-
lowed to  enjoy  the  liberty  of  the  mountains.  Eor
thirteen  vears  the  Spaniards  made  no  headway,  and

in  1588  Gen.  Barrio-Nuevo,  empowered  by  the  em-
peror, made  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Enrique, The

latter  selected  the  region  of  Boya  as  his  resilience,
and  was  declared  hereditary  prince,  and  many  na-
tives Hocked  to  his  domains.  After  this  timc(al»'Ut
1544)  he  is  not  mentioned  by  historian-.

KNKHM  KZ  m:  ALMANSA.  Martin  (en
kavtht.  vicemv  of  New  Spain,  b.  in  A  lean  ices.  Spain,

■bout  1695;  ol  In  Lama,  Peru,  r>  March.  1666.  H<-
took  possession  of  the  government,  8  Nov.,  l
and,  on  his  arrival  at  Vera  Cruz,  attached  and  de-
feated Sir  John  Hawkins  in  the  Iwiy  of  San  .luaii
de  I'lua.  In  1670  hi  sent  an  ex|>edition  against
the  Indians,  established  in  their  territory  the  prvai-
di.-s  of  Ojucla  and  Porte/.uelos,  and  founded  the
towns  of  Celaya  and  San  Felijic,  in  (iuanajuato.
During  hi-  government  great  activity  was  displayed
in  the  foundation  of  towns,  convents  and  colleges.
He  eftnbUahad  the  inquisition  in  i")71,  a  year  oe-
fore  the  arrival  of  the  Jesuits,  end  in  1676  U-gan
to  luiild  the  cathedral  of  Mexico.  He  established
the  excise  fluty  in  the  latter  year,  and  al»olished  the
fonisi  service  >-f  the  natives  in  the  mince. When.


800


ENRIQUEZ DB RIVERA


EBAUZO


in  1676,  the  plague  of  Matlazahuatl  broke  out,  in
which two million natives parfatwd, Enrique*

showed  tlit'in  great  kindness,  and  excused  them
from  all  taxes.  He  was  promoted  viceroy  of  Peru
on  4  Oct.,  1580,  and  arrived  in  Lima  in  1661.  I  It-
founded  the  College  of  San  Martin,  11  Am;..  1666,

giving  the  direction
to  the  Jesuits,  and,
up  to  the  abolition
or  that  order  in
1767,  this  college
was  one  of  the  most
notable  in  the  New
World.  F-nriquez  au-
thorized the  convo-
cation of  the  third
concilium  of  Lima
on  15  Aug.,  sent  as-
sistance to  the  city
of  Arequipa,  which
had  suffered  greatly
from  an  earthquake,
gave  orders  for  the
cleaningofthestreets
y^  <X  W»  "$•( I  and  canals  of  Lima,

K-— 1/ ///  organized the  mail

service  to  the  inte-
rior, and  initiated
numerous  other  improvements.  Enriquez  died
suddenly,  while  in  office,  and  his  remains  were
buried  in  the  convent  of  San  Francisco  of  Lima.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Ordenanzas  de  Mesta  para  la
Nueva  Espafta"  (1574)  and  "  Instrucciones  sobre
las  cosas  y  gobierno  de  Nueva  Espafla,"  both  of
which  are  "preserved  in  manuscript  in  Mexico.

ENRIQUEZ  DE  RIVERA,  Payo,  viceroy  of
Mexico,  b.  in  Seville,  Spain,  about  1610;  d.  in  the
convent  of  Nuestra  Seftora  del  Risco,  Avila,  Spain,
8  April,  1684.  He  belonged  to  the  family  of  the
Duke  of  Alcala,  a  distinguished  Spanish  nobleman.
He  entered  the  religious  order  of  Saint  Agustin,
and  graduated  as  doctor  of  theology,  which  science
he  taught  afterward  in  the  convents  of  Burgos,  Val-
ladolid,  and  Alcala.  He  was  appointed  bishop  of
Guatemala  by  Philip  IV.  in  1657,  and  in  1667  was
assigned  to  the  bishopric  of  Michoacan,  Mexico,
but  before  he  could  reach  his  new  see  he  received
notice  of  his  promotion  to  the  archbishopric  of
Mexico,  where  he  arrived  27  June,  1668.  In  1673
Pedro  Nuflo  Colon,  Duke  of  Veragua,  then  an  old
man,  came  to  New  Spain  as  viceroy,  but  died  six
days  after  his  arrival.  Then  some  sealed  instruc-
tions, which  had  been  deposited  in  the  inquisition,
were  opened,  and  it  was  found  that  they  appointed
Payo  Enriquez  deputy  viceroy.  His  government
was  remarkable  for  its  liberality  and  justice.  He
ordered  many  repairs  of  public  buildings  and  other
improvements,  built  the  causeway  between  Mexico
and  Guadaiupe,  and  took  energetic  measures  for  the
defence  of  the  coasts  during  the  invasion  of  Yuca-
tan by  English  corsairs,  in  1681,  after  resigning
both  the  office  of  archbishop  and  that  of  viceroy,
he  returned  to  Spain,  and,  declining  the  bishopric
of  Cuenca,  retired  to  the  convent,  where  he  died.
When  the  news  of  his  death  arrived  at  Mexico,  due
honors  were  paid  by  the  authorities  to  his  memory.
He  wrote  many  theological  works  printed  in  Val-
ladolid,  Guatemala,  and  Mexico,  and  also  "  Carta
al  Seflor  Don  Diego  Andres  Rocha.  Alcalde  del
Crimen,  en  hi  Audicncia  de  Lima"  (Mexico.  1670).
EPIPHANE,  Louis  Marie,  French  missionary,
1>.  in  Moirans,  Franche  Comte,  in  1680:  d.  in  Cu-
mana,  Spanish  Venezuela,  in  1692.  His  father,
who  was  seneschal  of  Moirans,  had  destined  him  for
a  soldier,  but  at  the  age  of  twenty  he  joined  the


order  of  Capuchin  moiik>.  and  requeued  ptraiMlOH
t..  take  Mjirt  in  the  Sooth  American  missions  or*
ganized  by  them.  In  1651  he  was  sent  to  Murnu-
hao,  and  studied  several  Indian  dialects,  which  he
soon  spoke  fluently.  Afterward  he  resided  fur
several  years  in  the  territory  of  the  Tayupc  Indi-  .
ans,  where  he  founded  several  villages,  among
others  that  of  Saint  Marc  in  1657,  which  was  for
some  time  renowned  for  its  college.  In  1661  the
Spanish  government  commissioned  Epiphane  to
explore  the  course  of  the  Rio  Grande,  which  he  as-
cended as  far  as  the  river  Amazonas.  Afterward,
in  1663,  he  ascended  the  latter  river  for  1,200
miles.  He  then  went  to  Guayana,  and  founded  at
Viapoquo  a  mission  and  a  college,  and  in  1667  was
appointed  director  of  the  College  of  Capuchin
monks  at  Cumana.  He  filled  this  office  till  his
death,  and  at  the  same  time  discharged  the  duties
of  general  chief  of  the  missions  of  Spanish  Guay-
ana and  of  the  province  of  Caracas.  It  is  said  that
Father  Epiphane  founded  upward  of  200  villages
in  the  province  of  Caracas,  and  that  he  contributed
to  the  civilization  of  more  than  40.000  Indians.
He  was  the  author  of  important  works  on  America,
which  were  published  in  the  "  Bibliotheca  script  li-
ra Capucinorum"  of  Bernard  de  Bologne  (1754).
These  are  "  Annales  historiques  de  la  Mission  des
peres  Capucins  dans  la  Nouvelle  Andalousie,
Amerique  du  Sud,  de  1615  a  1670  " ;  "  Explorations
le  long  du  fleuve  Orenoque,  1662  " ;  "  Ma  mission
sur  le  Rio  Grande,  1661  " ;  "  Grammaire  de  la
langue  Tayupe  " ;  "  Les  moeurs  et  coutumes  des  In-
diens  dans  la  Guyane  Espagnole,  1690  " ;  and  "  La
civilisation  Indienne  dans  PAmerique  meridionale,
1685,"  said  to  be  the  only  work  on  the  subject.

EPPES,  John  Wayles,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1773;  d.  near  Richmond,  Va.,  20  Sept.,  1^
He  received  an  academic  education,  and.  after
studying  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  in  Richmond.  In  1803  he  was  elected  as
a  Democrat  to  the  IT.  S.  house  of  representatives,
and  with  successive  re-elections  served  continu-
ously from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1811.  Ijater
he  was  elected  to  the  13th  congress,  and  served
from  24  May,  1813,  till  3  March,  1815.  lie  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  1817,  but  resigned  the  office
two  years  afterward  on  account  of  failing  health,
and  retired  to  his  estates  in  Chesterfield  county.
He  married  Maria,  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Jeffer-
son, who  died  at  Monticello  in  April.  1804.

KRAI  ZO.  Catalina  de  (a-row'-tho),  also  called
Erauso  and  Eraso,  Spanish  adventuress,  b.  in  San
Sebastian  de  Guipuzcoa,  province  of  Biscay,  Spain,
10  Feb.,  1585 ;  d.  in  Cu  it  a  x  t  la.  near  Orizaba,  Mexico,
in  1650.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Capt.  Miguel  de
Erauzo.  At  the  age  of  four  years  she  was  placed
in  a  Dominican  convent ;  but  on  18  March,  1600,
she  scaled  the  wall  and  escaped  to  the  woods,
where,  subsisting  on  herbs  and  roots,  she  remained
three  days,  and  in  that  time  transformed  her  habit
into  that  of  a  Dominican  lay  friar.  Proceeding  in
male  attire  to  Vitoria,  she  found  employment  as
an  amanuensis.  Subsequently  she  was  a  page,  and
then,  under  an  assumed  name,  visited  her  native
place  and  heard  mass  in  the  very  convent  from
which  she  had  so  lately  escaped.  Thence  she  went
to  Valladolid,  and  became  page  to  the  king's  private
secretary.  After  this  Catalina  obtained  a  sum  of
money  and  went  to  Bilbao,  thence  to  the  port  of
Pasajes,  where  she  embarked  for  San  Lucar.  and
bound  herself  as  cabin-boy  on  board  a  galleon
commanded  by  her  uncle,  who  did  not  recognize
her.  She  sailed  in  the  fleet  commanded  by  Gen.
Luis  Fernando!  de  Cordova,  which  reached  Punt*
tie Araya. n.ar Cumana.  and there destroyed  a


i.i:  \i  z<»


i  zo


B81


small  Dutch  squadron.  Next  sin-  went  t"  Pana-
ma, and  thence  to  Safla,  and  there  took  charge  of
•  shop,  managing  it  to  1 1 1« •  «-nt »n-  satisfaction  of
li.  i  employer.  * » 1 1  one  OBBMBtM,  while  at  the
itre,  Catalina  was  annoyed  bj  ■  man  named
-.  who  threatened to  di-tigure her fan-,  ami

on  tii.'  following  'lav  weal  to  the  shop  with  the
purpose  of  proToldiig  her.  When  In-  lift  she  got
a  knife.  made  it  Into  ■  -<>rt  of -daw,  and,  girding  «>n
lur  sword,  want  in  search  of  Raye*.  she  found
him  near  tin-  doorol  a  church,  ru-hed  u|k.ii  him,
and  crying.  "Thi-  i-  the  Emm  thai  btobediawwed,
la-  En  with  the  rude  weapon.  A  friend  of
-  then  attacked  her,  but  -he  wounded  him
dangerously,  and  then  took  refuge  to  ■  church.
Ber  employer,  who  entertained  feelings  of  friend-
snip  for  the  sister-in-law  of  the  wonndad  l>'
thought  matters  would  be  brought  to  a  satisfac-
tory termination  by  a  marriage  lictwccn  her  and
hi-  clerk.  Catalina  gave  her  employer  to  under-
stand that  nothing  could  tndnoi  her  to  marry.
She  then  went  to  Trujillo  to  take  charge  of  anoth-
er -hop.  RayaSj  With  two  others,  followed  and  at-
tacked bar,  boi  Catalina  defended  herself  again st
all  three, and  killed  one  of  them.  (MoJto,  tin-  chief
magi-trate,  was  taking  her  to  prison,  when,  passing
by  a  church,  lie  allowed  her  to  take  refuge  in  it.  He
was  from  Biscay,  and  she  had  chanced  to  speak  to
him  in  the  Basque  dialect.  She  next  went  to  Lima,
and  after  some  months  enlisted  as  a  soldier,  under
the  assumed  name  of  Alonso  I>iaz  Ramirez  deGuz-
man.  in  the  exjH'dition  that  was  to  be  sent  to  Chili.
The  company  was  commanded  bv  Capt.  Gonzalo
Rodriguez,  and  formed  part  of  the  forces  sent  to
Oonoenoioa  under  the  command  of  Sarabia,  but
made  the  campaign  under  the  command  of  Gov.
KiU'ra,  whose  secretary  was  Capt.  Miguel  de  Erau-
zo,  whom  she  knew  to  be  her  brother,  but  he  did
not  recognize  her.  But  he  found  that  Ramirez  de
Guzman  frequented  a  certain  gambling-saloon,  and
caused  her  transfer  to  Paicabi  (Arauco),  where  she
remained  three  years  in  service.  She  accompanied
the  expedition  to  Valdivia,  where,  in  a  severe  en-
gagement, -he  with  two  soldiers  rushed  in  among
the  Indians,  and  l>oth  soldiers  perished  in  the
fight;  but  Catalina  wounded  many,  and  killed  a
cacique,  after  receiving  three  wounds  from  arrows
and  one  from  a  lance.  For  this  exploit  she  was
appointed  ensign,  and  served  as  such  in  the  com-
pany of  Alonso  Moreno,  in  the  kittle  of  Puren,
and  when  her  captain  fell  she  took  his  place  and
led  the  company  bravely.  Afterward  Catalina
took  part  in  other  engagements,  and  was  wound-
ed many  times  by  arrows.  She  fought  with  the
famous  cacique  Quispehuancha,  unhorsed  him.
and  then  had  him  hanged  on  a  tree.  When
Catalina  was  at  Nacimiento  she  obtained  a  six-
months'  leave  of  absence,  to  return  to  Concc|K.-ion,
and  while  there  was  insulted  in  a  gambling-saloon
by  an  officer,  whom  she  wounded  in  the  breast,
and  took  refuge  in  a  church.  The  governor  had
the  church  surrounded  for  six  months,  and  by  t hi-
time  the  fury  of  the  people  had  abated.  Catalina
left,  accompanied  by  the  ensign  I>oii  .luan  Silva.
who  had  asked  her  to  be  hi-  second  in  a  duel  with
Don  Francisco  Boiaa.  Silva  being  wounded  and
Hojas  killed,  Catalina  fought  with  tin-  second  of
the  latter  while  the  moon  was  obscured  by  a  cloud,
so  that  -lie  did  not  seethe  face  of  her  op|n»nellt.
The  cloud  passed  away  and  Catalina  looked  anon
the  face  of  her  brother,  whom  -In-  had  killed,  .she
then -et out  00  a  journey  to  Tucuuian  (in  th<

fetitine  iirovince). Boom  idea  may  be  formed  "f
er  hardships  and suiforingi on that perUone

journey  from  the  foot  (ae  the  herself  relates)  that


for  the  flr>t  time  in  her  life  *he  shed  team.  When
she  saw  two  deserter- ami  two  Indian-  «  h  •  accom-
panied her  |M*rish  of  hunger  and  cold,  her  heart
failed  her  for  a  moment,  but  -he  killed  a
and,  subsisting  on  its  flesh,  continued  her  journey.
After  travelling  n  long  time. -he  came  to  M  farm,
whose  owner,  a  widow,  feasted  her  with  the  great-
est kindness,  and  wanted  Catalina  to  marry  her
daughter.  She  went  to  Tiicunian,  M  if  for  the
purpo-e  of  celebrating  the  marriage,  but  fled,  and
directed her  Potosi,  accompanied  by  a

soldier. Ob  the  way  they  wen-  attacked  by  a  gang

of  robben,  two  of  whom  they  killed, she  reached

Potosi,  and  was  for  a  -hurt  time  valet  t
Arguijo,  but  soon  joined  the  command  of  the  cor-
regidor  of  l'oto-i,  who  was  raising  tr>x»j>s  to  put
down  an  insurrection  headed  by  Ylwflez,  and  took
|«irt  in  a  severe  engagement.  She  wa-  maiie  aide-
de-camp  to  (ien.  Allm.and  aceom|uiuie<l  him  on  an
expedition  against  the  Mojos  Indians.  After  this
she  went  to  Charms,  where  -he  wa-  employed  by
a  merchant,  whose  business  ptoapovoa1  rapidly
under  her  able  management ;  but  she  had  a  dispute
at  the  gaming-table,  and  fought  a  duel  with  the
cousin  of  the  bishop,  killing  her  adversary.  In
Fomahamba  (Peru),  Catalina  had  another  duel,  in
which  she  killed  her  adversary,  and  was  thrown
into  prison  and  put  to  the  torture.  She  made  M
coiife— ion,  but  was  sentenced  to  die,  refused  to  re-
ceive the  consolations  of  the  church,  and  atoeodad
the  scaffold.  But  an  order  arrived  from  President
Don  Diego  de  Portugal  to  suspend  the  execution
and  send  the  culprit  to  Chuqmsaca,  as  it  had  been
proved  that  the  declarations  of  the  witnesses'  were
false.  Catalina  went  to  Cochabamba.  A  nun
named  I'lloa  induced  the  president  of  Charms
to  commission  Catalina  to  conduct  the  trial  of
Francisco  Escotwr,  who  had  treacherously  killed
two  Indians.  The  result  of  the  trial  wa-  that
she  condemned  him  to  l»e  hanged,  and  the  sen-
tence was  carried  into  execution.  Catalina  next
went  to  La  Paz,  where  the  servant  of  the  cor-
regidor  enraged  her  bv  throwing  his  hat  in  her
face.  Catalina  stabbed  him  with  her  dagger,  and
he  fell,  mortally  wounded.  She  was  imprisoned,
-cut.  need  to  <lie,  and  was  allowed  two  davs  to  pre-
pare for  death,  but  finally  esca|>ed.  When  the
viceroy,  Marauifl  de  Monteselaros,  was  preparing  a
fleet  to  attack  the  naval  forces  of  the  Dutch  in  the
1'acitic,  under  the  command  of  George  Bpilberg,
Catalina  joined  the  Beat,  and  embarked  in  the  "  Al-
mirante."  which,  stranded  off  Cafiete,  wascomplcte-
lv  destroyed  in  the  conflict. Catalina  was  one  of

the  few  paraoni  thai  wen-  eared,  and  fell  Into  the

hand- of  the  Dutch,  but  were  -et  f rec  at  Payta. She

went  to  Lima,  and,  after  a  stay  of  seven  month-,
proceeded  to  Ouaoo,  Hen-  she  was  a  great  favorite
with  the  ladies.  On  one  OQQlBion,  in  a  gambling-
saloon,  she  met  a  Spaniard  commonly  known  as  the
"Cid."  lie  wa-  repul-ive  and  <)iiarrclsome,  but
courageous.  The  "Cid"  took  his  seat  beside  her.
Twice  be  took  from  the  table  the  money  she  had
won;  but  on  his  making  the  third  attempt  -he
pinned hfal  hand  to  the  table  with  her  |K>niard.  Tin
"Cid."  with  two  of  his  friends,  attacked  her;  -he,
battling  with  all  three,  made  her  way  to  the  -trect.
where  two  Ib-eayan  friends  came  to  her  aid.  The
"Cid  "  Wounded  Catalina  in  the  l>ack  and  in  the  left
aide,  and  she  fell,  bleedfcag  profusely.  Faint  from.
loss  of  blood,  she  bettered  herself  to  be  dying,  and
longed  to  reveal  her >ex.  Raising  herself,  she  saw
the  "Cid"  standing  opposite  the  church  at  Whom
door  aba  lay. The  dying  woman  rose,  staggered

toward  tl Cid,"  and  throat  berawocd  through

his  body,  killing  him  OB  the  in-tant. The  corregi-


3(52


EKAUZO


BBCILLA V zfSlGA


dor  arrived,  and,  seeing  her  dangerous  wound,  or-
dered her  to  confess.  She  revealed  t  lie  secret  of  her
sex  to  the  priest, and  was  taken  to  the  house  of  the
treasurer  Aleedo.  After  many  more  advent  hits,
mostly  personal  encounters,  she  met  Bishop  Agus-
tin  de  Carvajal,  to  whom  she  related  the  story  of
her  life,  telling  him  she  was  willing  to  submit  to
examination  by  a  committee  of  matrons,  adding
that  she  still  preserved  her  purity.  It  was  proved
by  the  declarations  of  the  matrons  that  she  had
spoken  the  truth.  Catalina  lived  in  a  convent  in
1020-'2,  then  travelled  to  New  Granada,  and  sailed
for  Spain,  arriving  in  Cadiz,  1  Dec.,  1024.  Her
fame  had  preceded  her,  and  crowds  thronged  the
streets  with  cries  of  "  Long  life  to  valor ! "  "  Long
live  the  ensign-nun!"  In  Madrid  she  presented
an  account  of  her  services  to  King  Philip  IV.,  who
granted  hera  pension  for  life  of  800  crowns.  Cata-
lina set  out  for  Barcelona,  but  before  arriving  there
was  robbed.  From  Barcelona  she  went  to  Genoa,
and  thence  to  Rome,  where  the  pope,  Urbano
VIII.,  granted  her  an  audience,  and,  having  heard
the  narrative  of  her  adventures,  gave  her  absolu-
tion for  all  the  crimes  she  might  have  committed,
with  permission  to  dress  in  male  attire  for  the  rest
of  her  life.  She  next  went  to  Naples,  and  thence
to  Spain,  remaining  in  Seville  until  1630,  in  which
year  she  embarked  again  for  Havana,  and  thence
for  Mexico,  as  ensign  in  the  fleet  commanded  by
Capt.  de  Echazarreta.  In  Mexico  she  made  a  long
campaign,  and,  as  usual,  distinguished  herself  by
her  bravery  in  battle,  and  after  some  years  retired
from  the  service,  bought  a  string  of  pack-mules,
and  liegan  trade  between  the  city  of  Mexico  and
Vera  ( 'ruz.  A  certain  rich  merchant  commissioned
her  to  take  a  young  lady  from  Jalapa.  Catalina,
enchanted  with  the  loeauty  of  the  young  lady,  grew
very  fond  of  her ;  but  when  they  reached  Mexico
a  nobleman  became  enamored  of  the  girl,  and,  al-
though Catalina  offered  to  place  $3,000  at  interest
in  her  name,  and  give  her  half  her  pension,  if  she
would  become  a  nun,  the  young  lady  married  the
nobleman.  Unable  to  endure  the  absence  of  her
beloved  friend,  Catalina  went  to  the  house  of  the
latter,  where  she  was  well  received ;  but  as  she  re-
peated her  visits  too  often,  the  lady,  jealous  of  her
reputation,  persuaded  her  husband  to  forbid  Cata-
lina the  house.  At  this  the  latter  almost  lost  her
reason,  and  challenged  the  husband,  who  declined
to  measure  swords  with  a  woman.  A  short  time
afterward  the  husband  was  defending  himself
against  three  men  who  had  attacked  him,  when
Catalina  took  up  his  defence  and  vanquished  them.
In  1050,  on  her  way  to  Vera  Cruz,  she  fell  ill  at
Cuitaxtla,  and  in  a  few  days  expired,  and  was
buried  at  Orizaba.  Archbishop  Palafox,  of  Mexico,
caused  a  eulogistic  epitaph  to  be  inscribed  on  her
tomb  in  1651.  The  memorial  presented  by  her  to
King  Philip  IV.  is  referred  to  on  page  135  of  the
book  published  by  Don  Joaquin  Maria  Ferrer,  and
was  accompanied  by  a  certification  of  Don  Luis  de
Cespedes  Feria,  governor  of  Paraguay,  of  Don
Francisco  Perez  de  Navarrete,  of  Don  Juan  Cortes
de  Monroy,  governor  of  Veragnas,  and  of  Gen.  Don
Juan  Recio  de  Leon.  The  king  and  the  pope
called  her  Ensign  Dona  Catalina  Erauzo.  Don
Pedro  de  la  Valle,  in  a  work  on  his  voyages  (1680),
says  he  knew  her  in  Rome,  and  that  in  that  city
Francesco  Crecencio  executed  a  portrait  of  her.
The  history  of  her  life,  written  bv  herself,  was  pub*
lished  in  Mexico  in  1653.  The  Rev.  Nicholas  Ren-
teria  in  1693  gave  a  succinct  account  of  her  life.
The  poet  Juan  Perez  de  Montalban  wrote  a  drama
entitled  "  La  Monja  Alferez  "  ("  The  Ensign-Nun  ").
which  was  represented  in  Lima  and  in  Seville  at


the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  Dm  Can-
dido  M.  Trigurros  wrote  a  poem  on  Dofia  Catalina
Krauzo  (Seville.  1784).  Gil  Gonzalez  Davila.  in  his
life  of  Philip  1 II..  gives  a  succinct  account  of  Dona
Catalina.  lie  mentions  that  he  met  her  at  an  inn
in  the  dress  of  a  soldier,  and  that  he  saw  her  wound*.
and  the  documents  that  proved  her  services.  Josr
quin  M.  Ferrer  published  her  history  (Paris.  U90),
taken  from  her  memoirs.  In  1630  Pacheco  made  a
full-length  portrait  of  her  from  the  following  de-
script  ion  :  "  She  is  tall,  for  a  woman ;  her  eyes  are
large,  black,  and  brilliant;  her  lips  red  and  full;
her  nose  rather  short,  the  nostrils  dilated  :  her
neck  is  short ;  her  figure,  neither  good  nor  bad ;
her  hair  short,  and  anointed  with  pomade,  accord-
ing to  the  fashion.  Her  gait  is  light  and  el<
her  manners  natural ;  her  hands  alone  are  femi-
nine, but  rather  in  gestures  than  in  form.  There
is  a  light  brown  down  on  the  upper  lip."

KKBEN,  Peter,  organist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1863.  After
the  death  of  his  father,  who  was  one  of  the  early
German  settlers  in  Pennsylvania,  he  removed  to
New  York,  where  he  became  an  organ-builder,  and
was  also  organist  in  Trinity  parish  from  1807  till
1839. — His  son,  Henry,  b.  in  New  York  city  in
1801 ;  d.  there  in  May,  1883,  was  apprenticed  in
1818  to  Thomas  Hall,  an  organ-builder.  He  be-
came Mr.  Hall's  partner  in  1822,  and  afterward
carried  on  the  business  alone.

ERCILLA  Y  Z I  S  I < .  A .  Alonso  de  (er-theel-
ya),  Spanish  poet,  b.  in  Madrid,  7  Aug.,  1533 ;  d.
there  about  1595.  He  was  the  third  son  of  Fortun
Garcia,  lord  of  Torre  de  Ercilla,  and  Leonor  de
Zufiiga,  a  noble  lady  in  the  service  of  Empress
Isabella,  wife  of  Charles  V.  In  early  youth  he
was  a  page  to  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  afterward
Philip  II.,  and  in  1554  accompanied  Philip  to  Eng-
land on  the  occasion  of  the  latter's  marriage  to
Queen  Marv.  While  he  was  in  London  news  was  re-
ceived of  the  rebellion  of  the  Araucanians,  a  brave
nation  of  Chili,  and  Ercilla  at  once  joined  the  ex-

I>edition  against  them  under  Alderete.  He  high-
y  distinguished  himself  in  the  campaign  that
followed,  taking
part  in  seven  bat-
tles and  many
other  fierce  en-
counters. He  af-
terward accom-
panied Hurtado
de  Mendoza  to
the  conquest  of
Chiloe,  near  the
straits  of  Magel-
lan, and  with  ten
followers,  on  28
Feb.,  1558,  pene-
trated inland  to
a  point  that  had
been  reached  by
no  other  Euro-
peans, leaving  a
statement  of  that
fact  in  verse,  cut
in  the  bark  of  a
tree.  After  tak-
ing possession  of
those  regions  in
the  name  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  he  returned
to  the  city  of  Imperial,  and,  being  suspected  of
joining  in  a  mutiny,  was  condemned  to  be  bs»
headed,  but  was  reprieved  and  afterward  exiled.
While  at  Lima  he  heard  of  the  rebellion  and
cruelties  of  Lope  de Aguirre  in  Venezuela,  and


BOB


reached  Panama  in  1501,  OH  his  way  to  fight
against  him: but  Aguios had  ju«t ban  deposed

:  killed,  and  Krcilla,  after  a  long  and  dangerous
lllnni.  retonwd  t<>  Spain  in  1668.  After travelling

y  through  Europe,  be  i-ntvred  the  Ml
of  the  Kni|M>n>r  Rudolph.  of  Austria,  as  one  of  bit
ehandM-rhtins  hut  abool  1680  returned  to  Madrid,

re  he  passed  the  rest  of  his  lift-  m  retlienft.

almost  forgotten,  and iii  extreme  [M.v.rty. When

tin  began  his  seven  years'  campaign  ill  Chili  he

oonoaiTed  the  idea  of  miHing  ii  the  subject  of  a

m;  and  in  the  intervals  iif  active  duly ino-tly

at  night-time,  haoomposad  the  first  part  of  "La

Aram-ana."  writing  Mi  versee  on  scraps  of  paiH-r.
and  often  on  hit*  of  leather.  The  third  and  last
part  of  the  poem  he  finished  after  his  retwn  to

Spain.  "  Im  Araucana  '*  is  one  .»f  the  bob]  cele-
brated of  Spanish  epics,  and  one  of  the  U-st  ever
written  in  any  language,  It  not  only  possesses  the
merit  of  pure  diction,  vivid  description,  and  majes-
tir  style,  but  it  is  also  a  true  history  of  the  Arau-
canian  war,  in  which  the  author  was  personally  en-
gaged, and  as  such  has  lieen  used  by  the  most  con-
scientious historians.  The  first  fifteen  canto-  <>f
44  La  Araucana'  were  published  in  Madrid  in  1509,
thOQBOOnd  part  in  15 < 8,  and  the  third  part,  com-
pleting the  thirty-seven  cantos,  in  1590.  Its  best
editions  are  those  of  Madrid  (177'i  and  1886),  A
portion  of  the  poem,  translated  into  French  by
Grainville,  is  found  in  vol.  vii.  of  the  "Quatre  Sal-
s' us  du  I'amasse."  An  analysis  of  the  poem,  wit  h
translations  of  parts  of  it,  has  been  made  in  Hay-
liv*s  "  Essay  on  S3pic  Poetry"  (London,  17S2).

ERIC,  bishop,  b,  in  Norway  in  the  11th  centu-
ry. He  was  active  in  the  conversion  of  the  natives
of  Greenland,  and  was  the  first  bishop  that  exer-
I  jurisdiction  in  America.  As  soon  as  the  Nor-
wegians under  Thorwald  l>egan  to  form  settlements
in  Vinland.  Kric  followed  his  countrymen  from
(Jreenland  to  the  newly  discovered  continent.  Here
he  labored  among  the  natives  for  several  years.  He
returned  to  Norway  in  1120,  gave  an  account  of
the  progress  of  religion  in  Vinland  and  Green-
land, and  advised  the  establishment  of  a  bishopric
in  the  new  colonies.  The  bishop  of  Scandinavia
erected  the  new  see  of  (tarda  in  Greenland,  and
recommended  Ericas  bishop.  He  was  consecrated
at  Lund,  in  Denmark,  in  1121,  by  Archbishop
Adzar,  and  sailed  for  ( tarda  with  a  body  of  mission-
aries, hut.  after  a  short  stay,  visited  the  new  colony
in  Vinland.  The  situation  of  Vinland  has  ban
fixed  by  some  in  southeastern  New  England.  Some
have  gone  so  far  as  to  place  it  about  Narragaiisett
bay;  but  such  conjectures  are  supported  by  inade-
quate evidence,  and  have  little  historical  value.

ERIC  THE  RED,  Scandinavian  navigator.
He  was  the  son  of  a  jarl  of  Jadar,  and  was  called
red  from  the  color  of  his  hair.  In  888  lie  m
one  of  the  Northmen  who  braved  the  dangers  of
the  Atlantic  ocean  to  settle  in  Iceland.  During
the  following  year  he  set  mil  from  Bredifiord  in
search  of  land  seen  by  Guunhjoru,  of  which  a  tra-
dition  stiil lingered  among the Northmen. He

don  bled  ('ape  Farewell,  ami  Bailed  up  the  veal

coast  to  the  present  site  of  Juliaucshaah,  where  he

saw  large  berasof  reindeer browsingon  fheniaadow

lands.  Tin-  country  pleased  him.  and  he  named  it
Greenland,  and  the  inlet  Rriflflord.  In  088  he  re-
turned to  Iceland,  but  SOOU  again  si -t  sail  with
:v-tive  ships  loaded  with  emigrants,  and  the
founding  a  colony.  He  reached  l
fiord  with  but  fourteen  of  his  vessels,  the  remain
der  having  been  l<>st  or  forced  t<>  put  hack,  and  be
built  a  settlement  tar  up  the  fiord,  The  town  grew
and  prospered,  and  in  Um*  the  coast  was  explored


and  new  plantation,  f,. uncled.  Ah  no  trem  grow  in
that  region  now.  it  is  pp. 1*1.1,.  that  the  land  wu
far  nmre  habitable  than  at  present,  ami  \cry little

mention  <>f  lee  ii  made  by  the  early  chronfc
Ab.ut  !<KX»,  mi  exploring  jwrty  mi out  by him,
Under  the  command  of  hut  -on  I,eif  J  the

eontineiit  of  North America,  |>art of  which
called  Markland,  and  another  |»art  Vinland. The
latter  ant  tears  to  have  Uvn  southeastern  v>
land, lie  is  supitoscd  to  have  established  a  BOiOBjJ

in  tlntf neighborhood, but  the  evidence  on  uhlan

this  supposition  is  made  is  not  satisfactory. See
Bryant  and  Gay's  ••  Popular  History  of  the  Ul
States,"  and  Rev.  Benjamin  F.  De  Costa's  ••  Pn
lumbian  Discovery  ol  America  by  the  Northmen  "  :
also,  Laing's  "  Heimskriiigla."  which  oontalm  by
far  the  ablest  discussion  of  the  subject.

ERICH,  Augustus  Frederick,  physician,  b.  in
■Ueben,  Germany,  4  May,  I88Z  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  gymnasium  in  Helenas,  and  came  to
the  United  States  in  1888.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  the  I'niversitv  of  Maryland  in  :-
and  began  to  practise  in  Baltimore.  In  1h4kS  |m.
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Baltimore  social  di»-
[lensary,  and  was  assigned  to  the  charge  of  diseases

of  women.  He  hifiami  profejaof  of  chemistry  in
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  llalti-
more  in  1873,  and  was  afterward  elected  to  fill  the
chair  of  diseases  of  women  in  the  same  institution.
He  is  a  member  of  numerous  medical  societies,  and
in  1H71  was  president  of  the  Medical  and  surgical
society  of  Baltimore.  His  i  outributiotis  to  medi-
cal literature  have  been  Important,  and  are  chiefly
composed  of  pajters  on  his  s|>ecialties.

ERICSSON,  John,  engineer,  b.  in  Ungbnns-
hvttan.  province  of  Wermland.  Sweden.  81  Julv.
1803:  d.  in  New  York  city.  H  March.  I860.  His
father. Glof.  was  a  mining  proprietor,  ami  his  broth-
er. Baron  Nils  Ericsson,  was  chief  ofthe  Swedish
railways.  As  a  boy,  John  had  ample  opportunity
of  watching  machinery  connected  with  mines,  and
his  mechanical  talent  was  early  developed.  He
received  his  earliest instruction  from  a  Swedish

f governess,  and  a  German  engineering  ofBoar  who
lad  served  under  Bernadotte.  lie  fore  he  was
eleven  years  of  age  he  had  constructed  with  his
own  hands,  and  after  his  own  plans,  a  miniature
saw-mill,  and  had  made  numerous  drawings  of
complicated  me-
chanical contri-
ranoee,  These
efforts  having
attracted  the  at-
tention of  Count
Platen,  this  cele-
brated engineer
appointed  him
a  cadet  in  the
corpsof  mechan-
ical cngiii'  •  re,
and,  after  sj\
months'  tuition.
he  was  made  a
leveller  at  the
grand  Swedish
ship  canal,  then

in  course  of  con-
struction. Two
nam later, at

i he  age  of  fourteen,  he  was  employed  tOBBi  out  the

work  of  a  motion  employing  MMl  soldier  ojK-riitives,
upicd his leisure in making  drawings  ,,f

every  implement and  machim MHHTtad  with  the

canal.  Be  entered  the  Swedish  army  as  ensign  in
1888,  and  was  rapidly  promoted  to  a  lieutenancy.


364


KKIC'SSON


KHICSSdN


Shortly  afterward  he  passed  with  distinction  a
competitive  examination  for  an  appointment  on  the
survey  of  northern  Sweden.  Notwithstanding  the
labor  attendant  upon  his  duties  as  a  surveyor,  he
undertook  to  make  drawings  for  a  work  on  canals,
and  to  engrave  the  plates  in  the  style  of  what  was
known  as  machine  engraving.  He  devised  a  line
engraving  machine,  by  means  of  which,  within  one
year,  he  completed  eighteen  large  copper  plates,
which  experts  pronounced  to  be  of  superior  merit.
When  about  twenty-two  years  old  he  constructed
a  condensing  flame-engine  of  ten-horse  power,  and
in  1826  went  to  England  to  introduce  it ;  but  it
was  not  successful,  the  flame  produced  by  mineral
fuel  being  far  less  in  volume  than  that  obtained
from  a  pine-wood  fire,  while  the  intense  heat  from
coal  seriously  affected  the  working  parts  of  the
engine.  In  1827  he  resigned  his  commission  in
the  army,  after  being  promoted  to  a  captaincy.
The  failure  of  the  flame-engine  compelled  him  to
draw  upon  his  mechanical  abilities  for  means  to
prosecute  further  experiments.  He  produced,  in
rapid  succession,  an  instrument  for  taking  sea
soundings,  a  hydrostatic  weighing  machine,  and
numerous  other  devices,  including  tubular  steam-
boilers,  and  artificial  draught  by  centrifugal  fan-
blowers,  dispensing  with  huge  smoke-stacks,  econo-
mizing fuel,  and  showing  the  fallacy  of  the  as-
sertion that  the  production  of  steam  was  de-
pendent on  the  amount  of  fire  surface.  In  the
steamship  "  Victory,"  in  1828,  he  made  the  first
application  to  navigation  of  the  principle  of  con-
densing steam  and  returning  the  water  to  the
boiler,  and  in  the  same  year  submitted  to  the
admiralty  his  self-acting  gun-lock,  the  peculiarity
being  that  by  its  means  naval  cannon  could  be
automatically  discharged  at  any  elevation,  not-
withstanding the  rolling  of  the  ship.  Not  being
able  to  agree  as  to  the  terms  of  adoption  in  the
British  navy,  he  kept  the  secret  of  this  invention
till  1843,  when  he  applied,  it  to  the  wrought-iron
gun  of  the  "  Princeton."  In  1829  he  produced  the
celebrated  steam  carriage  "  Novelty,"  built  for  the
purpose  of  competing  with  George  Stephenson  for
the  historical  Liverpool  and  Manchester  railway
prize.  This  engine  was  planned  and  completed,
and  placed  on  the  trial-ground  within  seven  weeks ;
but,  although  the  "  Novelty,"  guided  by  its  in-
ventor, far  exceeded  all  other  competitors  in  light-
ness, elegance,  and  speed,  attaining  the  then  amaz-
ing speed  of  thirty  miles  an  hour,  Stephenson's
"Rocket"  proved  superior  in  traction,  and  was
awarded  the  prize.  In  the  "  Novelty "  he  intro-
duced several  features,  the  four  most  important  of
which  are  retained  in  the  locomotive  of  the  present
day.  This  year,  also,  he  invented  a  steam  fire-en-
gine, which  excited  great  interest  in  London,  and
for  which  he  afterward  received,  in  1840,  the  great

fold  medal  of  the  Mechanics'  institute  of  New
rork.  In  1830  he  introduced  "  link  motion  "  for
reversing  locomotive  engines,  and  a  modification  of
this  device  is  now  in  use  in  all  locomotives.  His
Long-cherished  plan  of  a  caloric  engine  was  realized
in  1833,  and  was  hailed  with  astonishment  by  the
scientific  world  of  London.  Lectures  were  deliv-
ered on  it  by  Dr.  Dionysius  Lardner  and  Michael
Faraday,  and  it  was  highly  approved  by  Dr.  Andrew
Ure  and  Sir  Richard  Phillips.  A  vorking  engine
of  five-horse  power  was  built,  in  which  he  placed
the  "  Regenerator,"  but  it  was  unsuccessful  owing
to  the  high  temperature  essential,  which  produced
oxidation,  quickly  destroying  the  valves  and  other
working  parts.  In  1853  the  caloric  ship  "  Ericsson,"
of  2,000  tons,  was  propelled  by  a  motor  on  the  same
principle. A  sea  trial  from  New  York  to  Wash-


ington and  back  established  great  economy  in  fuel.
but  at  a  speed  too  slow  to  compete  with  steam.  For
several  years  thereafter  Eric— on  devoted  himself
to  the  improvement  of  the  stationary  caloric  engine
and  its  application  to  light  mechanical  purposes,
and  more  than  6,000  of  such  engines  have  been
built  up  to  1887,  hundreds  being  employed  in  New
York  city  in  pumping  water  in  private  dwellings.
In  1862  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences
awarded  the  gold  and  silver  Rumford  medals  to
Ericsson  "  for  his  improvements  in  the  manage-
ment of  heat,  particularly  as  shown  in  his  caloric
engine  of  1858."  This  was  the  second  bestowal  of
the  premium  in  the  United  States.  In  1836  Ericsson
invented  and  patented  the  screw  propeller,  which
revolutionized  navigation,  and  in  1837  built  a
steam  vessel  having  twin  screw  propellers,  which
on  trial  towed  the  American  packet-ship  "  Toron-
to" at  the  rate  of  five  miles  an  hour  on  the  river
Thames.  Subsequently  the  admiralty  barge,  bear-
ing the  lords  of  the  admiralty,  was  towed  at  a
rapid  rate,  but  the  endeavor  to  convince  them  of
the  practicability  of  the  new  device  was  futile,
since  they  thought  that,  as  the  power  must  be  ap-
plied at  the  stern,  the  vessel  would  not  steer.  In
1838  he  constructed  the  iron  screw-steamer  "  Robert
F.  Stockton,"  which  crossed  the  Atlantic  under
canvas  in  1839,  and  was  afterward  employed  as  a
tug-boat  on  the  river  Delaware  for  a  quarter  of  a
century.  In  1839,  urged  by  Com.  Robert  F.  Stock-
ton, U.  S.  N.,  Ericsson  resigned  his  office  in  London
as  superintending  engineer  of  the  Eastern  Counties
railway,  and  came  to  the  United  States  during
November.  In  1841,  under  order  from  the  U.  S.
navy  department,  he  furnished  designs  for  the  screw
war-ship  "  Princeton,"  the  first  vessel  having  the
propelling  machinery  below  water-line,  out  of  the
reach  of  hostile  shot.  This  vessel  dictated  the  re-
construction of  the  navies  of  the  world.  Besides
its  screw  propeller,  the  "  Princeton  "  was  remark-
able for  numerous  mechanical  novelties  devised  by
Ericsson,  such  as  a  direct-acting  semi-cylindrical
steam-engine  of  great  compactness  and  simplicity ;
a  telescopic  smoke-stack  ;  and  independent  centrif-
ugal blowers  for  ventilation  and  for  promoting
combustion  in  the  boiler-furnaces,  obviating  the
necessity  of  exposing  the  chimney  during  battle.
He  also  fitted  it  with  wrought-iron  gun-carriages,
with  mechanism  for  dispensing  with  breeching,  and
taking  up  the  recoil  of  the  twelve-inch  wrought-
iron  gun,  the  first  of  its  kind,  and  up  to  that  time
the  largest  and  most  powerful  piece  of  ordnance
mounted  on  ship-board ;  the  self-acting  lock,  before
referred  to ;  and  an  optical  instrument  to  enable
the  commanding  officer,  by  mere  inspection,  accu-
rately to  ascertain  the  distance  of  the  object  to  be
aimed  at.  The  "  Princeton  "  is  correctly  regarded
as  the  pioneer  of  modern  naval  construction,  and
also  as  the  foundation  of  the  steam  marine  of  the
world.  During  the  construction  of  the  "  Prince-
ton," and  before  the  end  of  1843,  numerous  pro-
peller vessels  were  built  and  furnished  with  engines
by  Ericsson,  for  carrying  freight  on  the  rivers
and  inland  waters  of  the  United  States,  and  his
propellers  were  in  successful  application  in  more
than  sixty  vessels  in  this  country  before  a  ringlfl
attempt  was  made  to  evade  his  patent.  Up  to  tins
period  Europe  was  skeptical  regarding  the  com-
mercial value  of  the  new  method  of  propulsion.
In  1851,  in  the  U.  S.  division  of  the  World's  fair
held  in  London,  he  exhibited  several  of  his  inven-
tions, including  his  instrument  for  measuring  dis-
tances at  sea;  a  hydrostatic  gauge  for  fluids  under
pressure  ;  a  gauge  for  the  volume  of  water  passing
through  pipe-:  i  he  alarm  barometej ;  a  pyrometer;


BRBiZUHIZ


B60


an  in^t  ruiiu-iit  br  imtlirtllfl  fluid-  by  t  * .

with  which  thf_v  | mi--  through  duflnfri  a|H-rtures*;

ami  I  :■  -ea lead,  -till in  use  by

tin"  IT.  >.  OOMl  survey,  toe  principle  of  which  was
adopted  in  constructing  thr  sounding  apparatu-
used  by  the  "Challenger"  cx|>cdit ion.  hor  these
philosophical  exhibit*  Brioaeon  wm  awarded  the

Iiri/i"  medal  i>f  tin-  exhibition.  Previoii-  |Q
-son  conceived  tin"  idea  that  WM  |>ut  in  prac-
tical shape  when,  in  1H54,  In*  presented  to  Emj>eror
leotl  III.  plans  of  a  partially  submerged
armored  vessel,  with  guns  in  a  revolving  -hot-proof
i"U|nila  nhWHtli  centrally  mi  thr  deck.  This  was
the  first  suggestion  of  the  "  .Monitor,"  which  was
_iieil  ami  Imilt  by  him  in  Ureenpoint,  N.  V.,  in
1801.  for  the  I'.S.  government,  under  verv  arbitrary
conditions.  When  the  proposition  to  build  this  ves-
sel was  accepted,  the  only  drawing  completed  by
the  designer  was  a  mere  outline  and  section  to  illu--
trate  the  stability  of  the  structure;  but,  by  extra-
ordinary energy  and  executive  skill,  calctilation-
and  working- plans  were  made,  and  the  "  Monitor"
launched,  with  steam  machinery  complete,  hi  one
hundred  days  from  the  laying  of  the  keel.  She
arrived  in  Hampton  Roads  ju-t  in  time  to  defeat.
on  9  March,  1N6:>,  the  Confederate  iron-clad  "  Mcr-
rimac,"  which,  on  the  day  preceding,  had  de-
stroyed the  *•  Cumberland  "  and  "Congress,"  and
was  about  to  sink  or  disperse  the  rest  of  the  gov-


ernment's wooden  fleet.  But  for  the  victory  of  the
"  Monitor,"  the  result  of  the  war  might  have  been
changed,  and  Kun>|>ean  interference  attempted.  A  I
lb  it  of  monitors  was  then  ouicklv  built,  which  de-  I
feated  several  Confederate  iron-clad  batteries;  and
Kricsson's  system  was  taken  up  by  European  mari-
time powers  and  carried  out  by  them  on  ■  large
scale.  In  1869  he  constructed  for  the  Spanish  gov-
ernment a  fleet  of  thirty  steam  gun-lioats,  which
was  intended  to  guard  Cuba  against  filibustering
parties.  In  lKHl  his  latest  war-ve.—el,  the  "De-
stroyer." WM  devised.  It  carries  a  submarine  ran
of sixteen inches calibre, which di.-eharges :{<H)

ponndi  of  gun-cotton,  in  a  l,500-|>ound  projectile,

against  an  iron-<"lad's  hull  beneath  the  water-line.
During  many  years  Ericsson  devoted  much  time
Btifle  investigation,  including  computations
of  the  inlluiiuis  that  retard  the  earth's  rotarv
motion.  His  'Sun  Motor."  erected  at  New  York
:.  develops  a  steady  DOWOK  obtained  from
the  supply  of  mechanical  energy  stored  up  in  the
sun.  1  his  motor  was  intended  by  the  de.-igiier  a-
a  contribution  to  applied  science.  Ericsson  con-
tributed numerous  pa|>cr»,  on  -cicntific.  naval,  and
mechanical  -ubiect-.  U)  varioii-  journal-  in  America

and  Europe. In  •* Contributions  to  the  Centen-
nial  Exhibition"  (New York. lsTtii  he  di

•  ntific  apparatus  devised  and  employed  by
him in experiment- which determined all im-

Kortant practical ipie-tion- relating to radiant
id  numerous  novel  in-trumeuts  by  which  he


dem..ii-trat..l  the  Intensity  <>f  tcaw  energy  and
the  teni|M  niture  of  the  solar  surface ;  it  aim  con-
tain- a  description  of  his  principal  engin
constructions  during  his  residence  In  the  United

States. Many honor- wen  upon him.

Besides  marring  royal  favor-  from  Sweden,  ha

WM knight commander  of royal orders  fa
mark  and  Spain  ;  recipient of  the  grand  i  •
naval  merit  from  the  late  King  Alfoni
and  of  a  Special  gold medal  sent  In  the  emperor
of  Austria  in  behalf  of  science; he  received  the
thank- of  congress,  and  was  a  njnflfhw  of  various
scientific institution- in Borops and America.
We-l.van university B)TI him the degree of
I.E.  D.  in  1888. In  im;7  „  huge  monument,  ipiar-
ried in  one piece  from the  lM'iglilioring  granite-
mincs, was set up in front of his birthplace,
bearing  the  inscription,  in  the  Swedish  lai  -
".John Ericsson was Imrn here.  :tl July, lsn:»."
See  "Ericsson and hi- licentious," "Atlantic
Monthly," July, 1868, and "  John Ericsson,"
"Scribner'-  Monthly,"  April,  1879.

ERNST,  Oswald  Hubert,  soldier,  h.  near  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  87  June,  1848.  Ha  entered  Harvard
in  1858,  and  two  years  later  was  appointed  to  the
C.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1864,  becoming  at  mice  1st  lieutenant  in  the  en-
gineer corps.  In  July,  1864.  he  became  assistant
engineer  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  and  served
throughout  the  (Jeorgia  campaign.  After  a  short
service  at  the  C  S.  military  academy  as  assistant
professor  of  engineering,  he  was  appointed  assistant
engineer  in  const  met  ing  fortifications  on  the  Pacific
0OMt,  and  remained  so  occupied  till  1888.  He  WM
promoted  captain  in  March,  1887,  had  command
of  an  engineer  company  at  Willetts  Point.  N.  Y..
in  1868-'?1,  and  in  1870  was  sent  M  astronomer
with  the  government  exj>edition  to  S|wiin.  to  ol>-
-eive  the  solar  eclipse  of  that  year.  I.atcr  he  was
appointed  instructor  of  practical  military  engi-
neering, military  signalling,  and  telegraphy  at  the
military  academy,  performing  also  the  duties  of
architect  for  the  more  important  structures  of  the
place.  In  1878  he  became  assistant  engineer  on
western  river  improvements,  and  in  1880  was  gi\en
charge  of  the  improvements  of  the  Mississippi
river,  between  the  Illinois  and  Ohio  rivers,  lie
received  his  coinmi—ion  as  major  in  May.  1HX2.
and  has  since  had  charge  of  the  works  of  river
and  harl»or  improvement  in  Texas.  Major  Ernst
has  written  articles  on  engineering  subject-,  end
has  also  published  "A  Manual  of  Practical  Mili-
tary Engineering"  (New  York.  1*7:1).

KRRANI.  Achille,  musician,  h.  in  Facnza,
Italy.  20  Aug..  1888.  When  seventeen  years  of
Sge  he  entered  the  conservatory  of  Milan,  and
studied  singing  under  the  famous  VaOOaL  A  Unit
five  years  later  he  made  hi-  first  apjxaran.  •
leading  tenor  at  Kcggio  ,M  Modena.  In  1888,
after  singing  often  in  Italy.  S|Miin.  and  Greece,
iie  went  to  Havana  under  the  management  of
Max  Maretzek.  Be  CMM  to  New  York  in  1860,
sang  at  Winter  Garden  with  Fahhri.  (iazia,  and
i  iui.  and  in  1881*  when  Adelina Patti  sang

Yioletta  in  "Traviata"  for  the  tlr-t  time.  M  t"<'k
the  part  of  Alfredo.  He  went  to  Mexico  in  1868,
and  after  the  civil  war  made  a  tour  through  the
southern  state-  as  tir-t  tenor  of  an  OpM  win-
pany.  He  then  settled  in  New  York  a- a  teacher
of  the  Italian  -tyle  of  -inking. Hi-  ino-t  famous

rupils are Minnie Hauck. .Miss  Thur-by, Mine.
hirand,  and  Stella  Bonheur.
ERRAXIRIZ. Federlco (er-rah  -thu-rith),
Chilian  statesman,  b.  in  Santiago.  Chili.  27  March,
L  there,  20  July.  1N77. He  -tudicd  law  in


866


ERRBTT


ERSKINE


the  University  of  Chili,  was  made  a  deputy  at  an
i.irlv  age,  and  took  some  part  in  the  parliamentary
debates.  In  1860  he  was  made  chief  of  the  prov-
ince of  Santiago,  and  introduced  nmny  reforms.
In  1862,  during  Perez's  administration,  ne  became
secretary  of  justice  and  of  public  instruction;  and

in  lNt;r>,  during  the
war  with  Spain,  he
was  secretary  of
war  and  the  navy.
In  1871  Errazuriz
became  president
of  the  republic  of
Chili  and,  while  in
the  discharge  of
this  office,  intro-
duced lil>eral  re-
forms df  great  im-
portance to  the
country,  tending
toward  the  secu-
larization of  pub-
lic instruction  and
freedom  of  wor-
^£?^  ^P i  . ship. He  amended

/C&&&u<0  C^iA^ut^c^yi^  the  constitution  of
£/  ^/  1833  by  means  of  a
law  which  was  very
much  discussed  in  congress,  abolished  ecclesiastical
privileges,  and  built  several  railways  in  the  north-
ern and  southern  parts  of  the  country.  He  also
organized  several  exhibitions  of  industry  and  art,
the  most  important  being  the  "  Exposicion  Univer-
sal "  of  1875,  held  in  a  magnificent  palace  built  in
the  "Quinta  Normal  de  Agricultura  expressly  for
that  purpose.  Errazuriz  improved  the  navy  by
adding  to  it  the  two  steel  men-of-war  "Cochrane  '
and  "Blanco  Encalada."  He  also  improved  the
condition  of  the  army,  and  contributed  greatly  to
the  material  progress  and  welfare  of  his  country.
He  died  soon  after  retiring  from  office.

ERRETT,  Russell,  journalist,  b.  in  New  York
in  1817.  In  1829  he  removed  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
where  he  adopted  journalism  as  a  profession.  He
has  been  repeatedly  elected  to  the  legislature  of
that  state.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  paymaster
in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  served  in  that  office  till  the
close  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  a  state  senator  in
1867,  assessor  of  internal  revenue  in  1869-73.  and
clerk  of  the  state  senate  in  1860-'l  and  1872-'6.
He  was  elected  a  representative  in  congress  in
1876  as  a  Republican,  and  served  in  1877- '83. —
His  brother,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city.  2  Jan.,  1820;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  19  Dec,
1888.  His  parents  were  converts  of  Alexander
Campbell,  and  he  became  a  preacher  of  that  de-
nomination in  1840.  He  held  pastorates  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  New  Lisbon,  Warren,  and  North  Bloom-
field,  Ohio.  Detroit,  Muir,  and  Ionia,  Mich.,  and  in
Chicago.  He  was  associated  with  Alexander  Camp-
bell in  the  "  Millennial  Harbinger,"  and  in  1866  he
began  the  publication  of  "  The  Christian  Stand-
ard "  in  Cleveland.  He  was  elected  president  of
Alliance  college  in  1868,  but  soon  resigned,  and
established  himself  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  contin-
ued the  publication  of  the  "Christian  Standard,"
now  the  foremost  weekly  periodical  of  his  church.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Butler  uni-
versity in  1886,  was  corresponding  secretary  of  the
Ohio  Christian  missionary  society  from  1853  till
1856,  and  president  from  1867  till  1870.  He  was
also  corresponding  secretary  of  the  General  Chris-
tian missionary  society  from  1857  till  1860,  and
president  from  1874  till  1876,  and  president  of  the
foreign  society  from  1875  till  1886. Dr.  Errett's


books  include  "  Debate  on  Spiritualism  with  Joel
Tiffany"  (IKS);  'A  Brief  View  of  Missions"
(1857);  "Walks  about  Jerusalem  n  (1871)  J  "Talks
to  Bereans"  (1872);  "Letters  to  Young  Chris-
tians" (1875);  "Review  of  a  Tract  by  Dr.  Thomas
<).  Summers,  entitled  'Why  I  am  not  a  Campbell*
ite'";  "Evenings  with  the  Bible"  (2  vols.,  1884
and  1887);  and  numerous  pamphlets.

KHSKINE,  David  Montagu,  Baron,  diplomat,
1>.  in  Kngland  in  1776;  d.  there,  19  March,  1855.
He  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Erskine,  lord  high
chancellor  of  England,  and  received  his  education
at  Eton  and  Cambridge.  He  became  a  barrister  at
law  in  1802,  and  in  1806  was  returned  to  parliament
for  Portsmouth.  Soon  afterward  he  was  sent  to
the  United  States  as  envoy  from  Great  Britain,  and
continued  as  such  till  1809.  For  many  yean  he
was  minister  plenipotentiary  to  the  court  of  "Bavaria,
and  remained  there  till  his  withdrawal  from  active
service  in  1843.  He  succeeded  to  the  peerage  in
1823. — His  wife,  Frances,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
28  June,  1781 ;  d.  in  England,  25  March,  1843.  was
the  daughter  of  Gen.  John  Cadwalader,  of  Phila-
delphia, and  married  Lord  Erskine  in  1  ?!»!>.  She
was  the  great-granddaughter  of  Judge  William
Moore,  of  Moore's  Hall.  Pa.,  whose  niece  married
the  lord  high  chancellor  Erskine,  and  hence  Baron
David  Montagu  Erskine  and  his  wife  were  cousins.
Lady  Erskine  was  distinguished  for  her  graces  of
character  as  well  as  of  person,  and  was  one  of  the
most  remarkable  beauties  of  her  time.  The  por-
trait of  her  by  Gil-
bert Stuart  is  con-
sidered one  of  his
masterpieces.  It
is  worthy  of  note,
as  a  proof  of  the
regard  evinced  by
Lord  Erskine  for
the  United  States,
that  his  eldest  sons,
Thomas  Araericus
and  John  Cadwal-
ader, each  of  whom
succeeded  to  the
title,  were  named,
the  former  after
Thomas  Cadwal-
ader, his  wife's
brother,  who  be-
came an  officer
during  the  war  of
1812,  and  the  lat-
ter after  his  father-in-law,  who  was  distinguished
as  a  general  in  the  American  army  during  the
Revolutionary  war.  The  descendants  of  Lady  Er-
skine, and  therefore  of  a  Revolutionary  general,
include  the  present  Duke  of  Portland  and  the  son
of  Lord  Archibald  Campbell,  prospective  Duke  of
Argyll,  his  eldest  brother  being  chddless.

ERSKINE,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ridley
Park,  Pa.,  31  Jan.,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  college  in  1843,  and  at  Princeton  theologi-
cal seminary  in  1848.  In  1849  he  was  called  to  the
pastorate  of  Penn  church  in  Philadelphia,  and  was
ordained  by  the  Presbytery  of  Phdadelphia  in
September  of  that  year.  He  held  this  charge  till
1851,  and  was  then  for  six  years  pastor  of  the
church  in  Columbia,  Pa.  He  was  pastor  in  Star-
ling, 111.,  from  1858  till  1864,  and  from  1865  till
1869  edited  the  "  Northwestern  Presbyterian  "  in
Chicago.  In  1870  he  was  called  to  the  church  in
Newville.  Pa.  He  was  moderator  of  the  synod  of
Harrisburg,  and  in  1878  became  a  director  of  the
Princeton  theological  seminary.


JT/Z^


;  i  n  K


i.i:i;\


Ml


KRSklNK,  i:  .i"i  t.  soieoUet,  i,.  n  Scotland.  7
Bapl  in  Binge

u of tin- ReV. Ralph Brskine, "f
Dunfermline,  Scotland,  author  i»f  "(m,-|m-|  SongJ

nml  "Scripture  Songs,"  ami  for  hi*  Kicntifli
■sjuvbes  wse  elected  a  member  of  tb  Bitty,

Hi-  afterward  came  ti>  this  country  ami  becalm-
geographer  and  surve  il  to  tin-  army.

I  KSKI.NK,  Sir  William.  British  soldier.  I».  in
England  in  172s*-.  d.on  '-»  March,  1786.  Hi  entered
tho  Scots  greys  in  17W,  and  became  a  cornel  at
Pontenoy.  In  March,  17-V»,  he  was  made  ■  major
in  tin-  I.*>th  light  dragoons,  and  served  with  freak
lil  in  Germany;  and  in  1788  be  was  promoted
tn  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  sent  tu  America
with  the  appointment  of  brigadier-genera^  and
eommanded  (he  7th  brigade  In  the  battle  <»f  Long

bland in 1770. Subsequently In* was second in

Bfrmmand  of  Got.  William  Tryon*s  marauding  ex-
pedition to  Danbory,  Goon*,  la  April.  1777. He

was  then  made  colonel  of  the  N()th  regiment,  ami
eniiiinamli-il  the  ea-tern  district  i>f  Long  Island
doting  the  wiiit<-r  uf  177s -!».  He  ffsj  made  a
—Jill  gniiCaal  la  177!».  lieutenant-general  in  17s?.
ami  btffMIH  a  baronet  in  .Iiine.  17111.  Daring  the
campaign  in  Flanders,  in  171W-'5,  he  was  second  in
command  to  the  Duke  of  York.

KKV1N.  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Williamsburg
district,  s.  ('.,  17  Dot.  1778;  d.  near  Darlington
Coiirt-IIousc.S.  ('..  7  July,  1841.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  17U7,  studied  law  with  W.  D.  James,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Columbia  in  No-
reaeber,  istM>.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
the  same  year,  re-elected  in  1H02.  and  served  until
;  Meanwhile  he  had  entered  on  his  praetioi
in  IVdee  count  v.  and  was  solicitor  of  the  northern
judicial  district  from  1*04  till  1816.  He  was  then
elected  to  congress  as  a  supporter  of  the  taritT.  and
served  from  1  Dec.  1M17.  till  .1  March.  1881.  Fail-
ing health  led  to  his  declining  a  re-election.  From
1  till  1H17  be  was  a  member  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  the  South  Carolina  college.

ERVIML  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Kirkwall.  Ork-
ney islands,  Scot  land,  in  1  OIK)  or  109.5:  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  Aug.,  17S0.  He  was  one  of  the  wealthiest
and  most  distinguished  merchants  of  Boston,  and
was  a  OManber  of  the  council  of  Massachusetts  for
twenty  years. —  His  son.  John,  l».  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  1727;  d.  in  Bath.  Finland,  17  .June.  1810,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  In  1747,  and  in  17<H)  signed
the  Boston  memorial,  thus  becoming  one  of  the
first  fifty  sight  men  in  this  country  to  array  them-
selves against  the  officers  of  the  crown.  In  1774
he  was  an  addresser  of  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchinson
unl  in  the  same  year  was  appointed  a  mandamus
councillor.  BOOS)  after  the  beginning  of  the  I  {evo-
lutionary war  he  fled  to  Halifax.  N.  S..  and  thence

to  England.  In  1778  he  was  proscribed  and  ban-
ished, and  a  year  later  his  property  was  confiscated

under  the  conspiracy  act. — The  second  John's
asp  hew,  fJeorge  William,  diplomatist.  l».  in  Bos-
ton. Mass..  in  1771  :  d.  in  New  York  city  in  July,
'.  was  a  son  of  George  Erring,  who.  daring  the
Revolution, wool  to  Halifax  and  theme  to  London,
and  sent  his  son  back  to  the  United  States  after
educating  him  at  Oxford.  Mr.  Erring  was  made
consul  at  London,  and  in  1804  was  appointed  sec-
retary of  legation  to  Spain.  In  1N11  he  was  coin-
Bllsaioned  special  minister  to  Denmark,  and  charged
with  the  Babied  of  spoliations  committed  under
tin- Danish llag  00  the  commerce  of the 1'nited

Prom  1814  till  1819  he  was  United  S
minister  to  Spain.

KRWIN,  Alexander  R.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lou-
isiana, 12  Jan.,  1820 ;  d.  in  lluutsville,  Ala.,  10  Jan.,


lb-  wu>  In  rasah  in  the  Methodist

Episcopal  church  in  I840L  and  joined  tin- T<  tun  s.
lb-  occupied  a  high  rank
in  the  ministry,  presided  over  the  <lark*ville  female
academy  and the Httntsville female  i
while  stationed in Nashtillc ISJOSlfSjd the
Of  D.  D.  from  Nashville  um\cr»it  v.

I  st  \  I.  V  NTK.  Juan  (es-cah-lahn  -tny  i.  Spanish
soldier,  li.  in  the  lot h  century ;  d.  in  16
one  of  the  adventurers  that  accompanied  Ibrnaii
Oortes  in  his  expedition  to  Mexico.  When  •
founded  Villa  Kica  de  \'era  Cru/.  on  tln-s|».t  where
he  had  disembarked.  BeosJantewas  appointed  high
constable,  and  discharged  the  duties  of  that  0BBB1
in  the  absence  of  the  gi-nenil-in-chief.  My  order  of
Cortes,  he  destroyed  the  ten  vessels  that  formed
the  Spanish  fleet.  When  Cortes  marched  to  M
he  left  Fscalante  with  lot)  men  to  guard  tin-  newly
founded  city.  Shortly  after  this  an  A/tec  chief,
called  ('uanjiopoca,  who  wished  to  go  SO  |<av  hom-
age personally  to  the  Spaniards,  obtained  ffOSB
Fscalante  a  guard  of  four  soldiers  to  protect  him
from  the  hostile  trills  he  would  have  to  encounter.
Two  of  the  soldiers  were  able  to  reach  Vera  Cruz,
but  the  others  were  assassinated.  Fscalante  then
set  out  with  fifty  Spaniards  and  some  thousands
of  Indians  to  take  revenge.  A  Imttle  ensued,  in
which  the  Spaniards  wen-  \ict..rioiis,  but  with  the
loss  of  seven  men.  among  them  Fscalante  himself.

E8CALAHTE  I  COLOM  BRKS.  Manuel.  M.x-
lean  bishop,  b.  in  Lima,  Fern,  sbottt  the  middle
of  the  17th  century;  d.  in  Salvatierra,  Mexico.  15
May,  17<>M.  While  very  young  he  was  taken  to
New  Spain  by  his  father,  who  had  bean  apjiointed
attorney  of  the  audicm-ia  or  supreme  court  of
Mexico.  There  the  boy  entered  the  college  of  San
Ildefonso.  finished  his  studies  there,  ami  subse-
quently became  theological  doctor,  professor,  and
four  times  rector  of  the  university.  He  also  filled
several  other  high  offices,  as  vicar-general  of  the
archbishopric,  abbot  of  San  Pedro,  whose  college
and  hospital  he  hail  founded,  and  in  1700  was  ap-
pointed bishop  of  DnrangO.  from  which  see  he  was
translated  to  that  of  Valladolid,  Michoacan.  in
1704.  His  charity  was  so  great  that  be  even  iwwnwl
the  episcopal  jewels  to  give  alms.  He  died  00  his
return  from  a  visit  to  San  Luis  I'otosi.

F.SCALERA,  Antonio  de,  Spanish  soldier, b.
in  Toledo,  Spain,  in  1506;  «1.  in  Ciodad  Real  de
(iiiavra.  Sooth  America,  0  S-pt..  1676.  He  Studied
at  the  University  of  Salamanca,  ami  in  1684  re-
ceived holy  orders  at  Seville.  In  1641  be  sailed
for  Kin  de  la  Plata  with  Gov.  Alvar  Nuiicz  Cab)  /a
de  Vuca,  and.  enlisting  in  the  annv.  Joined  in  the

campaigns  of  the  conquerors. When  difficulties

•rose  I ict ween  CaU'za  de  Vina  and  the  Vizcayan,
Irala,  Kscalera  advised  CiU/a  to  compromise,
whereupon  Irala  was  ap|»ointcd  second  commander,
and  sent  in  154^1  against  the  Quayoora  and  Caoove

Indians.  Meanwhile  Bsoaleta  had  undertaken  tin-
OOnqaest  Of  the  Xaraye  Indians,  and  for  that  pur-
|M)se  had  built  several  fortresses  in  their  territory.
AlMnit  that  time  a  terrible  famine  oppressed  the
coiniiierors,  but.  as  Fscalera's  army  was  well  BSjp
pliea  with  provisions,  he  was  able  to  minister  09
the  wants  of  CaU-za  de  Vaca  and  Irala.  In  IBM
Bsoaleta  was  of  great  sets  ice  in  delivering  the
Spaniards  who  had  l>ecn  besieged  by  the  •
Indians  in  a  place  near  Asuncion.  On  88  April.
1544,  the  army  reU-lled  and  dspaasd  Calieza  de
Vara,  and  Fscalcra  was  imprisoned  for  some  time
by  the  mutineers.  Soon  after  his  release  he  founded
the  city  of  Ciudad  Keal  de  (iuayra,  ami  in  l.VJll  de-
posed Alon/o  de  Kiipu-lme,  who  was  then  governor,
fi  >r  prevent  ing  the  colonists  from  gat  hering  precious


368


ESCALONA


stnu.-i.  After  Diaz  Melgarejo  assumed  command.
Kscalira  continued  in  his  work  of  conquest,  en-
gaged in  a  nine  months'  campaign  against  the
Guarany  Indians,  founded  several  forts,  and  in
1570  returned  to  Ciudad  Real.  After  (hat  date
Ksealera  retired  to  the  exercise  of  his  ecclesiastical
i  hi  lies,  and  wrote  several  memoirs  relating  to  the
conquest  and  the  natural  products  of  the  country.
Previously,  in  1550,  he  had  sent  to  Charles  V.  a  re-
port of  Irala's  behavior,  and  one  to  the  prosecutor
for  the  council  of  Indies.  His  writings  have  been
published  by  the  Madrid  Academy  of  history.

ESCALONA,  Juan  ( es-cah-lo'-nah ),  South
American  soldier,  b.  in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  in  1708 ;
d.  there  in  1834.  He  joined  the  revolutionists  in
1810,  and  on  5  July,  1811,  as  president  of  the
federal  executive,  he  declared  the  independence  of
Venezuela  to  the  republican  soldiers.  He  assisted
in  reconquering  Venezuela  in  1813,  and  in  1814
defended  Valencia  till  obliged  to  surrender  to
Boves,  who  put  citizens  and  soldiers  to  death  on
entering  the  city.  Escalona  escaped  to  Caracas,
where  he  hid  himself,  but  continued  to  encourage
the  revolutionists  by  his  writings.  He  returned  to
the  army  in  1820,  and  filled  various  civil  and  mili-
tary posts  till  1820,  when  he  was  elected  com-
mander-in-chief of  Venezuela,  relieving  Gen.  Paez,
who  had  been  suspended  by  order  of  the  senate
pending  an  official  investigation.  After  the  restora-
tion of  public  order  in  1827  he  resigned  his  com-
mission, but  continued  in  the  service  of  the  gov-
ernment till  1830,  when  the  republic  of  Colombia
was  dissolved.  After  Venezuela  had  become  a
separate  country  he  was  made  prefect  of  Caracas,
and  as  such  was  instrumental  in  suppressing  an
insurrection  in  1831.

ESCALONA  Y  CALATAYUD,  Juan  Jos6,
South  American  bishop,  b.  at  Quer,  Rioja,  Spain,
in  1075  ;  d.  near  Valladolid,  Mexico,  23  May,  1737.
He  studied  at  the  colleges  of  San  Jeronirao,  Alcala,
and  San  Bartolome,  Salamanca,  and  subsequently
was  theological  doctor,  canon  of  the  cathedral  of
Calahorra,  and  chaplain  of  the  royal  convent  of
La  Encarnacion  of  Madrid.  Afterward  he  occu-
pied the  see  of  Caracas,  Venezuela,  where  he  re-
mained for  a  short  time,  and  was  translated  to
that  of  Valladolid  de  Michoacan  in  1729,  where  he
was  noted  for  his  charities.  He  gave  large  sums
to  various  churches,  finished  at  his  expense  the  con-
vent of  Santa  Catalina,  built  the  Episcopal  palace
and  the  church  of  Nuestra  Sefiora  de  los  Urdiales,
as  well  as  a  part  of  that  of  San  Jose,  and  the  hos-
pitium  of  the  Guadalupe  shrine.  He  also  finished
the  most  costly  part  of  his  cathedral,  founded  a
college  for  girls,  and  a  home  for  women  of  good
character,  made  many  endowments  for  poor  mar-
ried women  and  for  nuns,  and  often  distributed
clothing  among  the  needy.  One  of  his  pastorals  is
entitled  "  Instruction  para  una  vida  perfect*. "

ESCANDON,  Antonio  (es-can-don'),  Mexican
capitalist,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  25  Aug.,  1N25;
d.  in  Paris,  France,  14  Jan.,  1882.  He  began  life
as  a  merchant  and  manufacturer,  and  afterward
became  a  banker.  His  thorough  knowledge  of  the
trade  of  his  country  soon  led  him  to  understand
the  importance  of  a  better  communication  btrtween
the  capital  and  the  principal  port  of  entry,  Vera
Cruz,  and  he  was  active  in  building  the  railroad
between  those  points.  The  road  was  begun  in  1 881 ,
and  opened  by  President  Lerdo  de  Tejada,  1  Jan..
1873,  and  is  considered  one  of  the  triumphs  of
modern  engineering  skill.  During  the  empire  Es-
candon  accepted  the  decoration  of  the  order  of
Guadalupe,  and  frequented  the  imperial  court,  and
on  the  eve  of  the  downfall  of  Maximilian  went  to


Paris,  whetv  he  stayed  until  the  iH'ginning  oi
During  \\i<  resideooa  there  he  ordered  from  the
sculptor  Charles  Cordier  a  statue  of  Christopher
Columbus,  winch  he  gams  to  his  native  city.  The
monument  is  nearly  forty  feet  high;  the  statue
itself  represent!  Columbui  with  one  hand  out-
stretched, while  with  the  other  he  lifts  a  veil,  un-
ci ivering  a  world.
On  the  four  cor-
ners of  the  pedes-
tal are  seated  four
monks — Diego  de
Dieza,  turning  the
leaves  of  the  Bible
to  see  if  it  con-
tains any  text  op-
posed to  the  mari-
ner's idea ;  Juan
Perez  de  Marche-
n.-i.  studying  a
chart  and  meas-
uring with  com-
E asses  the  distance
etween  Spain  and
the  New  World ;
Bartolome  de  las
Casas,  preparing
to  write  the  de-
fence of  the  In-
dians whom  he
vainly  sought  to
protectagainstthe
cruelty  of  the  con-
querors ;  and  Ber-
nardino de  Saha-
gun,  holding  aloft
the  cross,  before
which  the  Indians

are  prostrated.  The  four  sides  of  the  pedestal  con-
tain bas-reliefs  representing  scenes  from  the  con-
quest of  America,  and  the  chart  used  by  Columbus.
Escandon  came  to  Mexico  in  1877  to  see  this  monu-
ment unveiled,  and  returned  in  1878  to  Paris,  where
he  remained  till  his  death.  Escandon  built  a  coun-
try house,  about  1800,  at  Tacubaya,  the  gardens  of
which  are  among  the  finest  in  America,  while  the
building  contains  fine  collections  of  natural  history.
ESCOBAR,  Bartolonig  de,  Spanish  mission-
ary, b.  in  Seville,  Spain,  in  1502 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,
in  1024.  He  belonged  to  one  of  the  noblest  fami-
lies in  Spain,  and  had  immense  possessions,  which
he  employed  in  works  of  charity.  His  religious
zeal  led  him  to  the  West  Indies,  where  be  became
a  Jesuit  and  lived  seventeen  years.  He  afterward
went  to  Lima,  Peru,  where  he  spent  the  three  years
preceding  his  death.  His  works  are  "  Condones
de  Christi  testamento  "  (Lvons.  1017) ;  "  De  Festis
Domini "  (Paris,  1024) ;  "  Super  omnes  Beatae  Vir-
ginis  lestivitates  "  (1024) ;  and  "  De  la  Concepci6n
de  Nuestra  Sefiora  "  (Oviedo,  1022).

ESCOBAR,  Maria  de  (es-co-bar),  Spanish  colo-
nist, b.  in  Truxillo  about  the  end  of  the  15th  or
the  beginning  of  the  10th  century;  d.  in  (uzco.
Peru,  about  1500.  She  was  the  wife  of  Diego  de
Chaves,  one  of  the  companions  of  Pizarro,  and  one
of  the  few  officers  who  had  the  courage  to  pro-
test against  the  execution  of  Atahualpa  in  lo33.
Maria  followed  her  husband  to  Peru,  shared  the
fatigues  and  dangers  of  the  Spaniards,  and  intro-
duced the  cultivation  of  wheat  and  barley  into  the
.conquered  country.  The  first  experiment  was  tried
on  a  small  scale  near  Cuzco  with  a  few  grains
brought  by  her  from  Spain,  and  in  a  few  jreejS
there  was  sufficient  grain  to  furnish  seed  for  ali
the  colonists  of  the  different  provinces. Maria


BBCOMAK


RBCOI'.!  !■■■


taught  the  I t i <  1  i f 1 1 1 -  |»cr*onally  how  to  cultivate  the
grain,  iiiul  after  tin-  (loath  of  her  husband  in  Lima.

it  1540,  Pixarro  granted  ben  fine  piece  of  land
near  Lima,  together  with  the  Indians  ■Mi  it.  The
grateful  colonists  resolved  to  clear  tin-  land  ami
cultivate  it  for  her  during  tan  yearn,  but  it  -
that  they  MOD  forgot  their  promise,  as  Maria  is
■id  to  have  died  very  jmhit  in  CttJOO,

E8C0BAB,  Pedro  Snarez  de,  Spanish  theo-
logian, l>.  in  Model lin.  Spain;  d,  in  Tuvaoeaaa,
fo.  in I5»l. He  belonged  to  the  order  of  St.

Dstine,  which  he  entered  at  the  age  of  thirteen
in  Mexico.  After  having  mastered  tin-  Mexican
language.  In-  devoted  himself  to  preaahina  the  gos-

im|  to  tin-  Indian*,  ami  WSJ  -u<-ee>sivelv  first  theo-
logian of  the  oat  had  ml  of  that  city,  professor  of
the  SeriptnrH  in  the  university,  prefei  t  of  Mi
province,  prior  of  several  convents,  ami  bishop  of
(iuailalajara.  IIi>  works  include  *•  Baflala  del  I'a-
ssjag  celotial,"  "  Ramillete  de  perfeccidn  cvange-
lica,"  "  lielox  de  prfoeipea/'  ami  "Sermones  de  Tos
evangclios  de  toti.»  &]  afio"  |  f  vols.,  Madrid,  10911
EbCOBEDO,  Mariano,  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in
I>os  Arroyos,  (ialeana,  state  of  New  IiCon.  in  Jauu-
ary,  1828.  He  was  of  humble  parentage,  and  as
-'-'iias  his  ape  permitted  he  !>ecainc  a  muleteer.
At  that  time  Mexico  had  no  railroads,  and  scarcely
any  good  highways,  but  merely  mountain-paths,
especially  near  the  Texas  frontier,  where  the  mule-
teers were  at  the  same  time  traders  and  smugglers.
ffcoobedo  was  in  charge  of  a  string  of  pack  mules
Ulonging  to  his  father  when  the  war  with  the
United  States  began  :  and  when  (ien.  Zachary  Tay-
lor marched  against  Mexico,  crossing  the  river
Nni-ees,  Escohedo  converted  his  muleteers  into
partisans,  and  attacked  the  American  forces  where-
ever  he  could  meet  them  in  small  bodies.  He  also
took  part  in  the  fight  at  the  Carton  de  Santa  Rom,
and  in  the  liattles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Kesaea  de
Guerrero,  and  in  the  rest  of  the  campaign  in  the
northern  states.  After  the  peace  of  Guadalupe
Hidalgo,  in  1848,  Escobedo  retired  again  to  his
former  life  in  the  country;  but  when,  in  1854,  the
revolution  of  the  "Plan  de  Ayutla"  brake  out.  In
offered  his  services  to  the  Liberal  party,  was  ap-

Siinted  captain  of  a  companv,  and,  together  with
eronimo  Trevifio,  Francisco  \aran  jo.  and  Diodoro
Corel  la,  who  afterward  !>ecame  notorious,  contrilt-
uteil,  in  1855,  to  the  defeat  of  Guitian  at  Saltillo.

and  of  Parrodi  in

Morterillos.  His
name  first  became
known  during  the
three  years'  war
called  the"  war  of
the  reform."  when
he  again  fought
for  the  Liberal
party  against  the
forces  of  Mira-
mon.  .Juan-/,  ap-
pointad  him  colo-
nel in ls."»u.  and

in-  contributed  to

the  defeat  of  Mi-
BHDOB  at  Aten-
ti<|iie,  after  which
In-  continued  in
tin-  ramrajgn  till

the  vietory  of  Calpulalpan.  M !»<•<■..  180D. After
the  departure  of  Miramon  for  Europe,  and  the

establishment  of  the  government  of  Juarez  in
the  city  of  Mexico.  U  .Ian..  1861,  Esoobedo,  with
the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  was  sent  against
the  remnant  of  the  church  party  under  Manpicz
vou  ii. — 24


'/^^UM^p


and  Mejia,  bill  hi  *»»  *urpri*ed  in  the  town  aj
Rio  Verde,  and  taken  primmer  nfter  a  heroic

fence. Manplez ordered Bin to lie shot. but lie
was  saved by Mejia,  and kept prisoner  at B
ndi.  whence  he  afterward  escaped,  and.  travelling
on  f<M.t  to  Boiehapan,  offered  In-  »i  w  to

the  Government  of  Juan/..  After  the  intervention
>>f  Napolaofl  III.  in  Mexican  affairs,  Esoobedo  |«r-
tici|Mited  in  the  repulse  of  tin-  Fn-m-h  under  Ijui-
ren/.ii-  at  Piiel.la,  0  May.  1801,  and  the  less  fortu-
nate Mexican  attack  at  the  Cam  del  RnfiagU  hill,
near  Orizava.  After  the  re-enforcement  of  the
I-'reiich  under  Pbrey,  and  their  renewed  advance
upon  1'uchla,  KmoUiIo,  under  spsoiel  Orden  from
.luarez,  organi/.ed  tOTOM  for  tin-  MOOOrof  tlniteitv.
s|M-n«ling  part  of  his  private  fortune  in  this  under-
taking, and  cuti-nd  I'm-hla  before  it  was  oarroundad
by  the  French  army.  He  took  part  in  the  protract-
ed defence  of  the  city,  and  when  it  was  captured.  1?
May,  1WU},  he  was  taken  prisoner,  but  BKaped  from
Orizava  and  joined  Juarez  again  in  the  capital.
When  the  president  with  his  cabinet  abandon. il
the  city  before  the  advancing  French.  KscoUhIo  ac-
companied him  as  far  as  ZeoateOSS,  but  afterward
joined  Felipe  Hi-rriozabal  ami  Nicolas  BegoJei  in
their  resistance  to  the  invaders.  When  the  em-
pin'  was  established,  in  June,  1*04,  aVoobedo  was
obliged  to  give  up  the  struggle,  which  lie  had  0OB>

tinoed  in  the  states  of  Tamaulipas  ami  Nuero  Leon.

together  with  Blnojosa  and  Cortina,  lb-  |ui»ed
into  Texas,  and  fixed  his  residence  in  Stm  Antonio,
where  he  continued  his  exertions  for  the  republican
cause.  With  special  authority  from  Juarez,  he
went  to  New  Orleans  in  the  middle  of  i860,  secret-
ly purchased  arms  and  ammunition,  and  organized.
after  his  return  to  San  Antonio,  a  force  consisting
of  American  negroes,  ex-Confederate  soldiers,  and
Mexican  refugees,  which  he  led  into  IfesJoo.  In
November,  1N05.  he  surprised  ami  captured  the  im-
perial garrison  of  Monterey,  and  from  that  time
the  fortunes  of  the  republic  in  the  northern  states
took  a  favorable  turn.  Esoobedo'i  forces  were
rapidly  augmenting  by  the  enrolment  of  the  dis-
persed republicans,  and  in  March.  I960,  he  wee  able
to  begin  offensive  operations  toward  the  interior.
In  June,  1800,  he  captured  Saltillo  after  a  short  re-
sistance, and  in  July  of  the  same  year  Juarez  estab-
lished his  government  in  thai  city.  Esoobedo  was
appointed  geiieral-in-chief  of  the  army  of  the  north  :
and  as  the  French  troopa  retired  from  the  northern
States  in  their  march  of  concentration  toward  Vera
Cruz.  Esoobedo  captured  the  principal  cities  >u<--
cessivelv  from  the  remaining  imperial  font*.  In
September,  Beoobedo  marched  toward  Qnanajoato,
establishing  his  headquarters  in  Celaya,  when-  hk

forces  were  joined  by  those  of  Corona  and  Kulogio
Panes  from  the  north,  and  Hm-rta  and  Kcgules
from  Michoaean.  while  Juarez  established  his  gor-
ernmeni  in  Zacatecas.  Iii  November  his  arms  num-
bered 15,000  men.  and  with  this  form  he  man-lied,
in  December,  on  San  Luis  I'ntosi.  Alarmed  by  the
rapid  ■noossses  of  Esoobedo, the  emperordoepatohed

Miramon  and  Castillo  at  the  head  of  two  \ xx lies  of
tnxtps.  the  latter  toward  San  Luis  PotOttl,  the  for-
mer, with  4.imh»  men,  to  Zacattn-as.  Miramon  ra|v
idly  occupied  Aguas  Calii-ntes,  and  nrpriscd  Zaca-
tecas.  where  Juarez  with  his  cabinet  lian-ly  ee-
Oapea  falling  into  his  hands.  He  immediately
evacuated  tin-  town,  and  on  his  man-h  lo  join  Cas-
tillo he  was  attacked,  on  1  Feb..  180T  by  BsOObeOVri
I  at  San  Jacinto  and  completely  n>uted.  with
the  loss  of  nearly  'J.(XK)  deml  and  wounded.  His
artillery  and  ammunition  were  capture.!,  together
with  100  prisoners.  Mirainon's  brother  Jmuiuin
was  also  taken  and  shot,  together  with  uinetv-three


370


ESCOIiKDo


ESCOBEDO V ALARCON


prisoners,  as  a  reprisal  for  the  execution  of  Bf<  \i-
can  officers  after  the  imperial  decree  of  3  Oct.,  1865,
declaring  republicans  under  arms  outlaws.  Pot
this  victory  Escobedo  was  promoted  to  general  of
ilivision,  and  appointed  coinmamler-in-chief  of  all
The republican armies. Juarez established his

fovcrnment  in  San  Luis  de  Potosi,  and  ordered
!scobedo  to  advance  on  Queretaro,  where  the  rot
of  the  dispersed  troops  of  Miramon  had  joined
the  imperial  army,  consisting  of  more  than  8,000
picked  men.  After  an  obstinate  fight  on  the  heights
of  San  Gregorio,  Escobedo,  with  an  army  of  over
20,000  men,  surrounded  Queretaro  in  the  begin-
ning of  March,  establishing  intrenchments  and
batteries  on  the  hills  of  Ciraatario  and  Cuesta-
China,  and  on  12  March  a  regular  siege  began,
which  lasted  till  15  May,  when,  after  a  vigorous  as-
sault, the  city  was  taken,  as  is  generally  believed,
I  iv  t  reachery  of  Col.  Miguel  Lopez,  the  chief  of  the
emperor's  body-guard.  The  emperor,  together  with
Mejia  and  Severn  del  Castillo,  was  taken  prisoner,
and.  on  surrendering  his  sword,  offered  his  word  of
honor  to  Escobedo  to  leave  the  country  immediately
if  conducted  to  the  nearest  port  by  an  escort ;  but
Escobedo  refused  to  grant  him  this  liberty,  under
express  orders  from  Juarez.  It  is  said  that  he  had
previously  refused  brilliant  offers  that  were  made
to  him  by  European  princes  to  allow  Maximilian
to  escape  from  Queretaro.  A  court-martial  was
instituted  at  Queretaro  by  Juarez's  order,  and  the
emperor  was  condemned  and  executed.  At  the  end
of  June,  Escobedo  left  for  the  city  of  Mexico,  but
after  the  re-establishment  of  the  republican  govern-
ment in  the  capital  he  retired  to  nis  country  seat,
where  he  remained,  except  during  a  short  service  in
1868  against  the  revolutionists  of  Sinaloa,  till  Lerdo
de  Tejada  assumed  the  presidency  in  1873.  When  a
revolutionary  movement,  encouraged  by  the  church

Sarty,  broke  out  toward  the  end  of  that  year  in
lichoacan,  Escobedo  was  sent  to  quell  it,  and  suc-
ceeded in  doing  so  in  November,  1874.  In  1875  he
was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  frontier
department  of  the  east,  when  the  rising  of  Gen.
Diaz  broke  out.  Escobedo,  bv  order  of  the  secre-
tary of  war,  Mejia,  delivered  his  command  to  Gen.
Cofona,  but  the  latter  did  not  succeed  in  quelling
the  movement,  which  culminated  in  February,  1876,
in  the  "  Plan  de  Tuxtepec."  Lerdo  de  Tejada  then
removed  Mejia  and  appointed  Escobedo  secretary
of  war.  Notwithstanding  that  the  army  was  filled
with  sedition,  Escobedo  took  the  most  active  meas-
ures, sending  Gen.  Alatorre  with  a  strong  force  to
the  eastern  and  Gen.  Ceballosto  the  western  states,
but  they  were  unable  to  stem  the  tide ;  and  when
the  revolution  was  triumphant  at  Los  Llanos  de
Tecoac,  and  Lerdo  resolved  to  abandon  the  cap-
ital, Escobedo  collected  the  garrison  and  a  troop
of  rural  guards,  and  with  them,  on  26  Nov.,  pro-
tected the  departure  of  the  president  and  his  min-
isters toward  the  Pacific  coast,  as  the  roads  to  the
Gulf  were  intercepted.  After  several  days  the
party  was  surprised  and  captured  by  a  bandit,
Pioquinto  Huato,  of  Diaz's  party,  and  only  re-
leased on  payment  of  a  ransom  of  $30,000.  After
this  they  reached  Acapulco  in  safety,  and  proceeded
thence  to  New  York.  Escobedo  remained  there  till
February,  1878,  when  he  went  to  San  Antonio,
Texas,  and  published  a  manifesto,  proposing  the
overthrow  of  Diaz  and  the  reinstallation  of  Lerdo.
This  document  was  signed  by  Cols.  Winter.  Mon-
roy,  and  Cristo,  who,  passing  the  frontier,  invaded
Mexican  territory.  But  the  authorities  took  act  i  ve
measures,  and  when  Escobedo  ventured  personally
to  enter  Mexico,  he  was  arrested  at  Lampazos  and
sent  as  a  prisoner  to  the  capital. He  was  tried  by  a


court-martial,  but,  notwithstanding  the  exertions

of  the  government,  was  declared  not  guilty,  and
again  retired  to  his  estate  in  San  Luis  Potosi.
Fearing  attempts  on  his  life,  he  came  to  the  capi-
tal, where,  although  at  liberty  in  his  residence,  la-
was  continuously  under  espionage,  and,  in  fact;  a
prisoner,  being  forced  to  present  himself  frequently
to  the  authorities  T<>  escape  these  persecutions,
he  obtained  a  medical  certificate,  and.  under  pre-
text of  restoring  his  health,  came  to  New  zoik
toward  the  end  of  1879,  but  in  August,  1880,  re-
turned to  Mexico  and  accepted  an  office  from  the
government.  This  action  was  a  surprise,  as  short-
ly before  this  he  had  been  planning  a  new  con-
spiracy against  Diaz,  and  had  compromised  many
persons.  In  1882  Gonzalez  appointed  him  presi-
dent of  the  supreme  military  court  of  justice.
and,  after  holding  this  office  till  1883,  he  retired
finally  into  private  life.

ESCOBEDO  Y  AOUILAR,  Pedro  Josl  Al-
cantara, Mexican  physician,  b.  at  Queretaro,  19
Oct..  1798;  d.  in  Jalapa,  28  Jan.,  1844.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Mexico,  and  studied
medicine  there  at  the  National  school  of  surgery,
and  at  the  San  Andres  hospital.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Academy  of  practical  medicine.
and  occupied  the  special  chair  of  surgery  there  in
1826-'8.  In  1832  he  joined  the  medical  staff  of  the
military  canton  established  at  Jalapa,  and  rendered
valuable  services.  In  1833  he  returned  to  the  capi-
tal, and  was  appointed  professor  of  surgery  at  the
College  of  medical  sciences,  and  was  afterward  its
vice-director.  In  1844  he  labored  to  improve  the
institution  under  his  direction,  established  boards
of  health,  and,  with  a  credit  which  he  obtained  from
the  government,  facilitated  the  printing  of  the
*'  Farmacopea  Mexicana."  He  spent  his  salary  in
books  and  instruments  for  the  college  of  medicine,
in  which  he  took  great  interest.  Dr.  Escobedo  was
for  some  time  in  congress,  and  was  a  member  of
learned  societies  in  Mexico  and  Europe.  He  was  the
author  of  manv  treatises  and  articles  on  medicine.

ESCOBEDO  Y  ALARCON,  Jorge,  Spanish
jurist,  b.  in  Jaen,  Spain,  in  February,  1748;  d.  in
Madrid  in  March,  1806.  He  entered  the  college  of
Cuenca  in  1762,  and  afterward  studied  law  at  Sala-
manca, where,  in  1769,  he  occupied  the  chair  of
moral  philosophy.  In  1776  he  was  sent  to  Peru  by
the  king  as  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Charcas.
Afterward  he  was  appointed  political  and  military
governor  of  Potosi,  and  was  superintendent  of  the
mint,  the  bank,  the  mines,  the  taxes,  and  of  the
royal  treasury.  In  1779  he  incorporated  the  gov-
ernment bank  of  purchases  and  barter,  which,  un-
der Escobedo's  direction,  yielded  a  large  revenue
to  the  exchequer,  and  provided  for  the  wants  of
the  miners.  He  defended  Potosi  during  the  Revo-
lution of  1780,  organizing  the  troops  in  that  city,
and  ordering  the  casting  of  cannon  and  the  manu-
facture of  arms.  He  was  then  appointed  criminal
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Lima,  and  in  1782
Charles  III.  made  him  inspector  of  the  courts  of
justice  and  royal  treasury  of  the  vice-royalties  of
Lima  and  Buenos  Ayres,  and  superintendent  sub-
delegate  of  the  treasury  of  Peru,  with  the  same
honorary  rank  in  the  council  of  the  Indies.  He
was  also  appointed  political  governor  of  Lima,  and
from  1785  till  1T87  presided  over  the  city  corpora-
tion. In  that  period  he  founded  the  superior  junta
of  the  treasury,  of  which  he  was  president  In  all
these  public  offices  he  introduced  many  reforms,
and  at  the  same  time  co-operated  in  the  pacifica-
tion of  Peru.  In  February,  1788,  he  returned  t<>
Spain,  and  soon  afterward  was  elected  president
of  the  supreme  council  of  the  Indies. Escobedo


l>KRO


KSM1  -


871


Watt  the  author  of  "  Sobrv  el  tratwtjode  minus.  Im-iic-

flrio  de mctale*  v medios  de  fomentarlo*,' In

n <[•■  I ; .  \  i - 1 ; i ~ . ' Para In  aprobeeion  de

ilas  y  col>ran/.a  de  tributo-."  and  ••  Sibn-  h>s

artiiim nt<m  de  los  convgidorwi  y  arbi-

trioe  para  socorrer  a  los  indios  sin  aqm-l  gravamen."

Besides  these,  which  wen-  all  pnbMahad  in  Lima  in

iacobedo  wrote  memoirs  on  the  KOTemnMni

of  I*'  -ru.  which  were  aftcrwanl  published  in  Madrid.

1*11  ill  RO,  Joel  \.  koo-daj  r..).  Mexican
jurist.  I>.  at  1'arral  da  Hidalgo,  22  June,  1H01  ;  .1.  in
Chihuahua,  9  May.  \*<i->.  He  received  his  .-dura-
tion in  nil  native  town,  and  in  \H2~t  *M  appointed
Obiaf  dark  of  the  mm  notary  of  state  of  Chihuahua.
He  afterward  became  mponuUMnrj  member  of
the  supreme  court,  and  magistrate  of  the  same
body,  After  receiving  his  degree  at  Guanajuato.
he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  city  of  Mexico,
and  wasHi»|H)inted  judge  for  the  district  of  Chihua-
hua, which  office  he  held  for  ten  years.  He  repre-
sented his  native  city  in  five  state  legislatures,  was
lected  to  congress,  and  was  afterward  prose-
cutor to  the  supreme  military  court  Escudero
was  a  member  of  congress  in  1847,  a  year  of  severe
trials  for  Mexico,  and  he  distinguished  himself  by
his  patriotism.  He  was  the  author  of  some  eco-
nomic studies  on  the  general  history  of  various
states  of  Mexico.  His  princiiwl  works  are  "Con-
ducta  del  jefe  politico  CM  Chihuahua";  "Manual
del  Cultivador'  ;  "Manual  del  Vifiador";  "Orde-
nanzas  de  tierras  y  aguas  " ;  and  "  Recopilaci6n  de
lo-  decretos  y  6rdenes  del  rey  D.  Fernando  VII."

I  ni.i.in  i  „ui-  Philippe  Mariaucheau  d\
Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  l>.  in  Canada,  5  April,  1710;
d.  in  L'tle  d'Orleans,  Canada,  4  June,  1788.  His
name  was  submitted  to  the  court  of  Rome  by  the
Canadian  government  as  its  choice  for  coadjutor
bishop  of  Quebec  in  1770.  He  had  been  previous-
ly parish  priest  of  L'lle  d'Orleans  for  seventeen
years.  He  was  a  man  of  weak  intellect  and  timid
character,  and  it  was  supposed  by  the  Canadian
clergy  that  the  object  of  the  governor-general  in
selecting  him  for  the  office  was  to  weaken  the
church.  Their  resistance,  however,  and  that  of
the  titular  bishop,  liriaud,  was  feeble.  He  was
consecrated  in  1772  under  the  title  of  bishop  of
Dory  lea  HI  p<irtibns.  Immediately  after  his  conse-
cration he  was  sent  back  to  his  parish  by  Bishop
Briand,  who  refused  to  admit  him  to  any  share  in
the  government  of  the  diocese.  But  in  1774,  at
the  request  of  the  governor-general,  he  recognized
him  as  coadjutor  of  Quel»ec,  and  assigned  him  a
revenue  suitable  to  his  rank.  In  17H4  the  resig-
nation of  his  predecessor  made  him  bishop  of
Quebec.  The  priests  of  his  diocese,  who  were  per-
suaded of  his  unfitness  for  the  office,  asked  him
to  name  a  coadjutor,  which  he  did,  and  then  retired
to  the  presbytery  of  Saint  Peter  in  L'f le  d'Orleans,
where  lie  r— Moo  until  his  death.

K.SHLK.HAN,  Isaac  Stauffer.  physician,  b.
in  Lancaster  county.  Pa.,  22  May.  ISM,  Howaf
graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Philadelphia,  in
1851,  and  began  practice  at  once  in  that  city.  He
claims  to  ba  among  the  first  to  use  stimulants  in
pneumonia,  and  also  to  have  proved  that  blisters
are  not  revellents,  but  stimulants.  He  found  that
cerebro-spinal  meningitis  yielded  to  free  depletion
if  made  use  of  early  in  the  stage,  and  followed  by
chloroform  taken  internally.  Thai  OSMCiOMI  pre-
pared him  for  the  use  of  chloral,  which  he  h.
cessfully  prescribed  in  every  form  of  convulsion.
In  1866  he  used  with  success  a  narrow-blade  for-
OBfM  for  rigid  Of  uteri,  having  failed  with  the  usual
remedies,  and  without  an  unpleasant  symptom  the
delivery  took  place. He  claims  that  fractures  which


involve  the joints  when-  the  callus  U  washed by

ual  fluids  are  capable  of  forming  good  |
union  if  well  adjusted  and  kept  in  BMMMWoa
much  longer  |>eriod than usual. I»r.  K-h!<  man  is
the  author  of  paj>crs  showing  originality  of |
tice  in  placenta  previa.  <  »f  tins,  lit DavU.nf  Wilke*-
barre,  in an address said: "l»r. KshJetnaa
opened  a new  era  in  the treatment o|
previa." He  i-  vice-president  of  the  Philadelphia
county  medical  society, member  Of  the Northern
medical society, and president of tie- M...
chirurgical  society  of  Philadelphia.

KSLABA,  Sebastian  (es-lah  -Uh>.  Spanish  sol-
di- r.  b.  in  Kguiller.  Spain,  in  Fehruarv.  lt;:»* :  d.  in
Madrid  in  January.  1 7 "»*.».  In  19SI  h-  -  -rved  with
distinction  as  captain  of  the  BpaaMl  guards,  and
as  colonel  of  the  regiment!  of  "Astunas"  and
"Castilla"  he  took  part  in  nearly  all  the  Imttl.
the  second  reign  of  Philip  V.,  reaching  the  rank  of
lieutenant  general  in  ITiw.  At  the  beginning  of
the  war  between  England  and  Spain  in  1740,
Kslaba  was  appointed  viceroy  of  New  Granada,
and  immediately  after  his  arrival  set  to  work  to
repair  the  old  fortifications  of  Carthagena  and
Portobello,  and  to  build  new  ones.  Karly  in  Novem-
ber the  most  powerful  British  fleet  that  had  etaf
bean  sent  to  South  America  appeared  before  Car-
thagena. under  command  of  Sir  Kdward  Vermm,
and  on  5  Nov.  the  bombardaMOt  began.  Notwith-
standing that  Sir  Kdward  made  continuous  attacks
by  land  and  sea  on  Carthagena  during  the  pro-
longed siege,  the  splendid  fortifications  withstood
the  bombardment,  and  repeated  assaults  were  re-
pulsed by  Kslaba,  till,  in  May.  1741.  the  British  « en-
forced to  raise  the  siege  with  the  loss  of  seventeen
ships.  As  a  recompense  for  his  services,  Kslaba  was
promoted  captain-general  of  the  army,  and  in  174H
was  made  viceroy  of  Peru,  but  did  not  go  to  fill
this  place,  as  he  was  called  to  Spain  early  in  1744
to  become  minister  of  war,  and  held  the  office  for
several  years.  The  splendid  fortifications  of  Car-
thagena, built  under  his  personal  inspection,  •
to  this  dav  nearly  intact.  After  his  death,  in  17«^».
Charles  III.,  in  memory  of  his  brilliant  defence  of
Carthagena,  raised  his  son.  Col.  Caspar  Kslalia,  to
the  peerage  of  Castilla,  under  the  title  of  "  Marquis
of  the  Royal  Defence."

KSLING,  Catherine  Harbeson,  poet,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa,  12  April,  1812.  She  contributed
to  the  press  for  many  years  under  her  maiden  name
of  Waterman,  and  in  1H40  married  George  J.  Ksling,
a  captain  in  the  mercantile  marine,  with  whom
she  lived  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  for  four  years  before  his
death.  She  has  published  "The  Broken  Bracelet.
and  other  Poems (Philadelphia,  ISM).

ESLING,  Charles  Henry  A mrustine,  author,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1N4">.  He  was  educated  in
St.  Joseph's  college,  Philadelphia,  and  Georgetown
college,  1 ).('..  and  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar  in  1869.
He  was  invited  to  act  as  representative  of  tin-
Catholic  laity  of  the  I'nited  States  at  the  Vatican
on  the  celebration  of  the  golden  juhileeof  Pius  IX.,
in  1877.  and  on  his  n-turn  was  successful  as  a  lect-
urer. He  has  contributed  articles  to  the  "Catholic
Record,"  and  other  magazines  dealing  with  the  re-
ligious questions  of  the  day,  ami  has  published  the
••  Life  of  Saint  Germaine  Cousin,  the  Shepherdess
of  Pibrac";  metrical  translations  fn>m  the  hymns
of  the  "Roman  Missal  ami  Breviary";  and  several
BOOtns,  religious  and  secular,  the  longest  U-ing
"The  King's  King,  a  Legend  of  Merrv  Kmrland."

KS.HKNARD,  Joseph  Alphonse,  French  poet,
b.  at  Peiissane.  France,  in  1 7Gi# ;  d.  near  Fondi,
Italy,  in  1HU.  He  travelled  in  the  I'nited  States
and  the  West  Indies,  1788'-0,and  during  the  Revo-


839


KM 'ADA Y LAN  DA


ESPARTERO


lotion  was  a  royalist  writer  in  the  public  papers,
for  which  reason  he  was  banished  in  1792.  In  1797
he  returned  to  France,  but  was  exiled  again,  and
was  not  allowed  to  return  till  17!)!).  In  1801  he
was  appointed  secretary  to  Gen.  Leclerc,  brother-
in-law  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  whom  he  accom-
panied in  his  expedition  to  Santo  Domingo,  and  re-
mained there  after  Leclerc's  death.  On  his  return
to  Paris  he  was  appointed  censor  of  the  theatres
and  libraries,  afterward  chief  of  a  department  in
the  ministry  of  police,  and  in  1810  he  l>ecame  a
member  of  the  Academy  of  sciences.  He  published
a  didactic  poem  of  eight  cantos,  '•  La  Navigation,"
containing  exact  descriptions  of  the  scenery  of
tropical  seas  and  the  landscapes  of  Santo  Domingo
(Paris.  1805) ;  and  also  wrote  the  text  for  the  opera
of  "  Trajanus,"  by  Lesueur  (1807),  and  that  of  "  Her-
nan  Cortes,"  by  Spontini  (1809).  A  satire  against
the  Russian  emperor,  Alexander  I.  (1811),  caused
his  banishment  to  Italy,  but  he  was  recalled  after
three  months,  and  was  killed  while  returning.

ESPADA  Y  LANDA,  Juan  J.  Diaz  de (es-pah  -
dah),  Cuban  bishop,  b.  in  A  lava.  Spain,  20  April,
1756 ;  d.  in  Havana,  13  Aug.,  1832.  He  studied  at  the
University  of  Salamanca,  where  he  received  sacred
orders.  lie  was  appointed  bishop  of  Havana  in
January,  1800,  but  did  not  assume  his  office  till
26  Feb.,  1802.  During  thirty  years  Bishop  Espada
contributed  actively  toward  the  progress  and  wel-
fare of  the  island.  In  1804  he  caused  a  vast  public
cemetery  to  be  laid  out  in  Havana,  the  first  one  ever
established  in  the  island,  and  it  was  subsequently
named  after  him.  In  1804-'6  other  cities  and  towns
of  Cuba  were  also  provided  with  cemeteries,  abol-
ishing forever  the  old  and  unhealthy  custom  of
burying  in  the  churches  or  near  them.  During  the
first  decade  of  the  century  Bishop  Espada  encour-
aged vaccination,  which  had  been  introduced  in  the
island  in  1801,  endowed  many  public  schools  out  of
his  own  revenues,  founded  in  1827  an  asylum  for
the  insane,  and  paid  much  attention  to  the  improve-
ment of  the  morals  of  the  clergy.  He  was  inde-
fatigable in  his  efforts  to  promote  public  instruction,
and  introduced  many  useful  reforms  in  the  Theo-
logical seminary  of  San  Carlos,  and  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Havana,  where  he  created  several  new
cathedras.  In  1833  a  memorial  of  Bishop  Espada
was  published,  to  which  the  best  writers  of  Cuba
contributed.  In  1880  his  remains  were  transferred,
with  great  pomp  and  solemnity,  from  their  old
resting-place  to  the  new  cemetery  near  Havana,
where  a  fine  monument  has  been  erected  to  his
memorv. A  street  in  Havana  bears  his  name.

ESPADERO,  Nicolas  Ruiz  (es-pah-day'-ro),
Cuban  musical  composer,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in
1833.  He  was  a  friend  of  Gottschalk  and  of  Fon-
tana.  and  acquired  a  remarkable  mastery  of  the
piano.  Gottschalk  says  of  Espadero:  "He  has
written  with  such  a  freshness  of  melody,  an  ele-
gance of  harmony,  a  sonority  and  knowledge  of
the  piano,  that  a  prominent  place  is  insured  for
him  among  the  multitude  of  modern  composers."
In  1876  Espadero  was  commissioned  to  collect  and
classify  the  unpublished  works  of  Gottschalk.
Among  his  principal  productions  are  "La  chute
des  feuilles,*  "La  Plainte  du  Po&e,"  "Sur  la
tombe  de  Gottschalk,"  "  Chant  de  l'ame,"  "  Ossian."
"  La  plainte  de  l'eselave,"  "  Grand  Sonate,"  "  Ave
Maria."  besides  many  barcarolles,  nocturne^'  and
songs.  See  "  Biographie  universelle  desPkusi-
ciens  "  (Paris,  1881).  V

ESPARTERO,  Baldomero  (es-par-tay-ro),
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Granatula,  Ciudad  Real,  27
Oct.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Logrofio,  Spain,  8  Jan.,  1879.
He  was  the  son  of  a  peasant,  and  destined  for  the


^-^^tii^-^^^^-v^^p


church  ;  enlisted  as  a  soldier  in  1M09,  and  took  part
against  the  French  in  the  battle  of  <  ><-ana  on  L8  NOT.
of  that  year.  Afterward  he  entered  tin-  military
academy  of  Isla  de  Leon,  where  he  was  graduated,
12  Jan.,  1812,  as  ensign  of  engineers,  but,  failing
to  pass  subsequent  examinations,  was  transferred
to  the  infantry,
and  took  part
in  the  blockade
of  Tortosa  in
181&  In  Feb-
ruary, 1815,  Es-
partero  sailed
from  Spain,  as
lieutenant  of
the  regiment
of  Estremadu-
ra,  in  the  expe-
dition against
Colombia  un-
der Gen.  Pablo
Murillo.  He
was  ordered  to
Peru,promoted
captain  in  Jan-
uary, 1816,  and
afterward,  in
command  of  a
companyofsap-
pers,  took  an  active  part  in  numerous  encounters
with  the  guerilla  chiefs  of  the  insurgents.  He  par-
ticipated in  the  expedition  of  the  Laguna  and  the
defence  of  Chuquisaca,  10  and  11  Feb.,  1816,  and  on
1  Aug.,  1817,  was  promoted  major.  In  1820,  while
in  temporary  command  of  his  battalion,  at  Oruro,  he
succeeded,  by  prompt  action  and  personal  valor,  in
quelling  a  revolt,  and  thus  prevented  this  important
town,  with  a  large  deposit  of  ammunition  and  arms,
from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  republicans.  For
his  behavior  on  this  occasion  he  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  his  battalion,  20  Feb.,  1821.  He
was  brevetted  colonel,  23  May,  1822,  and  toward  the
latter  part  of  the  year  joined  the  division  of  Gen.
Valdes,  operating  in  the  southern  coast-districts
against  the  insurgents  under  Gen.  Alvarado. On

19  Jan.,  when  at  the  head  of  his  battalion,  he  was  the
first  to  take  possession,  under  the  enemy's  fire,  of
the  heights  of  Valdivia,  where  the  bloody  battle  of
Torata  was  fought.  Here  Espartero,  although  re-
peatedly wounded,  sustained  nimself  against  supe-
rior forces  with  great  bravery.  On  21  Jan.,  notwith-
standing his  wounds  received  at  Torata,  he  took  an
active  part  with  his  battalion  in  the  operations  of
Valde's  brigade  against  the  enemy's  right  wing  at
Moquegua,  and  on  1  Feb.  was  promoted  by  the  vice-
roy to  the  full  rank  of  colonel.  He  afterward  took
part  in  Valdes's  campaign  against  the  northern
provinces,  and  also  in  the  unlucky  battle  of  Zepita,

20  Aug.,  1823.  In  September,  Espartero  was  pro-
moted to  brigadier-general,  and  soon  afterward
commissioned  by  the  viceroy,  La  Serna,  to  go  to
Salta  for  a  conference  with  the  Argentine  general,
Las  Heras,  respecting  an  armistice  proposed  by
the  Spanish  government.  On  his  return,  at  the  end
of  Januarv,  1824,  he  was  sent  to  upper  Peru  to
suppress  the  revolt  of  Gen.  Pedro  Olafleta.  and  on
5  June  sailed  for  Spain,  to  explain  and  justify  La
Serna's  conduct  in  making  rapid  promotions,  which
had  been  the  cause  of  Olafieta's  disaffection.  He
had  a  long  audience  with  Ferdinand  VII.,  and  was
so  skilful  in  his  representations  that  all  the  acts  of
La  Serna  were  approved,  and  Espartero  himself  ap-

gainted  chief  or  the  general  staff  of  the  army  of
era. He  arrived  in  the  port  of Quilca,  1  stay,
1825,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Spanish  dominion


::::<


in  Peru,  and  was  arrested  by  the  republican  authori-
bul found  mentis  to  throw  overboard I h«-  offi-
cial oorrespondeiK-e  intrusted  to  him. lie  whs  sent
M  a  prisoner  to  Anijuijiii,  and it  w-as  general  I  v

Moved  timi  hi  would  !«•  -iiot  id  reprisal  for  the

itiuii  of  republicans,  l m t  he  was  Mil^.iii.ntlv
released,  and  returned  te  Spain  in  Im-j.Y  He  did
rvioe  again  till  1830,  when  he
Was  made  chief  of  tin-  regiment  of  S.ria.  Me  fa-
vored the  succession  of  IsaU-lla  II.  to  the  throne,
and  the  appointment  of  (jucen  Christina  as  regent,
mi. I  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  after  the
death  ..f  Ferdinand  VII.,  SB  Spt..  U-c^t.  he  MM
made  commander-in-chief  of  the  province  of  \U—

and  afterward  lieutenant-general.  In  his
o|»-rat  ions  against  the  Carlist*  he  displayed  energy
and  ability,  and  was  appointed  gcneral-in-ehief  of
the  iinnj  Of  the  north,  viceroy  of  Navarre,  and
captain-general  of  the  Hasoue  provinces.  After
new  victories,  early  in  \XW,  lie  was  created  a  gran-
dee of  the  first  class,  with  the  title  of  Duke  of  Vic-
toria an«l  Morella.  In  August,  1880,  he  concluded
with  the  Carlist  general  Maroto  the  convention  of
Vergara;  Don  Carlos  left  the  country,  and  Cabrera,
the  only  Carlist  general  remaining  in  arms,  was
dafwted  by  Kspartero  in  the  same  year,  Cjueen
Christina  endeavored  to  strengthen  her  govern-
ment by  placing  Kspartero  at  the  head  of  the  min-
istry ;  and  when,  in  1841,  she  was  compelled  to  re-
sign the  regency,  he  was  appointed  regent  by  the
cortes.  During  his  administration  he  suppressed
various  insurrections;  but,  notwithstanding  his
energy,  a  revolutionary  junta  assembled  at  Har-
celona  in  1848,  declared  that  the  queen  had  at-
tained her  majority,  and,  when  Narvaez  entered
Madrid  at  the  head  of  an  army,  Kspartero  was
forced  to  retire  to  Kngland,  where  he  raided  until
1847.  Me  was  then  restored  to  his  honors,  and
lived  in  Logroflo  in  retirement  till  1854,  when  he
was  placed  by  Isabella  at  the  heat!  of  the  ministry.
but  resigned  in  July,  1856.  After  the  expulsion  of
Isabella  in  1MB  he  supported  the  provisional  gov-
ernment, and  in  1870  several  members  of  the  cortes
offered  him  the  crown  of  Spain,  but  he  declined  it
on  the  ground  of  his  great  age  and  want  of  heirs.
He  was  afterward  created  prince  of  Vergara.

I'Sl'KJO,  Antonio  de  (es-pa'-ho),  Spanish  ex-
plorer. 1).  in  Cordova,  Spain  (some  say  in  IiO,.,lon),
about  the  middle  of  the  Kith  century.  Me  was  a
captain  of  the  armv  in  Mexico,  when  in  15X->,  after
organizing  a  special  force  of  one  hundred  boraiDWI
and  a  corresponding  infantry  detachment,  almost
at  his  own  exf>ense,  he  undertook,  in  company  with
Father  Bernardino  Beltran,  a  journey  in  search
of  the  Franciscan  missionary  Agustin  Kuiz.  After
travelling  several  days  toward  the  north,  he  met
some  natives  who  had  l>een  converted  during  the
expedition  of  Panfilo  de  Narvacz  to  Honda  in  1088.
The  people  among  whom  these  lived,  the  Jo-
manes,  were  so  far  advanced  in  civilization  that
thev  inhabited  houses  of  stone.  Shortly  afterward
In-  learned  that  Kuiz  had  Im-cii  killed,  but  pushed
on  toward  the  east,  and,  after  marching  through  a
lertile  country,  reached  the  territory  of  the  Cu-
niaiKs,  whose  capital.  Cia,  possessed  "eight  public
markets;  the  booOM  wen-  built  of  limestone  of
divers  colors,  and  the  inhabitants  wore  beautiful
cloaks  of cotton, woven in the country." Five

ies  northwest  of  this  he  found  the  Atn.i
who  had  seven  cities,  and  afterward  visited  the
town  of  the  AeOUOa,  situated  on  an  almost  |>er-
pendienlar  rock,  which  had  to  be  ascended  by  nar-
row stairs  cut  in  the  stone.  After  JoiUIOflina
eighty  leagues  farther,  he  reached  the  country  of
/.ufiis,  when-  he  met  three  Spaniards  who had


■OOOMOJded the  exjMslition of  Yaw  pier, iti 1
and  who  had lived n  long  with  the Indians  that
th.v had almost forgotten their native tongue.
II.  re  Father Beltran,  with most  of  the  part),  left
jo  and  returned  t<>  Mexico,  but  be  pushed  on
with tint nine follow. -p..  and  reached  the  town  of
Zagualo.  whosv  inhabitants  lodged  him  •uni|.tii.
and  govt  him  presents  of  clothing, lb-  then  [  nmm
through the land of  the  QullSn,  which  •
85,000  inhabitants,  and abounded in mines,
natives  wore  cloaks  of  .otton  or  of  (tainted  skin.
and  lived  in  houses  four  stories  high. The  forests
abounded in  name,  the rivers  in lish.  and  in  the
valleys grew maize, melon*,  tlnx. ffoft  tlSSS.  and

vines. Hut  he  soon  snoonntcrod  the  Tamo-,  sjbo

refused  to  let  him  proce.il  through  their.territory.
and,  turning  back,  lie  journeyed  along  a  river  which
he  named  "Hi.,  de  las  Yacas."  from  the  cattle  <.n
its  banks.  Me  reached  Sin  BaitolonN  in  1988,
after •  journey  of  nine  months.  J|,.  ],-|t  H  »..rk
titled  "  Helaci.'.n  del  viaje  al  Nuev..  .M.'jieo  "  ( 1686),
ESPEJO,  Jeronlnio,  Argentine  soldier,  b.  in

Mendoza  in  1N01. At  the  age  of  Bfletn  I ntered

the  Army  of  the  Andes  m  a.  cadet,  and  fought
bravely  for  the  liln-rty  of  three  republics.  In  (Tiili
he  served  in  the  campaign  of  the  restoration,  and
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Ctttoabuoo,  the  siege  of
Talcahuana,  the  action  and  surprise  of  (nucha
Kayada,  and  the  Imttle  of  Maypu.  In  Peru  he
served  under  the  orders  of  Gen.  San  Martin,  and
t<H)k  part  in  the  capture  of  Lima,  the  Bisge  <>f  Cal-
lao,  and  the  actions  of  Torata  and  Ifoqnauua,  In
the  Argentine  republic  he  took  iwrt  in  the  Imttle
of  Ytusaingo  and  the  action  of  tlie  bridge  of  Mar-
quez.  and  afterward  fought  against  Kosas  and
shared  in  the  battle  of  I^iguna-larga.  the  action  of
Rodeo  de  Chacon,  and  in  the  battle  of  the  citadel
of  Tucuman. Me  has  liecn  decorated  with  manv


crosses  of  military*  honor,  and  has  published  a  his-
torical work.  "  llntievista  de  Cuayacpiil  de  H«.li-
var  v  Bail  Martin  "  (BnsnOS  Avres.  |M7:j).

E8PEXETA,  Antoine  Froger  (cs-j.a-la-ta).
Huron.  French  colonist,  b.  in  Laval,  h  ranee,  in
1870;  d.  in  Patagonia  in  1715.  Mis  father  was  a
rich  merchant,  and  married  a  bareness  Fsj>cleta.
whose  title  her  son  inherited.  Young  Bspelete  re-
ceived a  good  education,  and  early  showed  great
aptitude  for  mechanical  science.  In  1»>!»">.  notwith-
standing his  youth,  he  was  appointed  royal  engi-
neer of  the  fleet  which  at  that  time  was  fitting  out
at  Rochelle  for  the  purjH.sc-  of  founding  French
colonies  in  South  America  under  command  of
his cousin, the  Count de Qenm  InVB,

Cor.vr  OB.)  It  was  by  F.spcl.ta's  advice  that  the
site  for  the  new  colony  was  fixed  at  Pott  Callant.
and  in  April,  1000,  he' was  left  in  charge  of  it  with
one  vessel,  seventy-five  soldiers,  and  fifty  colonists,
while  De  Ceiines  sailed  in  search  of  supplies.  H,.
built  a  fort  and  laid  out  the  plan  for  the  new  city,
which  he  Damed  Saint  Louis,  in  honor  of  the  king:
and  when  it  was  evident  that  he  had  been  aban-
doned to  his  fate  by  De  (buries,  he  made  the  colo-
nists promise  t<>  continue  the  building  of  the  city,
left  the  soldiers  with  them,  and.  taking  oiilv  the
crew  of  hi*  v.sM-1.  started  for  BnTOpa.  In  tie  M  ssl
Indian  sen  he  encountered  De  QeunSJrl  fleet,  and
sailed  with  him  to  Hochdle.  As  I»c  (bin  •
too  much  occupied  with  the  prizes  he  had  taken  to
remember  the  new  eokmr,  BnjMssta  went  at  ones

to  Paris  to  solicit  assistance  and  a  royal  commis-
sion, but  was  unlavontblv  received,  a*  he  was  con-

sidered  ■  deserter  from  lv  Genmeri  fleet. For  his
justification  he  published  H Rotation  d'un
fait  en  1080  ''■  si  1  au  eOtes  d  Afrique,  ddtron  de
Magellan,  Bread,  Cayenne  el  Ies  Antilles,  par  une


:*7-i


KSIMNOSA


KSIMNOSA


Ire  de  vaisseaux  du  roi,  commandos  par  le
oomte  de  Gennes,  et  de  la  fondation  de  la  colonie

deSuint  Louis  ft  la  Baie  Francaisc.  pal  M.  Kroger,
baron  d'Espeleta"  (Paris,  1698).  This  narrative  is
still  highly  esteemed  on  account  of  its  exactitude,
and  in  it  the  author  contradicts  the  stories  regard-
ing the  gigantic  stature  of  the  Patagonians,  which
he  never  found  to  be  above  six  feet  three  inches.
This  publication,  as  it  was  not  contradicted  bv  De
Genno.  tuned  the  tide  of  public  opinion  in  &*pe-
leta's  favor,  and  the  king,  toward  the  end  of  1698,
made  him  a  knight  of  Saint  Louis,  and  in  January,
1699,  lieutenant-general  and  governor  of  the  colony
of  Saint  Louis,  with  power  to  found  other  French
colonies  in  the  South  sea.  Espeleta  sailed  again
on  11  March,  1700,  with  180  soldiers  and  340  colo-
nists. On  his  arrival  in  Saint  Louis  he  found  the
colony  a  prey  to  famine  and  at  war  with  the  Pata-
gonians. He  promptly  concluded  peace  with  the
Indians,  set  the  colonists  to  clearing  and  cultivat-
ing the  land,  and  in  a  few  years  they  became  very
prosperous,  and  a  new  colony  was  founded  at  Port
Gallant.  The  vessels  which  he  sent  to  France
laden  with  colonial  produce  were  twice  captured  by
the  British,  and  Espeleta  conducted  the  third  ex-
pedition himself.  After  his  return  in  1715,  hos-
tilities with  the  Patagonians  broke  out  again,  and
in  one  of  the  encounters  Espeleta  was  killed.  His
death  was  the  ruin  of  the  colony,  and  although  his
deputies  continued  to  hold  out  for  a  year,  the  colo-
nists became  disheartened,  and,  after  blowing  up
the  fort,  returned  to  France.  Malte  Brun  says,  in
his  "  Geographie  generate  " :  "  Espeleta 's  death  was
a  great  loss  lor  France,  as  he  certainly  would  have
founded,  in  the  course  of  time,  in  South  America  a
vast  colonial  empire  for  France,  if  he  had  been
properly  supported  by  his  government."

ESP1N0SA,  Gaspar  de  (es-pe-no'-sa),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Medina  del  Carapo,  Valladolid,  in
1484;  d.  in  Cuzco.  Peru,  14  Feb..  1537.  In  1514  he
came  to  Darien  with  Pedrarias  Davila  as  supreme
judge  of  the  expedition,  and  in  that  capacity  pre-
sided at  the  first  trial  of  Balboa,  Davila's  prede-
cessor. (See  Balboa,  Vasco  NuSez  de.)  When
Pedrarias  declared  war  against  an  Indian  chief
called  Pocorosa,  he  ordered  Espinosa  to  leave  Acla
with  an  expeditionary  force  of  infantry  and  cav-
alry. He  attacked  a  body  of  3,000  Indians,  and,
after  an  obstinate  fight,  they  fled,  frightened  by
the  horses  and  the  blood-hounds  that  the  Spaniards
carried.  After  his  victory  Espinosa  committed
many  cruelties  against  the  Indian  prisoners,  and
on  tne  arrival  of  re-enforcements  from  Pedrarias
he  invaded  the  Indian  territory  still  farther,  and
recovered  a  great  part  of  the  treasure  that  had  been
abandoned  some  tune  before  by  Gonzalo  de  Bada-
jos,  amounting  to  about  83,000  gold  castellanos.
After  defeating  an  army  of  20,000  men  with  which
the  native  cacique  hoped  to  crush  him,  and  con-
quering several  other  tribes,  he  began  his  return
march  to  Darien,  which  he  finally  reached,  with
great  riches  and  over  2,000  Indian  slaves.  Espino-
sa, preferring  the  adventurous  life  of  a  conqueror
to  tnat  of  a  judge,  soon  started  on  another  expedi-
tion, and,  according  to  his  assertion,  explored  many
miles  of  the  Pacific  coast.  On  his  return  to  Darien
in  1517.  he  found  that  Balboa  had  been  imprisoned
a  second  time  by  Pedrarias,  and  although  he  gave
it  as  his  opinion  that  that  explorer  ought  to  be
pardoned  in  consideration  of  nis  services  to  the
crown,  he  sentenced  the  prisoner  to  death  on  a
written  order  from  Pedrarias.  Favored  by  the  mili-
tary for  his  generosity,  and  by  the  municipality  of
Darien  on  account  of  his  success  in  his  expedition,
bpinOM  was  proclaimed deputy  governor  not-


withstanding  IV  -drarias's  strenuous  opposition.  In
the  beginning  of  1518,  Pedrarias,  to  get  rid  of
Espinosa,  sent  him  with  a  force  of  150  men  on  n
expedition  along  the  coast  to  recover  t lie  rest  of
the  treasure  lost  by  Badajos,  in  which  attempt  he
was  entirely  successful.  On  his  return  to  the  i>t lir
mus  he  proceeded  with  his  force  to  the  weetem
gulf  to  found,  by  Pedrarias's  orders,  a  city  to  s.
as  a  base  for  the  expedition  to  the  South  Pacific.
and  toward  the  latter  part  of  1518,  with  the  i
tomary  formalities,  the  foundations  of  the  city  of
Panama  were  laid.  In  the  same  year  Lope  de  Sosa,
who  was  to  relieve  Pedrarias,  arrived  in  Darien.
and  with  him  came  Judge  Alarconcillo  to  investi-
gate the  administration  of  the  late  governor.  As
Sosa  died  on  the  day  of  his  arrival  in  Darien,  the
astute  Espinosa  persuaded  Alarconcillo  that  his
authority  liad  expired.  Espinosa  himself  then  pro-
ceeded with  the  investigation,  and  naturally  fa-
vored Pedrarias,  as  his  own  reputation  was  involved
in  that  of  Pedrarias.  In  the  beginning  of  1519
Espinosa  was  sent  with  two  ships  to  take  possession
of  a  group  of  islands  called,  by  the  historian  Herre-
ra,  Zebaco.  Hearing  of  gold-mines  on  the  main-
land, he  set  sail  for  the  coast,  where  he  met  an
auxiliary  force  under  Pizarro  and  De  Soto.  Thev
were  finally  forced  to  retire  without  finding  gold
and  with  heavy  losses,  but  the  rest  of  his  expedi-
tions along  the  coast  were  more  fortunate.  The  In-
dian chiefs  submitted  after  a  short  struggle,  and,
loaded  with  booty,  his  command  returned  to  the
coast  of  the  gulf  of  Parita,  where  he  founded  the
city  of  Nata,  leaving  Francisco  Compaflon  in  com-
mand. He  was  recalled  to  Panama  in  1519  by
Pedrarias,  who  wished  to  visit  the  new  colony  him-
self, and  in  the  same  vear,  together  with  many
other  officers  from  the  \Vest  India  islands,  Espi-
nosa reached  San  Lucar  with  a  fleet  of  five  ships,
which  carried,  as  tribute  for  the  crown,  over  $600,-
000  in  gold,  2,500  marks  of  pearls,  and  manv  other
valuables.  At  court  he  was  received  w  ith  distinc-
tion, more  on  account  of  his  riches  than  of  his
character,  and  the  emperor,  Charles  V.,  gave  him  a
coat  of  arms,  emblematic  of  his  exploits  in  the  New
World.  In  1524  he  was  commissioned  to  investi-
gate the  administration  of  the  judges  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Santo  Domingo,  and  during  that
time  to  administer  justice  in  the  island  together
with  Judge  Zuazo.  After  finishing  the  investiga-
tion, Espinosa  went  to  Panama  to  attend  to  his
private  affairs.  Hernando  de  Luque,  in  the  com-
pact signed  by  him  with  Pizarro  and  Almagro  on
10  March,  1526,  seems  to  have  been  but  a  figure-
head for  Espinosa,  who  really  furnished  the  $20,000
in  gold  for  the  outfit  of  the  first  expedition,  but
who,  at  that  time  in  office,  did  not  want  his  name
to  appear.  When  therefore  Pizarro,  in  consequence
of  the  general  rising  of  Indians  in  1536,  asked  for
auxiliary  troops,  Espinosa  raised  a  corps  of  250
men  in  Panama ;  ana  when,  after  the  return  of  Al-
magro from  Chili  in  1537,  the  war  between  the
two  copartners  began,  Espinosa  accepted  a  com-
mission from  Pizarro  to  go  to  Almagro  at  Cuzco
and  try  to  arrange  the  difficulty.  While  there  he
was  attacked  by  the  illness  of  which  he  died.

ESPINOSA,  Juan,  South  American  soldier,  b.
in  Montevideo  in  1804;  d.  in  Arenas,  Peru,  in
1871.  He  was  known  as  "the  soldier  of  the  An-
des." Espinosa's  family  emigrated  to  Buenos
Ay  res  in  1807.  His  father  was  exiled  in  1810  l>\
the  revolutionists,  and  the  boy  remained  with  his
mother  till  he  was  twelve  years  of  age,  when  he
enlisted  in  the  troops  that  left  Buenos  Ayres  in
1816  to  fight  for  the  independence  of  Chili.  Es-
pinosa fought  at  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,  1817,  and


EBQl'lt


878


Mavpu.  5  April.  1H1H,  and  was  promoted  " nicer  of
th.  Mb  battalion  of  Rio  do  In  Plat*.  In  1830, when
sixteen  years  of  age.  he  followed  San  Martin  in  his
exjH-ilit  i. -i i  t<>  IVru,  took  purl  in  the  I  tattles  of  |(i.>
IlumUi, Pichincha,  and other encounters, wliicli

I  the  territory  n--w  known  as  the  republic  of
Ecuador.  After  this  KspsBOM  wee  assigned  to  the
battalion  Pichincha,  of  the  Colombian  division,  and
in  1898  Mired  in  the  campaign  of  Intcrnx-dm-.  in

t  in  the  l»attle  of  Ayacucho,  and  after  tli«'  ciim-

fjn  of  Bolivia,  in  lN'i.'i,  had  reached  the  rank  of
leutenant-oolonel  <>f  Colombia,  After  the  war  of
indejiendenee  Kspinosa  wished  to  return  to  his
country,  hut  hud  no  means  to  make  the  trip.  Iloli-
var  gave  him  f>500,  and  the  custom-house  of  A  rim
defrayed  his  expenses  to  Valparaiso.  He  supported
him-elf  in  Chili  for  ten  years,  and  in  1H41  returned
to  Lima,  and  was  appointed  l>v  (ten.  (iamarra  rec-
tor of  the  College  of  Puno.  fie  afterward  shared
in  the  camjiaign  of  the  south  as  secretary  to  the
commander-in-chief. The  government  of  Marshall

Castilla  appointed  bin  ins|>ector-general  of  the
anny,  and  in  1807  he  was  made  prefect  of  Ayacu-
cho,  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  departments
of  Ayacucho.  .hinin,  and  Huancavelica.  As  suIh
secretary  of  war,  Kspinosa  shared  in  the  encounter
of  C'allao  on  2  May,  1800.  He  left  two  works,
••  Hereiicia  esjmfiola  6  caraeter  de  Isabel  II.,"  and
"  Diooiooario  republicano."

KSPINOSA,  Pedro,  Mexican  bishop,  b.  in
Tepic,  29  -Line,  179:3;  d.  in  the  citv  of  Mexico,  12
Nov.,  1800.  He  completed  his  studies  at  the  semi-
nary of  Guadalajara,  and  afterward  occupied  the
chair  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  at  the  university,
where  he  received  the  degree  of  doctor  of  theology,
and  was  subsequently  appointed  professor  of  phi-
losophy and  dogmatic  theology.  He  was  intrusted
with  many  important  ecclesiastical  commissions  by
Catenas,  then  bishop  of  Guadalajara,  and  on  8
Jan..  1854,  was  consecrated  bishop  at  the  cathedral.
He  lalNired  hard  for  the  benefit  of  his  diocese,
founding  schools,  printing  books,  and  supplying
the  wants  of  the  poor.  Political  disturbances  after-
ward compelled  Kspinosa  to  leave  the  country,  and
he  visited  the  pope,  who  received  him  well,  and
honored  him  with  several  religious  titles.  After
the  erection  of  the  separate  diocese  of  Zacatecas,
he  was  consecrated  first  archbishop  of  Guadalajara,
lb-  died  on  his  wav  to  assume  his  offloe.

ESPI  VENT,  Louis  Charles  d\  French  corsair,
b.  in  Nantes,  France,  in  1041 ;  d.  in  Tobago,  West
Indies,  in  Dei-ember,  1677.  He  was  of  noble  fam-
ily, and,  when  very  young,  entered  the  royal  navy,
which  he  soon  abandoned  for  the  more  hazardous
life  of  privateering.  In  1059  he  went  to  Saint
Christopher,  where  his  relative  De  Poincy  was
commanding  at  that  time.  Soon  afterward  he
fitted  out  a  small  fleet,  with  which  he  went  on  a
crui>c,  and  his  captures  and  adventures  soon  be-
came famous.  In  1003  he  entered  the  port  of
Carthagena  by  night,  and  under  the  guns  of  the
torts  captured  a  galleon  that  was  ebOBl  to  sail.  In
liii'.t  K-pivent  kidnaped  the  S|ianish  governor  of
Sinto  Domingo,  and  nMigitd  bin  to  pay  a  ran—
of  :.>.">,000  francs.  Sm»h  afterward  the  buccaneers
Of  Santo  Domingo  chose  Kspivent  at  their  chief,
hut  the  jealousy  of  DuOBSBS  obliged  him  to  quit
the  island.  In  1  «M»7  he  went  to  (iuadeloupe,  where
.  Booel  appointed  him  his  lieutenant.  In  that
same  year  he  kidnapttcd  M.  de  Thoisy  I'atroclc,  an
envoy  of  I...uis  Xl\  .,  and  exacted  a  ransom  from
him.  In  1076  he  was  appointed  by  Admiral  «I'K—
-  1st  lieutenant  on  hoard  the  MgaU  "  La
(iloire."  He  took  part  in  the  recapture  of
eniie,  and  distinguish- d  himself  at the  OOmhss1  of


Petit  Goave against  the  Dutch  fleet  under  Hinkers.
II--  was  killed  in  tM)  attack  on 1

I  SPY, James Pollard.  fist, b. in

Westmoreland  county.  Pa..  J»  Mav.  17*5;  d.  in
Cincinnati.  Ohio.  •.'»  .Ian..  I860,  II-  IM  gradu-
ated at  Transylvania  university  in  Inim,  end  in
■ne  year  became  principal  of  the  classical
ax  ad.  in y  in  Cumberland.  Afterward  be  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  an- 1  print |s.-<|  f,,r
four  years  in  Xetiia,  <  >hi.».  In  1H17  he  accepted  a
call  to  the  classical  department  of  the  Franklin
institute,  and  while  in  Philadelphia  published  in
the  ".l-iiirnal  of  the  Franklin  Institute"  his  earli-
est researches  in  meteorology.  After  Mime  years
of  investigation  he  advanced  the  theory  that  every
great  atmospheric  distiirlwnce  liegins  with  the  up-
rising of  air  which  has  bOM  rarelicd  by  heat.  The
rism^  mass  dilates,  and,  as  its  t<ui|M-niture  falls,

precipitates  rapor  in  the  form  of  eJooda Owing

to  the  lilieration  of  the  latent  heat,  the  dilation
continues  with  the  rising  till  the  moisture  of  the
air  forming  the  upward  current  is  |>ra«tically  ex-
hausted. The  heavier  air  flows  in  bOMOfia,  and.
finding  a  diminished  pressure  above  it,  rushes  up-
ward with  constantly  increasing  violence.  The
great  quantity  of  aqueous  vapor  precipitated  (lur-
ing this  atmospheric  disturtmnce  gives  rise  to
heavy  rains.  The  physical  principles  on  which
this  theory  was  based  were  correct,  and  it  is  so
far  supjiorted  by  observation.  It  found  many  ad-
herents, and  attracted  the  attention  of  scientists
abroad.  In  1N40  he  visited  Europe,  and  presented
his  views  before  the  British  association,  to  whose
transactions  he  contributed  papers  on  "Storms"
and  on  the  "  Four  Fluctuations  of  the  Barometer."
A  committee  of  the  French  academy  of  sciences
examined  his  theory,  and  reported  favorably  on  it.
During  the  debate  that  took  place  in  the  academy,
Arago  said,  "France  has  its  Cuvier,  England  its
Newton,  America  its  Espy."  However.  subsequent
researches  led  to  important  modifications  of  his
views  by  the  so-called  rotary  theory  which  is  now
generally  accepted.  Mr.  Espv  believed  that  rains
could  be  produced  artificially  by  means  of  fires
sustained  long  enough  to  produce  a  powerful  uj>-
ward  current,  which  would  initiate  the  action  as
previously  descrilicd.  He  petitioned  congress  and
the  legisfature  of  Pennsylvania  for  an  appropria-
tion to  enable  him  to  perform  the  experiment,  but
without  success.  In  1848  be  received  an  appoint-
ment  under  the  war  department,  enabling  him  to
prosecute  his  investigations  in  the  Washington
observatory,  and  several  volumes  of  his  reporoi
were  published.  While  holding  this  offlOt  he  in-
stituted a  service  of  daily  bulletins,  m  conjunction
with  the  newspajiers  and  t he  telegraph  oompanhs,
on  the  condition  of  the  weather  in  different  locali-
ties. This  constituted  the  earliest  efforts  of  the
weather  bureau,  which  has  since  deToloped  into  an
important  branch  of  the  war  dc|»irtmcnt.  Mr.
Espv  was  a  member  Of  the  American  philosophical
societv,  received  its  Magellanic  gold  medal  in  1*:H>,
and  iii  1*41  was  elected  a  corresponding  member
of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  He  VM  sometimes
called  the  "Storm  King."  He  published  "  Phi-
loeophj  <>f  Storms"  (Boaton  and  London,  1K41).

KSOTKMKLING.  John,  buccaneer, lb  wrote
in  Dutch  an  account  of  the  buccaneers  of  America,
which  was  translated  into  English  (London,  10*4).
Sir Henry Morgan obtained a verdict Q
against  the  publisher  for  Ifbol

B8QUIIJ, Mamertn.  Argentine K.  C.  bishop,
b.  in rietlrablanca,  South America,  in 1  S2ti :  d.  in

Cordoba,  Argentine  Bepohiie,  In  in-^i.  He  en-
tered the  Franciscan  order  at  an  early  age,  and


876


ESQUIVEL


ESTAING


devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  philosophy  and
theology,  becoming  distinguished  as  n  professor
and  preacher.  His  learning  procured  for  him
aimm^  his  count rvnien  the  title  of  the  "  Ijacor-
daire  of  America.  He  was  so  at>a?hed  by  the
praises  that  he  received,  that  he  retired  among  the
natives  and  labored  among  them  for  some  years.
He  was  sought  out  and  nominated  to  the  bishopric
of  Parana,  but  declined  it,  and  retired  to  the  mis-
sionary college  of  Tarija,  in  Bolivia,  whence  he
was  summoned  by  the  archbishop,  who  made  him
MofeMOC  of  theology  in  the  college  of  Sucre.  Here
he  also  edited  a  literary  and  philosophical  journal,
"  El  Cruzado,"  his  articles  in  which  attracted  at-
tention throughout  Spanish  America.  His  repu-
tation led  to  his  nomination  as  archbishop  by  the
authorities  of  Buenos  Ayres.  He  again  declined,
but  fearing  that  he  might  be  compelled  to  assume
the  office,  ne  concealed  himself,  with  the  consent
of  his  superiors,  in  different  monasteries  in  Peru
until  it  was  filled  by  another.  He  then  returned
to  his  missionary  college  of  Tarija.  In  1875  he
sailed  for  Europe  to  visit  the  Holy  Land.  While
in  Palestine  the  see  of  Cordoba  became  vacant,  and
he  was  ordered  by  the  pope  to  return  to  South
America  and  assume  its  duties.  He  entered  Cor-
doba barefoot,  in  his  Franciscan  habit,  and,  after
his  consecration,  continued  to  travel  as  a  mission-
ary from  town  to  town  throughout  his  diocese.
He  acted  successfully  as  a  peacemaker  in  the  civil
wars,  and  it  was  on  the  occasion  of  a  journey  in
the  heat  of  summer,  to  restore  peace  at  Rioja,  that
he  fell  sick  and  died  by  the  road-side.

ESQUIVEL,  Juan  de  (es-ke-vel),  Spanish  ad-
venturer, b.  in  Spain  about  1480 ;  d.  in  Jamaica
about  1519.  In  1502,  when  Ovando  was  appointed
to  succeed  Bobadilla  as  governor  of  Hispaniola,
Esquivel  went  to  the  island  as  one  of  his  lieuten-
ants. In  1504  Ovando  sent  him,  at  the  head  of
400  men,  to  subjugate  the  province  of  Higuey,
which  had  revolted  under  the  leadership  of  the
famous  cacique,  Cotabanama.  The  Indians  were
defeated  ana  driven  to  the  mountains,  but  there
was  soon  another  insurrection,  and  Esquivel  was
■gain  sent  by  Ovando  to  subdue  the  province.
This  was  done  after  much  bloodshed  and  the  cap-
ture of  the  cacique,  after  which  Esquivel  found-
ed, in  1505,  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz  del  Seybo,
which  was  afterward  destroyed  in  the  middle  of
the  18th  century  by  an  earthquake.  Diego  Colum-
bus sent  Esquivel,  in  1509,  with  seventy  men,  to
take  possession  of  the  island  of  Jamaica  on  his  be-
half. In  1509  he  reduced  it  easily,  and,  in  further
obedience  to  his  instructions,  began  a  colony  and
founded  the  seat  of  government  on  the  spot  where
Christopher  Columbus  had  been  shipwrecked  in
1503,  and  named  it  Sevilla  Nueva.  The  Indians
betook  themselves  to  the  mountains,  and  stood  on
their  defence ;  but  Esquivel,  after  several  engage-
ments, found  means  at  length  to  cut  off  the  chiefs.
The  rest  submitted,  and  were  employed  in  planting
cotton  and  grain.  Esquivel  introduced  a  Spanish
bleed  of  cattle,  hogs,  and  horses,  and  several  kinds
of  garden-stuff  were  cultivated.  By  the  modera-
tion of  his  government  he  soon  won  the  Indians
into  subjection.  This  commander  has  been  highly
extolled  for  prudent  and  temperate  behavior.  The
exportation  from  his  colony  about  the  year  1514
had  grown  to  be  considerable,  and  it  furnished  co-
pious supplies  of  provisions  to  the  Spaniards  of
the  continent  and  the  neighboring  islands.  Un-
fortunately, his  rule  was  short.  In  the  space  of
ten  years,  five  vessels  had  been  fitted  out  under  his

direction,  and  two  new  towns  were  established,
which  he  named  Oristan  and  Melilla.


ESTAING,  Charles  Hector,  Count  d\  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Knvcl.  Auvergne,  France,  in
L7S9;  .1.  in  Paris.  28  April,  1794.  At  the  age  of
sixteen  he  became  colonel  of  the  regiment  Kouergue,
and  brigadier  in  17"><i.  In  1757  he  was  sent  t<>
India,  and  in  1758  took  Gondeleur  and  Fort  Sf.
David.  He  then  joined  Count  La  11  v.  and  was
made  prisoner  at  Madras  in  1759.  but  was  released
on  parole.  After  this  he  joined  the  navy,  was  given
command  of  two  ships  of  the  Hast  India  company,
and  inflicted  great  damage  on  the  English  while
in  the  east,  but  on  his  return  was  captured  near
I  .orient  by  British  cruisers.  He  was  imprisoned  in
Portsmouth  and  subjected  to  cruel  treatment,  on
the  ground  that  he  had  broken  the  parole  that  he
had  given  in  Madras.  Admiral  Boscawen  was  then
commander-in-chief  in  India,  and  often  said  that,
if  ever  he  should  get  "  the  villain "  in  his  power
again,  he  "  would  chain  him  upon  the  quarter-deck
and  treat  him  like  a  baboon."  D'Estamg  seems  to
have  had  equally  bitter  feelings  against  the  English.
In  1763  he  was  made  lieutenant-general  in  the  navy,
and  in  1767  vice-admiral,  a  rank  which  he  had  at
first  refused.  Meanwhile  the  colonies  in  America
had  found  an  advo-
cate at  the  French
court  in  the  per-
son of  Marie  Antoi-
nette, who  placed
in  the  hands  of
Louis  XVI.  a  me-
moir prepared  by
the  Counts  de  Mail-
lebois  and  D'Es-
taing,  which  cen-
sured the  timid
policy  of  the  king's
ministers.  After
the  defeat  of  Bur-
goyne,  6  Feb.,  1778,
a  treatv  was  con-
cluded between  the
United  States  and
France,  and,  pur-
suant to  its  stipu-
lations, a  fleet  of
twelve  ships-of-the-line  and  four  large  frigates,  un-
der the  command  of  D'Estaing,  sailed  for  America
on  13  April,  1778.  Early  in  July  D'Estaing  reached
Delaware  bay,  and,  after  landing  Conrad  A.  Gerard,
the  French  ambassador,  sailed  for  New  York  in
hopes  of  engaging  the  British  fleet,  but,  being  un-
able to  secure  a  pilot,  anchored  near  the  Jersey
shore,  not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Shrewsbury
river,  where  he  captured  several  prizes.  At  the
suggestion  of  Gen.  Washington,  the  French  fleet
was  requested  to  co-operate  with  Gen.  John  Sulli-
van in  the  expulsion  of  the  British  from  Rhode
Island.  D'Estaing  appeared  at  Newport  late  in
July,  and  on  5  Aug.,  1778.  the  British  burned  six
frigates  in  order  to  prevent  their  falling  into  the
hands  of  the  French.  Events  seemed  favorable
for  the  capture  of  the  entire  British  force  at  New-

Kort,  but  delays  and  lack  of  proper  understanding
etween  the  two  commanders  prevented  united  ac-
tion. The  appearance  of  the  British  fleet,  and  a
subsequent  storm  in  which  several  of  the  French
vessels  were  seriously  injured,  led  to  their  with-
drawal to  Boston  for  repairs,  and  the  campaign
terminated  without  success.  In  May.  1778,  I'll—
taing  proposed  a  joint  expedition  with  his  fleet
and  the  American  troops  to  capture  Halifax  and
Newfoundland  for  the  king  of  France.  Washing-
ton could  not  afford  to  reduce  his  army  by  the  re-
quired number  of  troops,  and  the  enterpri.-. MM


■  lull


ESTEKI.Y


:<7?


consequently  ahandom-d  On  I  Nov..  177*.  D'Es-
taing  sailed  In  the  Went  Indies,  where,  nfti-r  mi
unsuccessful  attempt  to  take  St.  Lucia,  h<

V  inceut  and  Grenada,  and  also  forced  tin-  Mril-

isli  admiral, BjTM — who  came to tin- relief  of

Grenada— to retire. In Scptemlier, 177J». with

\J  iMpS  of  tilt  thu  and  eleven  frigates*.  l*»ar-

ing  abonl  t».(MM»  aokUan,  in-  suddenly  ap|>eared  off

tin'  const  of  Georgia.  Four  British  vessels  at  ..in  .•
fell  into  his  baiKU,  and  a  plan  was  arranged  with
(iin.  Benjamin  Lincoln  for  a  united  attack  on  the
of  Savannah.  The  lateness  of  the  season,  the
dangerous  coast,  and  the  reported  approach  of  a
British  Meet,  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  insist  on
immediate  action  ;  out  unfortunate  circumstances.
with  various  delays,  made  it  PomJbei  for  the  Hrit-
ish  to  prepare  themselves,  ami,  in  OOMeqtMSjen,  the
attack  was  postponadi  Finally,  on  !»  October,  it
was  decided  to  carry  the  town  by  assault.  The  i
Americans  and  French  ad vaueed  in  three  coluinns,
the  principal  one  under  the  direct  command  of
DKstaing,  assisted  by  Gen.  Lincoln.  Early  in  the  !
engagement  the  French  commander  was  wounded!
both  in  the  arm  and  thigh,  and  in  this  condition)
was  carried  to  his  camp.  The  combined  forces  '
failed  in  carrying  the  fortifications,  and.  after  se- I
vere  losses,  withdrew.  A  second  attack  was  urged
by  Gen.  Lincoln,  but  D'Estaing's  loss  had  ban
heavy,  ami  he  determined  on  immediate  departure, !
in  conseipience  of  which  the  siege  was  raised.  He
returned  to  France  early  in  17*0.  and  there  endeav- ,
ored  to  persuade  the  ministry  to  send  12,000  men
to  America  as  the  best  way  of  pursuing  the  war.
Lafayette  had  given  similar  advice,  ana  in  June,
1780,  Count  de  Kochambeau,  with  6,000  men,  was
sent  to  the  colonies.  In  17H3  D'Estaing  had  com-
mand of  the  allied  fleets  of  France  and  Spain,  and  I
was  made  a  grandee  of  Spain.  Subsequently  he
declared  himself  in  favor  of  national  reforms,  and
was  electee!  in  1787  to  the  assembly  of  notables.
In  1789  he  was  appointed  commandant  of  the  Na-
tional guard  of  \  ersailles,  and  was  chosen  admiral
in  L7U  !>y  the  legislative  assembly.  He  continued
to  cherish  a  regard  for  the  royal  family,  and  wrote
friendly  letters  to  the  queen,  which  came  to  the
knowledge  of  the  revolutionary  authorities,  and  he
was  arrested  and  imprisoned.  On  the  trial  of  Marie
Antoinette  he  testified  in  her  favor,  but  without
avail.  He  was  himself  brought  to  triad  in  1794,
and  cited  his  military  and  naval  services  to  the
nation  in  his  defence,  but,  seeing  that  his  death
was  determined  on,  said,  "  Send  my  head  to  the
English  :  they  will  pav  you  well  for  it."  D'Estaing
wrote  two  poems,  "  Le  plaisir"  (1755),  and  "  Ije
tvve  "  1 1 775);  a  tragedy.  "  I.*>s  Thermopyles"  (1791) ;
a  pamphlet,  "Apsraj  hasardc  sur  Pcxportation
dans  les  colonies;  dedie  a  feu  M.  Franklin"  < Paris,
171)0);  and  works  on  the  navv.

ESTAIGH.  Elizabeth,  colonist,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  IMS;  d.  in  New  Jersev  in  17»»'J.  She
was  the  oldest  daughter  of  John  iladdon.  a  (Qua-
ker. During  her  early  youth  William  IVnn  visited
her  father's  house,  and  greatly  amused  her  by
talking  about  the  Indians.  From  that  time  si,',,
became  interested  in  the  (Quaker  emigrants,  and
early  U-gan  to  talk  of  visiting  the  colonies.  ||,.r
father  purchased  land  in  New  Jersey,  with  a  view
of  emigrating,  but  did  not  carry  out  his  plan  ;  and
when  he  offend  the  land  to  any  relative  who  would
settle  u[M.n  it.  BUtahttth  at  once  promptly  agreed
it  it.  Her  parents  reluctantly  permitted  her
to  embark  earlv  in  the  spring  of  17<m>.  aocompanii  I
by  a  friend  and  housekeeper,  and  two  men-servants,
■ambers  of  the  society  of  Friends.  Soonafb
she  married  John  Estaugh,  a  Quaker  preaobar,  after


a  courtship  in  which  the  first  advance*  were  made
bj  benelf  In  the  following  wordi  d  John,

I  haves  subject  of  importance  OB  my  mind,  mid
•  me  which  nearly  interests  thee.  I  am  strongl*.  im-
pressed that  the  Lord  has  sent  thee  tome  as  a  part-
ner for  life."  In  ITU  her  bsjsbss)d  went  to  make  a
religious  visit  to  Tortola.  in  the  West  Indies,  where
he  died.  She  published  a  religious  tract  by  him.
in  which  apfiears  a  preface  entitled  ••  Kl
Estaugh's  Testiiimuv  mm -cruiiig  her  (Moved  Hus-
I'ainl.  John  Estaugh."  Mrs.  Estaugh's  house  lie-
came  a  place  of  general  resort  for  Friends,  and
an  asylum  for  U-nightcd  travellers.  Haddonficld,
N.  J.,  was  named  for  her.  Her  medical  skill  is  *,
well  remembered,  that  the  old  nurses  of  New  Jersey
are  said  still  to  recommend  her  preimratioiis.

ESTE,  David  Kirk  pat  rick,  jurist.  I.,  in  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  in  October,  17*V.  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  1  April,  1h7").  He  was  the  son  of  ('apt.  Moses
Este,  of  the  Continental  army,  and  Ann Kirk-

SKtrick,  sister  of  Chief-Justice  Kirkpatrick,  of
ew  Jersey.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
ix<>:{,  and  studied  law  under  difficulties,  owing  to
partial  loss  of  eyesight.  He  removed  to  Ohio  in
1809,  settled  in  Cincinnati  in  1N14,  and  became
prominent  in  his  profession.  He  wss  associated
with  Henry  Clay  as  counsel  for  the  Hank  of  the
United  States  for  the  Northwest  territory,  and  his
practice  extended  to  the  I'.  S.  supreme  court.  In
18J14  he  was  "elected  president  judge  of  the  ninth
judicial  circuit  of  Ohio,  and  in  lKtx  judge  of  the
superior  court  of  Cincinnati.  On  theexpiratioti  of
his  term  in  1847  he  retired  to  private  life.  Judge
Este  was  an  advocate  of  much  force  and  skill,  and
a  man  of  great  research.  In  his  long  life  he  was
singularly  above  reproach.

EST  EN,  James  Christie  Palmer.  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  St.  George,  Bermuda,  7  Nov.,  1805;  d.
in  Toronto,  Canada,  25  Oct.,  1864.  He  was  a  grand-
son of  a  former  attorney-general  of  the  Bermudas,
and  his  father  was  chief-justice  of  those  islands
for  twenty  years.  The  son  was  educated  at  the
Charter  House  school,  London,  called  to  the  bar
in  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  practised  as  a  barrister  in
England.  He  passed  a  part  of  his  early  life  in
Virginia,  came  to  Canada  in  18510,  and  on  tin- es-
tablishment of  the  court  of  chancery  there  in
1837,  became  a  barrister  in  it,  and  in  1849.  on  the
reconstruction  of  the  court,  he  was  constituted  one
of  its  judges,  and  so  continued  till  his  death.
During  his  term  of  offlce  he  was  never  absent
from  his  |M»st.  and  was  acting  chancellor  for  a  few
years  during  the  illness  of  Chancellor  Make.

ESTEKLV.  George,  inventor,  b.  in  I'lattekill,

N. V., 17 Oct., 1N<K>. He received a ( Illnll-

school  education,  and  in  1X17  removed  to  Wisoou-
sin.  where  he  engaged  in  wheat-growing.  Finding
difficulty  in  securing  laU.rers,  he  turned  his  at-
tention to  the  invention  of  agricultural  machines.
He  experimented  at  first  with  a  n-ajH-r.  and,  bjqb>
fBrting his  born  into  a  machine-shop,  produced  in
1844  an  implement  capable  of  successfully  cut-
ting ten  acres  of  wheat  in  half  a  day.  A  year  later
he  built  a  harvesting  machine,  and  soon  U-gan
to  manufacture  various  agricultural  implements.
Subsequently  he  obtained  numerous  patents,  and
his  establishment  at  Whitewater,  \\  i*..  has  be-
come one  of  the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the  United
States.  His  inventions  include  steel  plow*,  a  self-
raking  rea|K-r.  rSSjMC  for  harvesting  without  bind-
ing, and  an  improved  broadcast  seeder  and  culti-
vator. The  use  of  steel  in  rea|>ers  and  harvesters
is  his  most  ini|K>rtant  invention,  and  his  machines
are  now  constructed  of  that  metal.  Mr.  Esterly
has  written  several  pamphlets  on  the  cum |


378


KSTKVKZ V UGARTK


ETTWEIN


KSTKVKZ  Y  I'GARTE,  Pedro  Ajrustin  (cs-

ta-veth).  .Mexican  II.  0.  bishop,  b.  in  Orotava.  Ci-
nary  Islands,  5  March,  1 754 ;  d.  in  Merida,  Mexico,
8  May,  1827.  He  studied  theology,  philosophy,  and
literature  in  a  Franciscan  convent  in  his  native
island,  and  then  entered  the  College  of  San  Bar-
tolome  and  Santiago  de  Granada,  where  he  won  a
fellowship  in  jurisprudence  for  nine  years.  Shortly
afterward  he  became  rector  of  the  college,  and  pro-
fessor in  the  University  of  Granada.  On  15  July,
1775,  he  received  the  degree  of  doctor  in  canonical
law.  In  1770  he  was  ordained  as  a  priest,  and  l>e-
came  noted  for  the  eloquence  of  his  sermons.  For
some  time  he  was  regent  of  the  seminary  of  Zamo-
ra.  and  on  27  July,  1796,  was  appointed  by  Charles
IV.  bishop  of  Yucatan,  Mexico.  He  arrived  at
Campeche  in  May,  1802,  and  immediately  set  about
remodelling  the  plan  of  studies  in  the  seminary,  in-
creasing its  faculty  and  founding  the  chairs  of
Greek  and  canonical  law.  When  Mexico  became
independent  he  accepted  the  result  of  the  contest
unhesitatingly,  and,  without mixing  in  politics,

6 reached  peace,  union,  and  Christian fraternity.
te  was  the  founder  of  the  University  of  Yucatan,
which  was  finished  in  1824.

ESTORUE,  Joseph  Leonard,  physician,  b.  in
Opelousas,  La.,  in  1830;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1880.
He  studied  at  the  royal  college  of  Cahors,  France,
where  he  was  a  classmate  of  Gambetta.  After  re-
ceiving the  degree  of  M.  D.,  he  was  pursuing  scien-
tific studies  in  Paris,  when  the  civil  war  in  the
United  States  recalled  him  to  this  country.  He
was  appointed  a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army
in  the  trans-Mississippi  department,  but  was  made
a  prisoner  at  Fort  de  Russey. After  the  war  he

Eractised  his  profession  in  St.  Landry,  and  endeared
imself  to  the  people  by  his  skill  and  devotion  dur-
ing the  epidemic  of  1878.

ESTRADA,  Bartolom6  Rnlz  de,  Spanish  pilot,
lived  in  the  early  part  of  the  16th  century.  He  ac-
companied Francisco  Hecerra  in  the  first  vovage  of
exploration  he  made,  by  order  of  Pedrarias  Davila.
Sailing  from  Darien  with  150  men,  he  explored  the
Pacific  coast,  visited  the  river  Peru,  and  at  the  end
of  six  months  returned  with  an  immense  quantity
of  gold  and  pearls.  It  is  also  said  that  it  was  he
who  conducted  Pizarro  and  Almagro  to  the  empire
of  the  Inca  Atahualpa,  which  they  called  Peru,  after
the  river  of  that  name.

ESTRADA,  Jos6  Dolores  (es-trah-dah),  Nica-
raguan  general,  b.  in  Matagalpa  in  1787;  d.  near
Granada,  12  Aug.,  1869.  Up  to  his  sixty-fourth
year  he  lived  quietly  in  the  country,  occupied  in
the  cultivation  of  his  estate,  but  in  the  civil  war  of
1851  offered  his  services  to  the  conservative  leader,
Fruto  Chamorro,  and  enlisted  under  the  same  chief

B::tin-t  the  democrats  in  the  revolution  of  1853.
e  participated  in  the  nine  months'  defence  of  the
city  of  Granada,  and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of
5  Aug.,  1854 ;  but  notwithstanding,  when  the  enemy
raised  the  siege,  Estrada,  as  second  in  command,
remained  for  twenty-four  hours  in  the  saddle  in
the  pursuit  of  the  retiring  army. When  the  re-

Sublic  was  invaded  by  Walker  and  his  followers  in
une,  1855  (see  Walker,  William),  Estrada  did
his  best  in  the  defence  of  his  country,  and  after  the
capture  of  Granada,  15  Oct.,  1855,  he  retired  with
a  few  followers  to  the  northern  department  of
Chinandega,  and  continued,  with  Generals  Martinez
and  Fernando  Chamorro,  to  oppose  the  forces  un-
der Walker's  command.  After  Walker  bad  caused
himself  to  be  elected  president  in  June,  1856,  and
declared  war  on  the  rest  of  the  Central  American
republics.  Estrada  inarched  with  his  little  army  to
join  the  Costa  Ricans,  but  was  intercepted  by  W'alk-


.r-  forces,  and  intrenched  himself  in  a  favorable
position  in  SaO  Jacinto.  Karl v  in  the  morning  of
14  Sept..  1864  his  position  was  stormed  by  the  ene-
my, who  attacked  in  three  columns,  ami  one  of  his
redoubts  was  taken.  After  many  hours  of  fierce
lighting,  Estrada  saw  that  his  forces  would  soop
Ik-  surrounded,  and  made  a  desperate  sally  at  the
head  of  his  troops,  throwing  the  enemy  into  such
confusion  that  they  fled,  and  were  pursued  as  far
as  Tipitapa.  After  Walker  had  been  driven  from
the  country,  Estrada  left  the  army,  and  although,
on  the  second  invasion  of  Nicaragua  by  Walker,  in
November,  1857,  he  offered  his  services  again,  he
refused  all  honors  and  offices,  and  took  part  in  the
electoral  campaign  of  1863  only  to  avoid  the  uncon-
stitutional re-election  of  the  last  president.  When
the  revolution  of  1869  began,  Estrada,  although
eighty-two  years  old,  was  appointed  commander-
in-chief  of  the  army,  and  defeated  the  revolution-
ists in  several  encounters,  but,  a  few  days  before
the  final  pacification,  he  died  in  consequence  of  the
fatigue  that  he  had  undergone.  The  congress  of
1870  ordered  a  marble  monument  to  be  erected  on
his  grave  with  the  inscription  "  Al  general  Estrada,
vencedor  de  San  Jacinto,  el  14  de  Setiembre  1868,
la  patria  agradecida."

ETHERIDGE,  Emerson,  statesman,  b.  in  Car-
rituck  county,  N.  C,  28  Sept.,  1819.  When  thir-
teen years  of  age  he  removed  to  Tennessee,  received
a  public-school  education,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1840.  He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1845-'7,  and  a  candidate  for  speak-
er, and  was  then  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
and  re-elected  as  an  American,  serving  from  1853
till  1857.  He  was  the  defeated  American  candidate
for  the  next  congress,  but  was  successful  in  1858,
and  served  again  in  1859-'61,  in  which  session  he
was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  Indian  affairs.
He  was  then  elected  clerk  of  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives, and  served  from  4  July,  1861,  to  8  Dec.,
1863.  On  his  return  to  Tennessee  he  devoted  him-
self to  the  practice  of  his  profession  and  the  study
of  philosophy,  served  in  the  Tennessee  senate  in
1869-'70,  and  was  twice  nominated  for  the  gov-
ernorship of  his  state,  being  defeated  once  and  de-
clining the  second  nomination.  He  was  the  last
Whig  that  served  in  congress.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Speeches  in  Congress"  (Washington,  1857).

ETTWE1N,  John,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Tren-
denstadt,  Wurtemberg,  29  June,  1721 ;  died  in
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1802.  In  1754  he  came  to
the  American  colo-
nies, where  he  la-
bored for  nearly
half  a  century  as
an  evangelist,  as  a
pastor,  and  finally
as  a  bishop  of  the
Moravian  church.
He  was  consecrated
to  the  episcopacy
on  25  June,  1784.
In  1801,  owing  to
the  infirmities  of
old  age,  he  retired
from  active  service.
Few  men  of  the
last  century  dis-
played greater  zeal
in  ■preading  the
gome!  through  the  country  of  his  adoption.  He
studied  the  language  of  the  Delaware  Indians,  pre-
pared a  small  dictionary  and  phr— 0  boot  there-
of, and  in  1788  gave  an  account  of  their  language
and  traditions,  including  a  vocabulary,  since  poo-


/£#U/S^«—


i:i  imi i:m i  \


KUSTIS


B19


lished by tin- Hi-tornal SOciet) -.f Pennsylvania.

trolled  thousands  "f  miles,  often  on  I
smashed  ia  eleven  <>f  tin-  thirteen  origin*]  ook>
niew  Mini  ill  what  ||  now  tin-  »t  nt  •-  <>r  Ohio;  "in
tn  use  Iii—  >>wn  w<.r«l-.  -  in  \  illug*--,  in  home-
stead*, from  pulpit-,  in  the  Open  air,  in  curt-
houses  and  Imrns,  to  many  and  \.r\  different
olasses  of men." Hi lnlK.p-il frequently among

th.-  Indian-,  and  in  177-  led  the  Christian  Indiana

from  the  Su-«|iichiinnii  to  the  Tuscarawas  val lev  <>f
Ohio,  ■  journey  of  eight  wwks,  full  of  hard-hips
Hinl  dangers,  and  ministered  with  frost  faithful-
ness to  tin-  -irk  of  tin*  American  army,  in  177<i  ami
1T7T.  when  tin"  general  hospital  had  boon  estal>-

■ihed  at  Bethlehem. Thronghooi  the  Blevolntion-

ary  war  be  received,  in  tin-  dabs  of  his  ohnroh,

the  many  distingnished  visitors  who  flocked  to
that  town,  both  military  officers  and  statesmen.
With  some  *>f  the  latter  be  became  intiinatt'.
Henry  Lonrsns,  of  Booth  Carolina,  was  his  par-
ticular  friend. On various  occasions ho eorre-

snondsd  with  Washington  end  negotiated  with
•nngreeStM  the  agent  of  the  Moravians. Not  the

lca-t  important  ait  of  his  life  was  the  founding,
in  17*7,  of  the  "Society  for  Propagating  the  Gos-

C'l  among  the  Heathen."  which  still  exists,  has  a
rge  endowment,  and  contributes  liberal  amounts
toward  the  support  of  the  extensive  mis-ions  of
the  Moravian  enunh.  Kttwein  stood  at  the  head
of  this  chorea  as  its  presiding  bishop  for  -even-
teen  yean,  displaying  sound  judgment,  gn»at  de-
cision of  character,  and  often,  amid  trying  cir-
cumstances, a  marvellous  heroism.  He  was  (puck
in  expressing  his  opinions,  and  abrupt  in  his  otter-
am.-:  but  upon  closer  acquaintance  whatever
seemed  offen-ive  was  forgntHal

Kl"  I'll  KM  I  A.  mother-superior  of  Sisters  of
Charity,  b.  in  Dublin.  Ireland.  IS  April,  1816;  d.
HlllllsMstwiH  Md.,  18  March.  1HM7.  Hersecu-
lar  name  was  Catherine  Blenkcnsoff.  She  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  in  early  girlhood,  and
entered  the  novitiate  at  St.  Joospb/l  academy.
Emmettsburg,  Md. She  rapidly  ros«-  to  l«-

Erimipal  teacher  in  the  academy,  and  was  soon  af-
•rwanl  transferred  to  St.  Mary's  orphan  asylum,
Baltimore,  and  appointed  mother-superior.  She
was  after  several  years  returned  to  St.  Joseph's,
ami  chosen  to  the  same  place  in  that  institution.
At  the  end  of  the  first  three  years  of  her  direction
she  was  appointed  mothor-OOnerior  of  all  the  Sis-
ters of  Charity  in  the  United  States.  Mother  En-
B  hernia,  as  superior  of  her  order,  made  a  tour
irough  the  south  in  18X0,  and  arranged  for  the
establishment  of  two  branch  houses.

EUSTACE,  John  Skey,  soldier,  b.  in  Flashing,
L.  I..  10  An-.  17M>:  d.  in'Newl.urir,  N.  V.. '■.'•">  Aug.,
1805.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
177'">.  and  in  the  -aim-  year  was  ap|x>iutcd  aide  to
■SBU  Sullivan  and  Oen.  Greene.  Congress  cominis-
sioneil  him  major  for  his  services  in  capturing  the
British  colonel  Burton.  After  the  war  be  raMed
in  Georgia,  when  he  print i-cd  law  and  became
■Mutant-general  of  the  state,  and  held  other  civil
and  military  offices.  In  17!»t  he  entered  the  French
service,  was  made  side  oVcamp  to  Liickner.  and
afterward  to  Duniouricr,  ai.d  attained  the  grade  of
major-gcmml  and  inarichal-de-camp.  In  1  ?J » 7  he
commanded  a  division  of  the  French  army  in  Plan-
On  his  return  to  his  native  country  in  Immi

be  led  a  studious  and  retired  life  in  Newboig, Be

was  the  author  of  many  pamphlets,  and  an  .

of  his  "  Exile  from  Great  Britain,  by  Order  of  the

Duke  of  Portland "  (London.'  1 .

I  I  sTIS,  William,  governor  of  Ma— ai  husetts,
b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  lu  June,  \~,~>-',;  d.  in Bos-


ton. Mass.,  6  Fob.,  1823.  Ho  was  graduate!  at
Harvard  in  1772.  -tinb.-l  medicine  under  l»r.
Joseph  Warren,  and  entered  ihc  Revolutionary

army  as  n  n-guneiilnl  SargSOU,  OSTVinfl  throughout
the  war  in  that  capacity,  and  slso  M  hospital  >ur-

■eon. Por  son  was  -talumed •■|.|««ito

West  Point,  at  the  boossof  Ool  Beverly  ItohiiiMon,
where AlBOld had hi-  head. marten*.  ' After
do-.,  of  the  war  he  practised  hi-  ptofssslon  m  I

ton.  and  was  a  surgeon m tl xpsditioa agnm-t

the  in-urgent-  in  Shav-'-  rcMlnni  in  17*'
From  17MM  till  17!>4  fie  was  a  ineinUr  of  the
Massachu-ett-  logi-lature.  and  was  for  two  years
councillor  under  Oov.  Sullivan.  In  1n<)1  -'5  he  was
a  representative  in  congress,  having  Ix-eti  chosen  as
a  Democrat,  and  in  1807  was  appointed  secretary  of
war.  which  office  he  retained  till  HI  Jan..  \H\'.i.  '  In
1SU  In-  wa- appointed  mini-ter  to Holland,  win-re

he  remained  till  imim. After  hi-  retnrn  to  the

1'nited  States  he  was  again  elected  to  congress  to
fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  from  1889  til]  1N£1,  when
he  was  chosen  governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  held
that  office  till  his  death.  The  degree  of  Id,.  I),  was
conferred  on  him  by  Harvard  in  1*2:1. ---His  nephew,
George,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mas-..  20  Oct.,  17WI;
d.  in  New  Orleans,  I>a.,  2'A  Dec.,  1858,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  lKl.r>.  He  became  private  ■
tary  to  his  uncle,  Gov.  Eustis.  then  minister  to  the
Hague,  where  be  began  his  legal  stinlns.  He  went
to  New  Orleans  in  1817,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
then'  in  1888.  and  served  several  terms  in  the  state
legislature.  He  was  afterward  secretary  of  t  he  state,
and.  as  a  commissioner  of  the  boanl  of  curn-ncy,
instituted  reforms  that  gave  stability  to  tin-  cur-
rency of  the  state.  He  was  also  attorney-general
of  Louisiana,  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  con-
vention of  1845,  and  chief-justice  of  the  supreme

COUrt  till  1852.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL,  I).
from  Harvard  in  1888. — Another  nephew.  Abra-
ham, soldier,  l).  in  Petersburg,  Va..  98  March,  1 71-'; ;
d.  In  Portland,  Mc.  *J7  June.  1K4:{,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1804,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his
relative.  Chief-Justice  Barker,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1K07.  and  began  practice  in  Boston.  In  lmw
he  entered  the  army  as  captain  of  artillery,  and  U-
caiue  major  in  1810.  During  the  war  Of  1N12  he
served  with  distinction, and  commanded  a  regiment
in  the  capture  of  York,  Upper  Canada,  in  ini:{.
He  was  braretted  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious
services  in  1818,  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
4th  artillery  in  1888,  brigadier-general  in  l km.  and
a  few  months  later  colonel  of  the  1-t  artillery. —
George's  son,  George,  oongn'ssman.  b.  in  New
Orleans.  I.a..  98  Sept..  1898;  d.  in  Cannes.  France,
18  Man  h.  1879,  «ne  educated  at  Jefferson  ool
I.  ..  and  at  llarvanl  law-ecbooL  He  WM  sleeted
to  Congress  as  an  American,  and  served  from  1855

till  1888. He  went  to  Prance  m  secretary  of  the

Confederate  legation,  and  n'lnaineil  then-  after  the
civil  war.  During  the  Franco-Prussian  war  he  vol-
untarily gave  his  scrvi.es  to  the  I'.  S.  legation  in
Pari-.— Another  son,  James  Kiddle,  ssnator,  l>.  in
New  <  Means,  27  Aug..  1XM.  He  received  a  classical
education,  was  graduated  at  llarvanl  law-school  in

is;,;,  admitted  t<>  the  i>ar  in  ikthj,  and  practised  in

New  Orleans. When the  civil  war  U-gan he  en-

tarad  the  Confederate  army,  and,  after  one  year's

service  as  judge-advocate  on  the  -tall  of  Sen.  Ma-

|ruder,  wm  tnaafarrad  t<>  the  staff  of  Gen.  Joseph

Johnston,  with  whom  he  BBrred  till  the  OMM  of  the
war.  He  then  lOSUmsd  practice  in  New  Orleans,
was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislatun>  prior  to
the  reconstruction  acts,  and  was  one  of  the  com-
mittee sent  to  Washington  to  confer  with  Pn*sident
Johnson  on  fmiisfains  affairs. He  OBJ  ■  Bjsashff


380


EVANS


EVANS


of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1872,  and
was  elected  a  inemU'r  of  the  state  senate  for  four
years  in  1874.  He  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Democrat  in  January,  1876,  to  fill  the  vacancy
which,  it  was  claimed,  existed  by  failure  of  the
senate  to  give  the  seat  to  P.  B.  S.  Pinchback,  who
had  been  elected  in  1873.  Only  three  Republicans
took  part  in  the  election,  on  the  ground  that  no
vacancy  existed,  and  Mr.  Eustis  was  not  given  his
seat  till  late  in  1877,  serving  till  1879.  He  then
became  professor  of  civil  law  in  the  University  of
Louisiana,  but  in  1884  was  again  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  for  the  full  term  of  six  years. — Abra-
ham's son,  Henry  Lawrence,  engineer,  b.  at  Fort
Independence,  Boston.  Msm,  1  Feb.,  1819;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1885,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1838,  and  in  that  year  was  appointed
to  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated at  the  head  of  his  class  in  1842.  He  was  then
assigned  to  the  engineer  corps,  and  ordered  to
Washington  as  assistant  to  the  chief  engineer.  He
assisted  in  the  construction  of  Fort  Warren  and
Lovell's  island  sea-wall,  in  Boston  harbor,  in
1843-'5,  and  during  the  following  two  years  was
connected  with  engineering  operations  in  Newport
harbor.  In  1847  he  was  made  the  principal  assist-
ant professor  of  engineering  at  West  Point,  but
resigned  in  1849  in  order  to  become  professor  of
engineering  in  Harvard,  and  organized  that  de-
partment in  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  there,
and  held  this  office  until  his  death.  He  was  dean
of  the  scientific  faculty  from  1871  till  1885.  In
the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of  the  10th  Massachu-
setts volunteers,  and  served  at  Williamsport,
Fredericksburg.  Marye  Heights,  Salem,  Gettys-
burg, Rappahannock  Station,  Mine  Run,  Wilder-
ness, Spottsvlvania,  Cold  Harbor,  and  many  minor
actions.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  12  Sept.,  1863,  and  resigned  on  27
June,  1864,  owing  to  impaired  health.  He  returned
to  his  college  duties  in  Cambridge  in  1864.  He  was
a  member  of  various  learned  societies,  to  whose
transactions  he  contributed  papers,  and  also  wrote
reports  and  technical  articles.

EVANS,  Anthony  Walton  White,  civil  engi-
neer, b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  31  Oct.,  1817 ;  d.
in  New  Vork  city,  28  Nov.,  1886.  He  received  his
earlv  education  in  New  Jersey,  and  then  studied
civil  engineering  at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  in-
stitute in  Troy.  His  first  professional  employment
was  on  the  enlargement  of  the  Erie  canal,  where
he  served  principally  on  the  eastern  division.  He
was  made  assistant  on  the  survey  and  construction
of  the  New  York  and  Harlem  railway  in  1845,  and
for  five  years  was  resident  engineer  of  two  divisions
of  this  work.  He  then  accompanied  Allan  Camp-
bell to  Chili,  and  became  his  principal  assistant  in
the  construction  of  the  Capiapo  railroad.  Subse-
quently he  entered  the  employ  of  the  Chilian  gov-
ernment as  chief  engineer  in  the  construction  of
one  of  its  railroads,  and  still  later  was  appointed
chief  engineer  of  the  Arica  and  Tacua  railway  com-
pany in  Peru.  After  a  brief  visit  to  the  United
States,  he  returned  to  Chili,  and  became  chief  en-
gineer on  several  railroads  then  in  course  of  build-
ing under  the  direction  of  the  government.  On
the  completion  of  these  he  came  back  to  the  United
States  and  settled  in  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  resum-
ing his  profession  as  a  consulting  engineer,  and
acting  as  purchasing  agent  of  rolling-stock  and
other  railway  materials  for  various  government!
and  companies  of  South  and  Central  America,  and
the  islands  of  the  South  sea,  Mr.  Evans  took  an
active  interest  in  the  matter  of  a  ship-canal  1m--
tween  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans,  and  favored


the  San  Bias  route.  I  le  was  a  fellow  of  the  A meri-
can  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  other  sociel
both  in  the  United  States  and  England,  to  whose
proceedings  he  contributed.  In  addition  to  the
foregoing,  he  wrote  occasionally  for  magazines,  and
furnished  reports  on  the  "  Preservation  of  Timber***
-  Railway  Gauges  for  the  British  Colonies,"  and
similar  subjects,  to  different  governments  of  the
British  colonies.  Bv  virtue  of  his  descent  from
Gen,  Anthony  W.  White,  he  was  a  member  of  tin-
Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  and  he  prepared  for  this
organization  an  illustrated  memoir  of  Kosciusko,
which  was  printed  privately  (New  York,  188

KVANS.  Augusta  June,  author,  b.  in  Colum-
bus, Ga.,  8  May,  1835.  When  a  child  she  removed
with  her  father  to  Texas,  residing  in  San  Antonio
from  1847  till  1849,  when  the  family  settled  in  Mo-
bile, Ala.  She  was  educated  almost  entirely  by  her
mother.  While  her  parents  lived  in  the  frontier
town  of  San  Antonio  the  Mexican  war  was  in  prog-
ress, and  that  town  was  a  place  of  rendezvous  for
the  soldiers  sent  out  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Taylor,
She  afterward  entered  a  school  in  Mobile,  but  deli-
cate health  compelled  her  to  leave  it.  During  the
civil  war  Miss  Evans  was  an  active,  zealous  sympa-
thizer with  the  south,  and  a  benefactor  to  the  sol-
diers that  were  stationed  near  her  country  home.
An  encampment  a  short  distance  from  her  residence
was  named  in  her  honor,  ''Camp  Beulah,"  and
there  she  was  a  constant  visitor  among  the  sick
and  the  dving.  Miss  Evans  married  in  1868  L.  M.
Wilson,  of  Mobde.  Her  novels  have  become  widely
popular.  She  is  the  author  of  "  Inez,  a  Tale  of  the
Alamo,"  anonymous  (New  York,  1856);  "  Beulah,"
the  novel  that  established  her  reputation  (1859);
"  Macaria  "  (Richmond,  1863) ;  "  St.  Elmo  "  (New
York,  1866);  "Vashti"  (1869);  "Infelice"  (1875);
and  "  At  the  Mercy  of  Tiberius  "  (1887).

EVANS,  Caleb,  English  clergyman,  b.  in  Bris-
tol, England,  in  1737;  d.  in  1791."  He  was  a  Bap-
tist clergyman,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
Dr.  Evans  was  an  advocate  of  American  indepen-
dence, and  published  '*  A  Letter  to  Rev.  John  Wes-
ley," under  the  signature  "  Americanus,"  on  his
" Calm  Address  to  the  American  Colonies"  (Lon-
don, 1775),  and  a  "  Replv  to  Rev.  Mr.  Fletcher's
Vindication  of  Wesley'*  (Bristol.  1776).

EVANS,  David  Reid,  lawyer,  b.  in  Westmin-
ster, England,  20  Feb..  1769 ;  d.  near  Winn's  Bridge,
Fairfield  district,  S.  C,  8  March,  1843.  He  came
to  South  Carolina  with  his  father  in  1784,  was
educated  at  Mount  Zion  college,  studied  law.  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1796.  In  1800  he  acted
as  second  to  Thomas  Baker  in  a  duel  with  Daniel
Brown,  in  which  both  the  principals  were  killed.
He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  180O-'4,  was
solicitor  of  the  middle  judicial  circuit  in  1804-'ll,
and  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  in  1813-'5,  and  declining  a  renomination
on  account  of  failing  health.  He  was  in  the  state
senate  in  1818  and  1822,  was  first  president  of  the
Fairfield  Bible  society,  and  a  ruling  elder  in  the
Presbyterian  church  for  thirty  years.  He  be-
queathed $8,000  to  benevolent  societies.

EVANS,  De  Scott,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Wayne
co.,  Ind.,  28  March,  1847.  He  was  at  Miami  uni-
versity, Oxford,  Ohio,  in  1863-'5.  studied  art  by
himself,  and  opened  a  studio  in  Cleveland.  Ohio.
in  1874,  giving  his  attention  to  portrait-painting.
After  studying  under  Bouguereau  in  Paris,  in
1877-8.  he  returned  to  Cleveland,  and  became  in-
structor and  co-director  in  the  Academy  of  fine  arts
there.  He  is  specially  skilful  in  painting  draperies.
His  genre  pictures  include  M  The  First  Snowfall. "
M Grandma s  Visitors,"  "  Day  before  the  Wedding,"


i:v  tNS


EVANS


881


and  -The  Flirtati-.n.'" BikMMll  to  exhibition*

of  tli.'  National  academy in New  V..rk  «-it  v  "  Tin-

Old  Clock  ning"

mi. I  "Wading  in  the  Brook "(1888); "Birthday

I"  an. I  '•  Fun  at  tin-  Studio"  ( 1884) :  ••  After  the

:.r"ainl  "Christmas

Morning  Beta  boh  (1887) encaged  on  »

picture  «>f  the  Qarfleld  family,  entitled  "Winter

ning  at  Lawnfleid,"  to  »«•  placed  in  tin-  reosp-

tion -r.'.iin  .»f  tin-  Qarfleld  monument  at  Cleveland.

I  \  ins Edward  Payeoa,  scholar,  i>.  In  Rem-

sen.  N.  ">  ..  s  De<  .  iv;;- His  father  was  a  Welsh

byterian clergyman. Edward removed to

higan  in  ls"><>.  and  was  graduated at  tin-  state

university  in 1854. lie  tuuirht in  an  academy  in

Bernando, Miss.,  in ix">,  mid  was  professor  in

OarroU  ooUege,  Waukesha,  Wis.,  in  l856-*7. Aft.r

■  .JitiiT  tin- years  fn-in  1857  till  1800  in  travel
and  studs  abroad,  he  became  in  IHfll  professor  of
ajodern  languages  in  Michigan  uBlfwaity,  l»ut  ie>

•  <l  in  1870  and  went  abroad,  where  he  has  since
.  engaged  in  literary  work. Since  1K84  he  has

been  oonneoted  with  the  •*  Allgemcine  Zeitung,"  <>f
.Munich,  Bavaria,  and  has  contributed  to  it  many
articles  on  the  literary,  artistic,  and  intellectual
life  of  the  United  States.  Prof.  Evans  has  made
a  specialty  of  oriental  languages.  Besides  many
articles  in  reviews  and  magazines,  he  has  published
'Al.riss  der  deutschen  Literaturgeschichte  "  (New
York,  1809)  and  a  "  Progressive  German  Header"
(1H?0),  and  has  translated  Stahr's  "  Life  and  Works
of  Eessing."  with  an  introduction  (2  vols..  Boston,
1800),  and  Ox  literal's  "  First  Historical  Transforma-
tions of  Christianity  "  (18(57).  He  has  in  preparation
iJ7)  a  work  on  "  Animal  Symbolism  in  Art  and
literature," and  a  "History  of*  Herman  Literature."
to  be  completed  in  five  volumes,  two  of  which  are
already  written,  though  not  published.—  His  wife,
Elizabeth  Edson  (wibson,  author,  b.  in  Newport,
N.  H.,  8  March,  1833,  was  educated  at  a  high  school
for  young  ladies  in  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  and  has  done
some  work  as  an  artist.  She  has  contributed  essays
and  short  stories  to  magazines,  and  has  published
"The  Abuse  of  Maternity"  (Philadelphia,  1875),
and  "  Laura,  an  American  (Jirl."  a  novel  (1884).

EVANS,  Elizabeth  Hewlings,  poet,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1818;  d.  in  Amelia  county.  Va.,  in
..  She  was  a  daughter  of  William  S.  Stockton,
of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1839  married  Dr.  M.  F.  T.
Evans,  of  Amelia  county,  Va.  Mrs.  Evans  con-
tributed poems  to  various  periodicals,  and  was
widely  known to the  public. A  volume  of  her

?«ins,  with a preface by  her  brother,  the  Rev.
honias  11.  Stockton,  was  published  shortly  before
her  death  (Philadelphia,  1851).

EVANS,  Evan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wales;  d.  In
Harford  county,  Md..  in  October,  1721.  He  was
educat.-d  in  England,  entered  the  ministry  of  the
established  church,  and,  on  the  grant  of  a  royal
bounty  of  680  to  Christ  church,  Philadelphia,  was
appointed  its  second  rector  in  1700  by  I>r.  OoSBp-
ton.  lord-bishop  of  London.  Be  at  once  hsoama  a
leader,  and  had  such  power  that  many  visiting
Philadelphia  were  deeply  impressed  by  his  preach-
ing, and  formed  congregations  when  they  returned
to  their  homes.  Ili>  duties,  not  the  least  of  which
was  his  work  among  young  men  over  whom  he  exer-
cised great  influence,  were  thereby  much  increased,  j
In  risning  these  congregations  he  often  travelled
fifty  ..r  sixty miles,  through Pennsylvania,  West

•  y,  and  Delaware.  The  chief  of  them  were
Radnor  and  Oxford,  and  his  church  at  the  former
place,  where  there  was  a  colony  of  Episcojialians
Ir.-in  Radnorshire,  Wales,  i->  represented  in  the
aeoompanying  illustration. He  went t<>  England


in  1709  on  private  busincm,  and  urged  that  a
bishop  should  !*•  tent  to  the  colonies,  and  on  bin
return  in  1701*  brought  the  communion  ncrvice
presented  bv  t^m  en  Anne  t<>  Christ  church.  He
visited  England  ajrain  in  1711  "Oi  MMSS  family
concern-."  and  while  there  BJOSlrsd  the  degree  of


*t^O


D.  D.  from  one  of  the  universities,  and  was  ap-
pointed missionary  at  Oxford  and  Radnor,  in  adoi-
dition  to  Christ  church.  Having  ban  presented
to  St.  CeorL'f's  parish,  Harford  co.,by  the  governor
of  Maryland,  he  resigned  his  former  charge  on  If
1-Vb..  171H.  While  on  a  visit  shortly  afterward,  he
was  seized  with  an  apoplectic  fit  in  the  pulpit  of
Christ  church  on  Sunday,  and  died  on  the  fol-
lowing Wednesday.  Dunng  his  ministry  he  bap-
tized 800  persons,  about  500  of  whom  had  be-
longed to  the  society  of  Friends,  whose  memU-rs
flocked  to  hear  him  in  great  numltcrs.

EVANS,  Eran  William,  scholar,  b.  near  Swan-
sea, Wales,  in  1887;  d.  in  Ithaca.  N.  Y.,'>>2  May.  1h74.
He  came  to  this  country  with  his  parents  when  a
child,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1851.  After
studying  theology  in  New  Haven  for  a  year  ha  l»e-
came  principal  of  Delaware  institute,  Franklin.
N.  Y.,  and  in  1855-'7  was  a  tutor  in  Yale,  accept-
ing in  the  latter  year  the  chair  of  natural  philoso-
phy and  astronomy  in  Marietta  college,  Ohio,
where  he  remained  until  1804.  He  was  then  occu-
pied for  three  years  as  a  mining  engineer,  s|>ent
one  year  in  European  travel,  and  on  the  founda-
tion'of  Cornell  university  was  the  first  profeesor
appointed,  occupying  the  chair  of  mathematics
there  till  18?2.  when  he  resigned  <>n  account  of
failing  health.  Prof.  Evans  wa-s  regarded  as  the
Ix-st  Celtic  scholar  in  the  I'nitcd  States.

EVANS,  (ieorge,  senator,  b.  in  Hallowell.  Me..
12  Jan..  175*7;  d.  in  Portland.  Me..  5  April.  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1818.  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  la  l*ls.  He  began
to  practise  at  Gardiner,  but  afterward  ramntatj  t"

Hallowell.  ami attained eminence as  a  criminal

lawyer. Be  was  ■  member  of  the  legislature  in

1825-'8,  and  was  speaker  of  the  house  in  his  last
year.  He  was  then  ehossfl  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
imd  served  .-ix  terms,  from  1821*  till  1841.  when  he
was  elected  to  the  l'.  S.  senate,  and  -crved  in
lH41-'7.  During  his  twelve  years  in  the  house,
although  bis  party  was  in  the  minority,  he  exerted
a  commanding  influence.  In  the  senate  he  was
chairman  of  the  committee  on  finance.  Henry
( 'la\  i-  reported  to  have  said  that  Mr.  Evans  knew
more  al>out  the  tariff  than  any  other  public  man  in
the  c. mntry.  His  siicecheson  llfNUl— I  and  Qoa>
inomical  quastfejei  were  very  effective.
lie  was  a  candidate  for  the  vice-presidential  nomi-
nation when  Ban.  Tavlor  was  nominated  for  presi-
dent, and  after  the  hitter's  accession  m  1848  was
appointed  chairman  of  the Mexican  claims  oom-


889


EVANS


KVAXS


mission.  He  was  attorney-general  of  Maine  in  1853,
1854,  and  1 8.5ft,  and  was  for  t went  \  -I w<>  years  a
UlHtea  of  Bowdoin  college,  which  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  I>.  in  1847.

KVAXS,  Sir  George  I)e  Lacy,  British  soldier,
b.  in  Moig,  Ireland,  in  1787:  d.  in  London.  9  Jan..
1870.  He  entered  the  British  army  in  1807.  served
in  India  and  Spain,  and  in  1814,  when  brevet  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  5th  West  India  regiment,  was
ordered  to  this  country.  He  was  at  the  battle  of
Bladensburg  on  24  Aug.,  where  two  horses  were
killed  under  him,  and  led  the  small  force  that  en-
tered Washington  and  destroyed  the  public  build-
ings there.  He  also  took  part  in  Ross  s  expedition
against  Baltimore  in  September,  and  was  near  that
officer  when  he  fell.  At  Xew  Orleans  he  was  the
only  landsman  that  volunteered  to  accompany  the
expedition  against  the  American  sloops  defending
Lake  Borgne.  He  was  wounded  l>efore  New
Orleans  on  23  Dec.,  1814,  and  again  on  8  Jan.,
1815,  and  was  sent  home.  He  recovered  just  in
time  to  join  Wellington  at  Quatre  Bras,  where
again  two  horses  were  killed  under  him.  He  com-
manded in  Spain,  in  1835-'7,  the  British  auxiliary
legion,  and  after  1846  was  member  of  parliament
from  Westminster.  He  served  as  a  lieutenant-
general  in  the  Crimean  war,  commanding  the  2d
division  of  the  English  army,  and  was  distinguished
at  the  Alma  and  at  Inkerman,  receiving  for  his
services  the  thanks  of  parliament  and  the  grand
cross  of  the  bath.  He  published  "  Facts  relating
to  the  Capture  of  Washington  "  (London,  1829).

EVANS,  George  Henry,  reformer,  b.  in  Brom-
yard, Herefordshire,  England,  25  March,  1805;  d.
in  Granville,  N.  J.,  2  Feb.,  1855.  He  came  to  this
country  with  his  father  and  brother  in  1820,  and
was  one  of  the  earliest  land-reformers  in  the
United  States,  adopting  views  similar  to  those
since  held  by  Henry  George.  Among  the  reforms
for  which  he  labored  were  the  destruction  of  the  U.
S.  bank,  inalienable  homesteads,  the  transportation
of  the  mails  on  Sundays,  a  limitation  in  the  right
of  any  person  to  hold  lands,  general  bankrupt  laws,
and  laborers'  liens.  He  also  favored  the  abolition
of  slavery,  of  laws  for  collecting  debts,  and  of  im-
prisonment for  debt.  He  edited  and  published
"The  Man,"  at  Ithaca,  N.  Y„  about  1822;  the
"  Working  Man's  Advocate,"  in  New  York,  in
1830 ;  "  The  Daily  Sentinel,"  in  1837 ;  and  "  Yonng
America,"  in  New  York  and  Iiahway,  N.  J.,  in
1853. — His  brother,  Frederick  William,  reform-
er, b.  in  Bromyard,  England,  9  June,  1808,  spent
his  boyhood  on  a  farm  of  500  acres  at  Chadwick
Hall,  near  Worcester.  He  says :  "  My  maps  were
the  landscape  of  hills  and  valleys ;  my  books,  trees
and  plants ;  my  teachers,  the  servants,  and  their
masters  and  mistresses.  I  graduated,  and  emi-
grated to  America  in  1820.  Then  I  taught  myself
how  to  read,  and  began  the  study  of  history.  I
learned  how  to  think,  observe,  and  reason  upon
theology  and  the  social  and  governmental  organi-
zation of  mankind,  until  I  became  a  materialist,  a
socialist,  a  land-reformer,  and  an  infidel  to  all  the
popular  church  and  state  religions  of  Christen-
dom." On  his  arrival  in  New  York  his  father  ap-
prenticed him  to  a  hatter,  and  it  was  in  the  inter-
vals of  his  work  that  he  thus  educated  himself.
After  travelling  on  foot  to  the  west,  then  on  rafts
and  boats  down  the  Mississippi  to  New  Orleans,  he
made  a  short  visit  to  England,  and  on  his  return

3'oined  the  Shakers  at  Mount  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  on  3
ii in-.  1830.  He  was  appointed  assistant  elder  in
the  "  North  Family  "  in  1838,  and  in  1858  became
first  elder  of  three  "  families."  He  has  invented  a
simple  method  of  warming  the  rooms  of  the  com-


munity uniformly.  Klilcr  Evans  lias  Yctim-d  fre-
i|uently,  has  contributed  to  seventy  different  pub*
lieations.  and  in  1873-7)  edited  and  published,  with
Antoinette  Doolittle,  a  periodical  entitled  "  The
Shaker  and  Shakeress."  His  teachings  haveootti
siderablv  modified  the  dogmas  of  his  sect.  He
has  published  "  Compendium  of  Principles,  Rules.
Doctrines,  and  Government  of  Shaken,'  with  biog-
raphies of  Ann  Lee  and  others  "  (Xew  York,  1859) ;
"  Autobiography  of  a  Shaker  "and  "Tests  of  Di-
vine Revelation"  (18(5!));  "Shaker  Communism"
(London,  1871) ;  "  Religious  Communism."  a  lect-
ure delivered  in  St.  George's  hall.  London  (1872);
and  "Second  Appearing  of  Christ"  (lv

EVANS,  Henry  0.,  journalist,  b.  in  1812;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,  1869.  He  was  co-editor
and  proprietor  of  the  New  York  "  Evening  Mirror"
almost  from  the  beginning  of  its  career  to  its  close,
and  was  one  of  the  best  writers  for  the  daily  press
in  the  city.  About  fifteen  years  previous  to  his
death  the  publication  of  the  "  Mirror"  was  discon-
tinued, and  he  engaged  in  mercantile  business,  in
which  he  maintained  a  high  reputation.

EVANS,  Hugh  Davey,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  26  April,  1792;  d.  there,  16  July,  1868.  He
left  school  at  thirteen  years  of  age  on  account  of
his  health,  and  in  1810  began  to  study  law.  He
was  admitted  to  practice  in  Baltimore  on  19  April,
1815,  took  rank,  while  yet  a  young  man.  with
Pinckney,  Wirt,  Rcverdy  Johnson,  and  the  other
leaders  of  the  Maryland  bar,  and  afterward  at-
tained eminence  as  a  constitutional  lawyer.  He
was  prominent  for  many  years  in  the  councils  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1843-'56
edited  "  The  True  Catholic,"  a  high-church  peri-
odical. He  was  also  connected  with  the  Philadel-
phia "  Register "  in  1853,  contributing  to  it
"Thoughts  on  Current  Events,"  with  the  New
York  "  Churchman  "  in  1854-'6,  and  the  New  York
"Church  Monthly"  in  1857-'8,  and  in  the  two
years  last  mentioned  edited  the  "  Monitor,"  a
weekly  paper  published  in  Baltimore.  He  was  a
prominent  member  of  the  Maryland  colonization
society,  and  prepared  a  code  of  laws  for  the  Mary-
land colony  in  Liberia  (Baltimore,  1847).  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  St.  James's  col-
lege, Maryland,  in  1852,  and  from  that  time  till
1864  was  lecturer  there  on  civil  and  ecclesiastical
law.  During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Evans  was  an
earnest  supporter  of  the  National  government,  and
in  1861  wrote  to  the  London  "  Guardian  "  a  letter
in  defence  of  the  arrests  made  in  Baltimore  in  that
year,  which  attracted  much  attention.  His  pub-
lished works  include  "  Essay  on  Pleading  "  (Balti-
more, 1827) ;  "  Maryland  Common-Law  Practice  "
(1837 ;  revised  ed„  1867) ;  "  Essays  to  prove  the
Validity  of  Anglican  Ordinations,"  in  reply  to
Archbishop  Kenrick's  book  on  the  subject  (Balti-
more, 1844;  second  series,  2  vols.,  1851);  "The-
ophilus  Americanus."  an  American  adaptation,  with
additions,  of  Canon  Wordsworth's  "Theophilus
Anglicanus"  (Philadelphia,  1851);  "  Essay  on  the
Episcopate  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in
the  United  States"  (1855):  and  several  pamphlets.
After  his  death  appeared  his  "Treatise  on  the
Christian  Doctrine  of  Marriage,"  which  he  con-
sidered his  best  work  (New  York,  1870),  and  a  me-
moir by  Rev.  Hall  Harrison,  founded  on  recol-
lections written  by  himself  (Hartford,  Conn.,  1870).

EVANS,  H.  Sugden,  Canadian  chemist,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
the  School  of  pharmacy  in  1848,  and  then  re-
moved to  Liverpool,  where  he  took  charge  of  the
laboratories  of  his  father,  a  wholesale  druggist.
In  1849  he  read  before  the  Londen  chemical  so-


i:\  \s>


i:\  kN8


B8B


oiety  a  paper  on  "  eliminates  of  Capper/*  and  was
elected  «>no  of  its  fellows. Be  afterward  Invi

feted  the  adulteration  <>f  drugs  and  food,  and  for
is  microscopical ImIm ir>* in this connection

madee  Hallow  of  tin-  Royal  mioroaoopfoaJ  km
ii i  was  also,  in  1866.  preaJderd  of  the  Pharauv
iiutical  society  of  (mat)  Britain.  In  lmwi  at
avtatad  tin-  vholaaak  drag  baataaai  in  Miwiliaal
Canada,  bat  eontinaad  to  live  la  Kngland  till
He  retired  from  active  oonneotioa  with  the
baatnees  in  1884,  and  Iwcame  chief  aaalyal  for  the
Dominion  government.

l\  \Ns  Jeha,  colonial  governor  of  Paaaaylpa*
nia.  h.  abool  1678,  He  was  of  Welah  origin,  and
in  February.  l?i»4,  banMM  dcputv-^overnor  «>f  the
ptoviaoa,  under  the  propriator,  William  Pann. He

was  not  a  (Quaker,  mill  wits  d(iiil)t less  laleoted  MM
of  deference  t<>  the  court  party,  who  did  BOl  be-
Have  in  the  peace  principles  of  that  sect.  Hi.s  ad-
aduiat ration  wai  marked  by  oaanasi  with the

assemltlv,  ami  especially  with  the  s|>eaker  of  the
honaa, David Lloyd, who headed the popular

Eari y.  Dewagarding  the  oonviotkaai  <>f  the  tim-
ers, Kvans.  for  the  first  time  in  tin-  history  of  the
colony,  made  a  public  call  for  troops,  with  the  de-
sire of  aadating  the  other  colonies  against  the
French  and  Indians.  The  call  met  with  no  re-
s|H.nx-.  whereupon  the  governor,  resorting  to  a
discreditable  ruse,  arranged  to  have  a  messenger
ride  into  Philadelphia  on  the  day  of  the  annual
fair, announcing,  with  apparent  consternation,  that
the  French  had  arrived  in  the  Delaware  and  were
marching  on  the  city.  Kvans  then  node  through
the  street  with  drawn  sword,  entreating  the  people
to  arm.  and  for  a  time  great  excitement  prevailed.
Valuables  were  hastily  thrown  into  wells,  and
many  people  fled  to  the  forests  ;  but  the  Quakers,
on  whom  Kvans  had  wished  to  make  an  impres-
sion, continued  quietly  at  their  devotions,  as  it
was  the  day  for  their  "  weekly  meeting."  The  gov-
ernor also  built  a  fort  at  Newcastle,  and  unlawful-
ly demanded  tribute  of  all  vessels  passing  up  the
river.  Kvans  had  a  good  deal  of  learning  and  re-
finement, but  his  habits  were  unsuiteu  to  the
Quaker  eit\.  Watson,  in  his  "  Annals  of  Phila-
delphia," says  that  in  1702  "Solomon  Cresson,  go-
mg  his  round  at  night,  entered  a  tavern  to  sup-
press a  riotous  assembly,  and  found  there  John
Kvans.  Ban.  the  governor,  who  fell  to  beating
son."  Kvans  was  Anally  recalled  in  February,
17<>n.  and  was  succeeded  by  Col.  Charles  Gookin."

EVANS,  John,  geologist,  b,  in  Portsmouth,
N.  II..  14  Feb..  181S;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  13
April,  18(51.  His  father,  Richard  Kvans,  was  a
judge  of  the  New  Hampshire  supreme  court.  After
taking  his  degree  at  St.  Louis  medical  college,  he
served,  under  Dr.  David  Dale  Owen,  on  the  geo-
logical surveys  of  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  Iowa,  and
Nebraska.  He  first  attracted  notice,  both  here
and  abroad,  by  his  discovery  and  description  of  a
large  deposit  of  fossil  Ixmes  of  extinct  species  in
the  "Mauvaises  Terres"  of  Nebraska.  He  was
afterward  commissioned  by  the  U.  S.  government
to  carry  on  the  geological  surveys  of  Washington
ami  Oregon  territories,  and  was  subsequent  1  j
Ologist  to  the  ChiriqnJ  commission.  At  tile  time
of  his  death  he  was  pre|>aring  an  elaborate  report
on  his  survey!  of  Washington  and  Oregon.

EVANS,  Josiah  James,  jurist,  b.  in  htaiibor*
aagh  district,  s.  c.  87  Nov-  1186;  d.  in  Wash-
ii.  I).  ('..»;  May,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at
S.uth  Carolina  college  in  1808,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1*11.  and  gained  a  high
reputation  as  a  lawyer.  He  was  ohoaaa  to  the
legislature  from  Marlborough  district  in  1811


and  in  1816  from Darlington  di-trict.  whither  he

had  removed Mi that year. He  w;i

for  the northern circuit in 1*1  7-'29.  wee  el<

-it  judge  ]■  i,  on  the  abolition  Of  the

court  of  appeals  in  I  une  a  judge  not  only

in  the  lir>t  but  also  mi  the  last  resort.  He  was
•lasted  to  the  ['.  B.  senate  as  a  stat.
crat  in  1H.V.',  ami  served  from  1M.W  till  his  sudden
death  from  heart  disease.  The  highest  tributes
were  paid  to  his  character  by  lx>th  political  friends
and  opponents.  In  1856  Judge  Kvans  made  a
speech  in  the  senate  in  vindication  of  S.uth  Caro-
lina, in  reply  to  Charles  Sumner.

I  \  \N*.  Lewis,  geographer,  b.  aboot  1700;  d.
in  June.  1750.  During  an  active  career  as  a  sur-
veyor he  collected  materials  for  a  map  of  the  Brit-
ish colonics  in  North  America,  and  in  1741*  pab-
lished  one  of  the  middle  colonies,  embracing  New-
York,  New  Jersey,  Delaware,  and  the  adjacent  In-
dian country.  A  seoond  edition  ■lipeaiwl  in  i
containing  also  Virginia,  .Maryland,  Pennsylvania,
and  a  part  of  New  Kngland.  The  map  was  repub-
lished in  1776,  with  large  additions,  by  Gov,  Pow-
nall.  Kvans  also  published  " Qeographloal,  His-
torical, Political,  Philosophical,  and  Mechanical  l\s-
mjt  "  ft  series.  Philadelphia,  1786;  London.  1756).
In  the  last  series  he  replied  to  some  strictures  on  a
statement  questioning  the  English  title  to  Fort
Frontenac,  which  had  appeared  in  the  first.

EVANS,  Nathan  (ieorgP.  soldier,  b.  in  Ma-
rion, S.  C,  6  Feb.,  1824;  d.  in  Midway,  Ala.,
30  Nov.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  a
military  academy  in  1*4*,  assigned  to  the  1st  dra-

foons,  and  served  on  frontier  duty  and  against  the
ndians.  He  was  made  1st  lieutenant  in  the  2d
cavalry.  ;{  March,  1855;  captain,  1  May,  1856;  and
distinguished  himself  in  a  fight  with  Comanche
Indians,  1  Oct.,  1858,  killing  two  of  them  in  |x-r-
sonal  combat.  He  resigned  on  27  Feb.,  1861,  en-
tered the  Confederate  service  as  colonel,  and  com-
manded a  brigade  at  Bull  Hun.  He  was  t  hen  pro-
moted to  brigadier-gemfal,  and  commanded  the
Confederate  forces  at  Ball's  Bluff,  19  Oct..  1861.
He  also  commanded  j,,  the  actions  at  James  Island,
S.  C,  and  Kinston,  N.  C,  in  1866.  and  subx-on.  m-
lv  became  major-general.  He  led  a  division  at
Hatcher's  Bon,  and  surrendered  with  (ien.  Ijee,
In  1861  the  South  Carolina  legislature  voted  him
a  gold  medal  for  gallantry  at  Lecsburg.

EVANS,  Nathaniel,  poet.  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  H.I  une.  174:2 :  d.  in  Qloooeeter  countv,  N.  J..
29  Oct.,  1767.  After  studying  at  the  Philadelphia
academy,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  merchant,  but
afterward  entered  the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now
I'niversity  of  Pennsylvania).  He  was  not  gradu-
al ed.  but  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  \  ■
He  then  went  to  England,  was  ordained  in  the
established  church,  and  returned  in  Deceml>er,
1766,  as  a  missionary  of  the  Society  for  propagat-
ing the  gospel  in  foreign  parts.  Mr.  Kvans  pub-
lished an  edition  of  Thomas  Godfrey's  poems,  with
a  memoir  (17»>7).  After  his  death,  selections  from
his  writings,  entitled  "Poems  on  Several  Occa-
sions," with  other  pieces,  including  one  of  his  ser-
mons, wen-  published  with  a  memoir  bvhis  friend,
the  Rev.  Dr.  William  Smith  (Philadelphia,  1772>.

KVANS,  (Hirer,  inventor,  b.  in  Newport)  Del.,
in  17-V»:  d.  in  New  York  city.  81  April.  1H19.  He
was  apprenticed  to  a  wheelwright,  and  before  he
had  reached  the  age  of  manhood  the  construction
of  a  land-carriage  to  1h«  propelled  without  animal
power  began  to  <K-eupy  his  attention.  At  the  age
of  twentf-tWO  he  Invented  a  machine  for  making
card-teeth.  Two  years  later  he  entered  into  busi-
ness with  hi>  brothers,  who  were  millers,  and  in  a


384


EVANS


EVARTS


short  time  invented  the  elevator,  tin-  eoPTgyer,  the
drill,  the  Ik>|)jmt-Im)v,  and  the  descender,  the  appli-
cation of  winch  to  mills  worked  liv  water-power
efteoteda  revolution  in  tin-  maiiufnct hit  of  Hour.
In  l786-*7  he  obtained  from  tin-  legislature  of
Maryland  and  Pennsylvania  the  exclusive  right  to

Use  his  improve-
ments in  flouring
mills,  and  Mary-
land gave  him  a
similar  privilege
with  regard  to
steam  carriages.
It  was  not  till
1799  or  1800  that
he  was  able  to  set
about  the  con-
struction of  a
steam  carriage.
Finding  that  his
steam-engine  dif-
fered in  form  as
well  as  in  princi-
ple from  those  in
use,  he  secured  a
patent,  and  ,  ap-
plied it  to  mills
more  profitably
than  to  carriages,
This  was  the  first  steam-engine  constructed  on  the
high-pressure  principle ;  and  to  Evans,  who  had
conceived  the  idea  of  it  in  earlv  life,  and  in  1787
and  again  in  1794-'5  had  sent  to  England  drawings
and  specifications,  the  merit  of  the  invention  be-
longs, although  it  has  been  common  to  assign  it  to
Vivian  and  Trevithick,  who  had  had  access  to
Evans's  plans.  In  1803-4,  by  order  of  the  board
of  health  of  Philadelphia,  he  constructed  the  first
steam-dredging  machine  used  in  America.  It  con-
sisted of  a  scow,  with  a  small  engine  to  work  the
machinery  for  raising  the  mud.  The  machine,
which  he  named  the  "  Orakter  Amphibolos,"  pro-
pelled itself  on  wheels  to  the  Schuylkill,  a  distance
of  one  and  a  half  mile,  was  fitted  with  a  paddle-
wheel  in  the  stern,  and  navigated  the  river  to  its
J' unction  with  the  Delaware.  This  is  believed  to
lave  been  the  first  instance  in  America  of  the  ap-
plication of  steam-power  to  the  propelling  of  land-
carriages.  He  predicted  the  time  when  such  car-
riages would  be  propelled  on  railways  of  wood  or
iron,  and  urged  the  construction  of  a  railroad  be-
tween Philadelphia  and  New  York,  but  was  always
Erevented  by  his  limited  means  from  prosecuting
is  mechanical  experiments  to  the  extent  he  de-
sired. He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Young  Engi-
neer's Guide"  (Philadelphia,  1805;  translated  into
French,  Paris,  1821):  and  of  the  "Miller  and
Millwright's  Guide"  (Philadelphia,  1797;  Paris,
1830;  14th  ed.,  with  additions  by  Thomas  P.
Jones) ;  and  he  also  published  a  description  of  an
improved  merchant  flouring  mill,  by  C.  and  O.
Evans  (Philadelphia,  1853).

EVANS,  Thomas,  Quaker,  b.  in  Philadelphia
in  1798 :  d.  25  May,  1868.  In  1827-8  he  opposed
the  Unitarian  views  of  Elias  Hicks  in  a  series  of
able  papers  in  the  "  Friend."  In  1837  he  narrowly
escaped  shipwreck  on  a  voyage  to  Charleston,  S.  C,
and.  from  over-exertion  at  the  pumps,  his  health
was  irreparably  injured.  From  1837  till  1854  he
edited,  with  his  brother  William,  "The  Friend's
Library,"  a  collection  of  standard  religious  writ-
ings by  eminent  members  of  the  society,  in  four-
teen volumes.  He  was  the  author  of  "An  Expo-
sition of  the  Faith  of  the  Religious  Society  of  the
Friends  "  (Philadelphia,  1828).


EVANS,  Thomas  Wilthenrer.  chutist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  \t:i  Dec,  1838. Be  reoerrad  ■

common-school  education,  and.  at  the  age  of  four-
teen, entered  the  employ  of  a  silversmith,  who  was
als<>  a  maker  of  dental  appliances.  In  1M1  h,.
entered  theolliceof  Dr.  John  1).  White,  of  Phila-
delphia, with  whom  he  remained  two  ream,  mean-
while following  a  regular  course  at  the  Jafianoa
medical  college.  He  established  himself  as  ■  den-
tist in  Maryland,  ami  afterward  in  Ijancaster.  Pa.,
where  he  acquired  an  extensive  practice.  His
early  familiarity  with  metals,  and  especially  with
gold-foil,  enabled  him  to  fill  cavities,  which  up
to  that  time  had  been  considered  impracticable.
Many  teeth  that  would  otherwise  have  been  ex-
tracted were  filled  by  him,  and  he  made  an  ex-
hibition of  his  achievements  at  the  Franklin  in-
stitute in  Philadelphia.  About  1848  he  went  to
Paris,  where,  under  the  patronage  of  Napoleon
III.,  he  became  distinguished,  and  in  time  he  treat-
ed many  of  the  crowned  heads  of  Europe.  Dr.
Evans  was  active  in  the  establishment  of  the  Red
cross  society,  and  in  organizing  the  American  am-
bulance corps  that  was  sent  out  under  its  auspices
with  the  French  army  in  1870.  At  the  downfall
of  the  empire  in  September,  1870,  he  aided  the
Empress  Eugenie  to  escape,  and,  although  the  story
is  told  in  several  ways,  it  is  generally  accepted  that
the  empress,  after  leaving  the  Tuilefies,  was  taken
to  Dr.  Evans's  residence  for  refuge.  She  was  hur-
ried into  his  carriage  and  driven  beyond  the  walls
of  the  city,  while  he  held  in  front  of  her  face  an
open  newspaper,  which  he  was  apparently  reading.
Dr.  Evans  s  fortune  is  estimated  at  many  millions,
including  a  valuable  collection  of  souvenirs,  which
he  has  received  from  his  titled  patients.  He  is
the  proprietor  of  the  "American  Register,"  a
weekly  journal  issued  in  Paris,  and  has  recently
purchased  a  daily,  which  is  now  (1887)  published
in  the  English  language  in  that  city.  He  has  pub-
lished several  boolcs,  including  "  The  Memoirs  of
Heinrich  Heine"  (London,  1884).

EVANS,  William,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Cavan,
Ireland,  in  1786;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1857.
He  emigrated  to  Canada  in  1819,  and  settled  in
Montreal,  where  he  was  made  secretary  to  the  first
agricultural  society  founded  there.  In  1837  he
contributed  a  series  of  letters  upon  agriculture  to
the  "  Courier,"  which  were  published  in  pamphlet
form.  He  established  the  "  Canadian  Quarterly  "
and  the  "  Agriculturist  and  Industrial  Magazine."
In  1842  he  edited  the  "  British  American  Cultiva-
tor" in  Toronto.  When  he  returned  to  Montreal
in  the  following  year  he  founded  the  "  Canadian
Agricultural  Journal,"  of  which  he  was  editor  un-
til a  short  time  before  his  death.  He  frequently
contributed  to  the  "  Gazette,"  in  Montreal,  on  agri-
cultural  subjects,  and  in  1853  was  appointed  secre-
tary and  treasurer  of  the  board  of  agriculture  in
Lower  Canada.  He  published  "  Theory  and  Prac-
tice of  Agriculture  "  (Montreal,  1835).

EVARTS,  Jeremiah,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Sun-
derland, Vt,  3  Feb.,  1781;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
10  May,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,
and,  after  some  time  spent  in  teaching,  studied
law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806.  and  prac-
tised that  profession  in  New  Haven  for  about  four
years.  From  1810  till  1820  he  edited  the  "  Pano-
j'list."  a  religious  monthly  magazine  published  in
Boston.  In  1812  he  was  chosen  treasurer  of  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis-
sions, and  in  1820,  when  the  "  Panoplist "  was  dis-
continued  and  the  "Missionary  Herald"  was  is-
sued by  the  board  in  it-  stead,  he  took  charge  of
the  latter  periodical. He  was  chosen  correspond-


i:\  \


880


hag  mnitaij  of  tin-  bawd  in  1*21.  •»'"'  whi

office  until  his  death. He  died  while  travel-
ling for  the  l«n.  lit  <.f  his  health. Ha  wn.tr  twen-

•ur  essays  on  ti  '  the  Indiana,  ander

the  signature  of  "  Willinin Pcnn,"  uixl  also  edited

hi f  "Speeches  "i»  the  Indian  Hill."  writ-
ing the  introduction:  and  wrote  moat  <>f  there-

~  <>f  the  Ixiard  of  missions,  that of  I-
daily  being  ebla Baa  "  Memoirs of  Jeremiah
Kvarts," bv Klienezer ('. Tracv (lioston, l
— His  ioq,  \\  ill  jam Maxwell,  lawyer,  b.  in I
ton.  <">  ivi...  1818. Ha  was  prepared  for  eotlona  in
tin-  Boston Latin-school,  graduated at Yale  in

r,  ami  while  in  college,  with  four  of  hieolaae*
mates,  bi  (banded  the  "  Vale  Literary  Magazine."
Choosing the profession  of the  law,  ba studied

in  Harvard  law-
school,  anil  in  the

office of Daniel

I, on  I.  of  New  York
city,  ami  waa  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
in  New  York  in
1K41.  He  soon  es-
tablished a  repu-
tation for  learn-
ing and  acumen,
and  was  often  con-
sulted bv  older
lawyers.  In  1849-
'58  he  was  assist-
ant district  attor-
ney in  New  York
city,  and  in 1851

-  ^^-  successfully nm-
j/s^*5%i "~J»-*l  •-*%" dinted  the  proae-

cution  ot  the  Cu-
ban filibusters  con-
cerned in  the  "  Cleopatra"  expedition.  The  same
year  he  was  selected  to  argue  in  favor  of  the  con-
stitutionality of  the  Metropolitan  police  act.  In
is.%7  and  1880  he  was  retained  by  the  state  of  New
York  to  argue  the  Lemmon  slave  case  against
Charles  (('Conor,  the  counsel  for  the  state  of  Vir-
ginia, before  the  supreme  court  and  the  court  of  ap-
Kila  He  l>ecame  an  active  and  prominent  mem-
r  of  the  Republican  party,  was  chairman  of  the
York  delegation  in  the  Republican  national
convention  of  18(H),  and  proposed  the  name  of  Will-
iam H.  Seward  for  the  presidency.  In  18ol  he  and
Horace  Greeley  were  rival  candidates  for  the  U.  S.
MMfeOfabip  betON  the  New  York  legislature,  but
finally  his  name  was  withdniwn  to  enable  his  sut>-
|H»rters  to  secure  the  election  of  Ini  Harris.  In
1W>2  he  conducted  the  case  of  the  government  to
establish  in  the  supreme  court  the  right  of  the
United  States  in  the  civil  war  to  treat  captunsl
vessels  as  maritime  prizes,  according  to  the  laws
of  war.  In  1885 and  1888 he  maintained  with  suc-
cess In-fore  the  courts  the  unconstitutionality  of
state  laws  taxing  U.  S.  bottda  or  National  bank
k without the  authorization  of  congress. In

-  President  Johnson  ohose  him  as  chief  coun-
sel in  the  impeachment  trial  before  the  senate,  and
from  15  .Inly,  lstw,  till  the  end  of  President  John-
's administration,  be  filled  the  office  of  attor-

general of  the Cniteil  States. He  acted in

ounsel  for  the  United  States  1  *• fore  the

tribunal  of  arbitration  on  the  Alabama  claims  at

vii,  and  presented  the  arguments  on  which

the  decisions  favorable  to  the  I ' nit e<l  States  were

tit based. In 1878  he  was  scnioi

counsel f..r Ibnry Ward Ik her  in the  trial  of

the  suit  against  him  in  Brooklyn. For  many  ft
reputation  had  been  national,  and  he  had  been

VOL. II. — '2.')


I  engaged  in  a  Urge  DOaaharof  Bejel  involving  great
interests,  among  Iht  more  famous  of  which  were
the  Parrish  will  case  and  the  oontaal  over  the  will
of  Mrs.  Gardner,  mother  of  the  aidowof  President
Trier. His  ■arrloai  ante  often  songM  in  aaa

which  large  corporations  were,  parties,  and  I.
<  •  ived  in  nana  instances  fees  of  a'.Vi.ooo  or  800,000
<  for  an  opinion,  such  as  that  on  the  Itcnlcll  mort-
gage sipon  the  I  tost  on.  Hartford,  and  Kric  railroad.
The  firm  of  Kvarts.  Ghoata  ^  Iteainan.  of  which
he  is  senior  partner,  has  among  its  clients  many  of
the  prominent  merchants  and  bankers  of  New-
York  city.  In  1*7?  he  was  the  advocate  of  tit
publican  party  before  the  electoral  commission.
■ad  during  the  administration  of  President  II
he  was  secretary  of  state.  His  administration  of
the  state  detriment  was  marked  by  a  judicious
and  dignified  treatment  of  diplomaiic  qnaatioaa,
and  especially  by  the  introduction  of  a  higher
standanl  of  efficiency  in  the  consular  service,  and
the  publication  of  consular  mpathl  on  economic
and  commercial  conditions  in  foreign  countries.
In  1881.  after  the  conclusion  of  his  term  of  ■  I
in  the  cabinet,  he  went  to  Paris  pj  delegate  of  the
United  States  to  the  International  monetary  con-
ference. On  4  March.  1HKT>,  he  took  his  scat  in  the
U.  S.  senate  for  the  term  expiring  '.i  March.  ls'.U.
having  liecti  elected  as  a  Republican  to  succeed  Kl-
bridge  G.  Iwtpham  as  senator  from  New  York.
Mr.  Kvarts  is  known  as  a  brilliant  speaker  at  con-
vivial gatherings,  and  as  a  public  orator  of  elo-
quence and  versatility.  On  many  important  occa-
sions he  has  delivered  addresses,  several  of  which
have  Im-cii  published.  Anions  his  public  addressee
are  the  eulogy  OB  Chief -JjBatica  Chase,  at  Dart-
mouth college,  in  June.  1878;  the  Centennial  ora-
tion, in  Philadelphia,  in  1876;  and  the  apaeohaB at
the  unveiling  of  the  statues  of  William  II.  Sewanl
and  Daniel  Webster,  in  New  York,  and  of  Rar-
tholdi's  Statue  of  Liberty.

EVE,  Joseph  Adams,  physician,  b.  in  Charles-
ton county,  s.  c.,  i  Aug.,  L806, Bewaagndnatad

at  the  Siu'h  Carolina  medical  college  in  1k>n,  and
began  to  practise  in  Augusta,  (ia..  making  a  spe-
cialty of  obstetrics  anil  diseases  of  women  and
children.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  in  1888  of
the  Medical  college  of  Georgia,  and  took  the  chair
of  materia  mediea  and  thcnipeutics.  which  he
exchanged  in  lXW  for  that  of  obstetrics  ami  wom-
en's and  children's  diseases.  His  papers  OH  ma-
teria mediea  ami  gynecology  have  appeared  in  the
"Suit hern  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal.'-— His
son,  Robert  Campbell,  physician,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  15  May,  1843,  was  graduated  at  the  Medical
college  of  Virginia  in  \WM,  and.  after  practising
some  time  at  Staunton,  Ya.,  settled  in  Augusta,
and  l»ecame  professor  of  materia  mediea  and  medi-
cal jurisprudence  in  the  (ieorgia  medical  college.
He  has  written  OH  the  "  Intluence  of  the  Ovaria  in
Uterine  Disorder*,"  ••  Kpilepsy."  and  "Tonic  Prop-
erties of  Mercury  in  Minute  Doses," — Joseph
Adams's  niece,  Maria  Loll,  author,  b.  near  Augus-
ta. (ia..aU>ut  !K4S.  was  graduated  at  Grecnsliorougli
college,  (ia.,  and  after  leaving  Bohool  contributed
to  "Sott's  Magazine"  ami  other  southern  literary
journals.  In  1W7!»  she  wrote  I  prize  pejsl  entitled
"Compiered  at  Ijist."  aipteaaing  gratitude  for
northern  aid  during  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of
She  has  published  many  (hx-iiis  in  maga-
zines and  DOWBpeaeTB,  some  of  which  are  included
in  "  Woman  in  Sacred  Song" (Boston),  and  some
in  Geotga  M.  Raker's  "  Reeling  Club." — Joseph
Adams's  cousin,  Paul  KHzshnun*.  physician,  b.
near  Augusta,  (ia..  'J7  .lime,  1N<m>  ;  d.  in  Nashville,
Tetin..  :t  Nov.,  1*77,  was  graduated  at  Fnmklincol-


EVELINE


EVERETT


lege,  Ga.,  in  1826,  and  studied  in  the  office  of  Dr.
Charles  I).  Meigs  and  in  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  lie  wa-

Eraduated  in  l&Ba.  He  then  studied  three  years  in
■  union  and  Paris,  and  served  as  ambulance  sur-
geon during  the  revolution  of  1830.  and  as  a  regi-
mental surp'on  in  the  Polish  wur.  He  returned  to
the  United  States  in  November,  1831,  and  the  fol-
lowing June  was  elected  professor  of  surgery  in  the
newly  organized  Medical  college  of  Georgia.  He
remained  there  until  1849,  when  he  succeeded  Dr.
Gross  as  surgical  professor  in  the  University  of
Louisville,  but  resigned  after  the  first  course  of
lectures.  In  1850  he  became  professor  of  surgery
in  the  University  of  Nashville,  which  was  estab-
lished at  that  time.  In  1868  he  accepted  the  pro-
Emonhip  of  surgery  in  the  University  of  Missouri,
but  was  obliged  by  the  unhealthfulness  of  the  cli-
mate to  return  to  Nashville,  where  he  became  pro-
fessor of  operative  and  clinical  surgery.  In  1877
he  became  professor  of  the  principles  of  surgery
and  of  the  diseases  of  the  genito-urinary  organs  in
the  Medical  college  there.  He  was  one  of  the  best
surgeons  in  the  southwest. In  1861  he  was  ap-

Sointed  surgeon-general  of  Tennessee,  and  served
uring  the  war  as  hospital  surgeon  on  the  medi-
cal examination  board,  and  with  the  Confederate
army  at  Shiloh,  Columbus,  Miss.,  Atlanta,  and  Au-
gusta, Ga.  He  performed  more  than  a  hundred
operations  of  lithotomy,  usually  by  the  bilateral
method,  and  lost  only  eight  out  of  ninety-two
cases  operated  upon  bilaterally.  He  is  believed  to
have  been  the  first  American  surgeon  to  excise  the
uterus  in  situ,  the  patient  living  over  three  months,
and  has  removed  the  crista  galli,  the  patient  sur-
viving six  days,  trephined  the  lateral  sinus  of  the
brain,  removed  a  nail  from  the  lung  by  tracheoto-
my, and  performed  other  difficult  operations.  He
was  for  a  time  editor  of  the  "Southern  Medical
and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  assisted  in  editing  the
Nashville  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."  He
has  published  over  600  articles  on  medical  subjects.
His  most  important  works  are  "  Remarkable  Cases
in  Surgery"  (1857);  "One  Hundred  Cases  of  Lith-
otomy "  in  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  American
medical  association  for  1870 :  "  What  the  South
and  West  have  done  for  American  Surgery  " ;  and
reports  of  20  amputations  and  13  resections  at  the
hip-joint  performed  by  Confederate  surgeons,  con-
tributed to  the  "  Medical  History  of  the  War."

EVELINE,  Robert,  an  English  colonist  in  Vir-
ginia. He  published  "  Direction  for  Adventurers,
and  True  Description  of  the  Healthiest,  Pleasant-
est,  and  Richest  Plantation  of  New  Albion,  in
North  Virginia"  (London,  1641).

EVERARD,  Sir  Richard,  colonial  governor  of
Carolina,  d.  in  London,  England,  17  Feb.,  1733.  He
was  the  last  of  the  proprietary  governors,  and  his  ad-
ministration was  disturbed  by  frequent  altercations
with  the  council.  When  he  had  been  governor  for
four  years  the  lords  proprietors,  in  1729,  surrendered
the  provinces  to  the  crown,  each  receiving  in  con-
sideration of  the  surrender  the  sum  of  $12,500.
The  population  of  North  and  South  Carolina,  after
the  charter  had  been  in  existence  sixty-six  years,
was  not  at  that  time  more  than  25,000  persons,  in-
cluding negroes.  On  the  transfer,  Everard  was  re-
called, and  the  first  royal  governor,  George  Bur-
rinsrton,  succeeded  him  in  February,  1730.

EVEREST,  Charles  William," poet,  b.  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  27  May,  1814 ;  d.  in  Waterbury,
Conn.,  11  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Trin-
ity college  in  1838,  and  ordained  a  priest  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1843,  became  rec-
tor at Hamden,  Conn.,  and  taught  the  rectory


school.  He  contributed  to  magazines,  edited  many
books  of  poems, and  published  "The  Poets  of  Con-
necticut '*  (Hartford,  1

EVERETT,  Alexander  Hill.  h.  in  Bostoa,
Mass.,  1!)  March.  1798;  d.  in  Macao,  China, 96  June.
1847.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Oliver  J
(who  was  pastor  of  the  New  south  church  in  Boston
from  1782  to  17!>2).  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1806  with  the  highest  honors  of  his  class,  al-
t  hough  the  youngest  of  its  members.  After  leaving
college  he  was  for  a  year  assistant  teacher  in  Phillips
Exeter  academy,  then  studied  law  in  the  office  of
John  Quincy  Adams,  whom  in  1809  he  accompanied
to  Russia,  residing  for  two  years  in  his  family,  at
tached  to  the  legation.  At  the  close  of  the  war
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  Gov.
Eustis,of  Massachusetts,  was  appointed  minister  to
the  Netherlands,  and  Mr.  Everett  went  with  him
as  secretary  of  legation,  but  after  a  year  of  service
returned  home.  On  the  retirement  of  Gov.  Kusti>
he  was  appointed  his  successor,  with  the  rank  of
charge  d'affaires,  and  held  this  post  from  1818  till
1824.  In  1825-'9  he  was  minister  to  Spain,  after
which  he  returned  home  and  became  proprietor
and  editor  of  the  "  North  American  Review,"  to
which  he  had,  during  the  editorship  of  his  brother
Edward,  been  one  of  the  chief  contributors.
From  1830  till  1835  he  sat  in  the  legislature  of
Massachusetts :  in  1840  he  resided,  as  a  confidential
agent  of  the  United  States,  in  the  island  of  Cuba,
and  while  there  was  appointed  president  of  Jeffer-
son college,  Louisiana,  but  was  soon  obliged  by
failing  health  to  return  to  New  England.  On  the
return  of  Caleb  Cushing  from  his  mission  to  China,
Mr.  Everett  was  appointed  commissioner  to  that
empire,  and  sailed  for  Canton,  4  July,  1845.  He
was  detained  by  illness  at  Rio  Janeiro,  and  re-
turned home,  but  in  the  summer  of  1846  made
a  second  and  more  successful  attempt  to  reach
his  destination,  and  died  in  Macao.  Mr.  Kver-
ett's  first  published  compositions  appeared  in  the
"  Monthly  Anthology,"  the  vehicle  of  the  Anthol-
ogy club  of  Boston,  which  consisted  of  George
Ticknor,  William  Tudor,  Dr.  Bigelow  and  Rev.  J.
S.  J.  Gardiner,  Alexander  II.  Everett,  and  Rev.
Messrs.  Buckminster,  Thacher,  and  Emerson.  The
"Monthly  Anthology,"  established  by  Phineas
Adams,  was  published  from  1803  till  1811.  Mr.
Everett  published  "  Europe,  or  a  General  Survey  of
the  Political  Situation  of  the  Principal  Powers,
with  Conjectures  on  their  Future  Prospects  "  (Lon-
don and  Boston,  1822;  translated  into  German,
French,  and  Spanish,  the  German  version  edited  by
Prof.  Jacobi,  of  the  University  of  Halle) ;  "  New
Ideas  on  Population,  with  Remarks  on  the  Theories
of  Godwin  and  Malthus "  (London  and  Boston,
1822) ;  "  America,  or  a  General  Survey  of  the  Po-
litical Situation  of  the  Several  Powers  of  the  West-
ern Continent,  with  Conjectures  on  their  Future
Prospects,  by  a  Citizen  of  the  United  States"
(Philadelphia,  1827;  London,  1828);  "Critical  and
Miscellaneous  Essays"  (first  series,  Boston,  1845;
second  series,  1847);  and  "Poems"  (1845).  To
Sparks's  "American  Biography "  Mr.  Everett  con-
tributed the  lives  of  Joseph  Warren  and  Patrick
Henry.  His  principal  contributions  to  the  "  North
American  Review  are  on  the  following  subjects :
French  Dramatic  Literature ;  Louis  Bonaparte ;
Private  Life  of  Voltaire;  Literature  of  the  18th
Century ;  Dialogue  on  Representative  Government,
between  Dr.  Franklin  and  President  Montesquieu ;
Bernardin  de  St.  Pierre;  Madame  de  Stael;  J.  J.
Rousseau;  Mirabeau;  Schiller:  Chinese  Grammar;
Cicero  on  Government  :  Degerando'a  History  of
Philosophy ;  Lord  Byron ;  British,  Opinions  on  the


EVERETT


B87


Protecting  System ;  Tin-  American  System ;  Life
of Uenrj  rly Literature of Modern

Europe;  Eiirlv  Literature  of  Franc*?;  Origin  and
1  tor  of  the  Old  Parties;  and  Thomas  Cariyle.

Hi-  principal  contributions  to  the  "Democratic
i.  a"  jin-  tin-  following:  Tin-  S|>c<trc  Bridc-
groom.  from  Burner;  The  Water-Kinj.'.  a  I
of  the  N'Tsr  ;  Tin-  Texas  Question ;  ami  Tin-  Mai-
thu-iau  Theory.  Hit contributions to  the  "
(Quarterly  Review"  van  ohJsflj,  if  m>t  tltogathar
devoted  to  an  exposition  of  auestioni  eonneoted

with  the  currency.  AaOOg  Sir.  Everett  -  pub-
lished orations  are  the  following:  ( »n  the  Prognai
ami  Limits  of  the  Improvement  of  .Society;  The
KriMich  Revolution ;  The  Constitution  of  the Vnited
State-;  DiSOOTSCT  of  America  bf  the  Northmen;
Battle  of  New  Orleans;  ami  Battle  of  Hunker  Hill.
—  Hi-  It. . tlier.  Edward.  i>  m  Dotohester,  Mans.,  11
April.  171M;  d.  in  Boston.  15  Jan..  1H<>5,  entered
Hananl  (where  he  edited  the  "  Harvard  Lyceum  "»

in  1*07,  iui,l  was
graduated  with
the  highest  hon-
or- in  1M11.  In
1813  he  was  set-
tled tl-  pastor
over  the  Unitari-
an church  in  Brat-
tle square,  Bos-
ton, mnoaofllna
the  Rev.  Joseph
Stevens  Buck-
minster,  and  s<x)n
attracted  atten-
tion by  his  elo-
quence, especially
by  his  sermon  de-
livered in  the  hall
of  the  houscof  rep-
resentatives, Washington,  in  February.  1820.  "  The
sermon  was  truly  splendid,"  wrote  Judge  Joseph
Story,  "and  was  heard  with  a  breathless  silence.
The  audience  was  very  large,  and,  being  in  that
magnificent  apartment  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives, it  had  vast  effect.  I  saw  Mr.  King,  of  New
York,  and  Mr.  Otis,  of  Massachusetts,  then-.  They
were  both  verv  much  affected  with  Mr.  Everett's
sermon ;  and  Mr.  Otis,  in  particular,  wept  bitterly.
There  were  some  very  stirring  appeals  to  our  most
delicate  feelings  on  the  loss  of  our  friends.
Indeed,  Mr.  Everett  was  almost  universally  ad-
mired as  the  most  eloquent  of  preachers.  Mr.
King  told  me  he  never  heard  a  discourse  so  full
of  unction,  eloquence,  and  good  taste."  After  his
graduation  Mr.  Everett  was  Latin  tutor  at  Harvard.
and  in  1814  he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  newly-formed
chair  of  Oreek  literature,  to  qualify  himself  for
which  he  spent  more  than  four  years  (from  the
spring  of  1810  to  the  autumn  of  1819)  in  Bnropa,
studying  fortwovears  in  the  University  of  G.ittin-
gen.  "Edward  Everett,"  remarks  Abraham  Hay-
ward  in  his  sketch  of  "American  Orators  and
Statesmen,"  in  the  "  Ijondon  (Quarterly  Review  "
for  Daccmber,  1K40,  "is  one  of  the  most  remark-
able men  living.  ...  At  nineteen  he  had  already
acquired  the  reputation  of  an  armompHahwl  scholar.
and  was  drawing  large  audiences  as  a  Unitarian
preacher.  At  twenty-one  (the  age  at  which  RogSf
.im  achieved  a  similar  distinction)  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  Greek  in  Harvard  university.
and  soon  afterward  he  made  a  tour  of  Europe,  in-
cluding Greece.  M.  Cousin,  who  was  with  him  in
Germany,  informed  a  friend  of  ours  that  he  was
one  of  the  best  Grecians  he  ever  knew,  and  the
translator  of  Plato  must  have  known  a  good  many


d*6^-0~Tr  *£■ (X*+^es&£'.


of  the  l»est. On  hi*  return  from hi* ti
lectured  .r||  Greek literature with the  elithtl-
aud  success  of  another  Abelard— we  Iio|m-  without

the IIe|ol-e." Hef.  n- his dc|MirtUre fur Imn

Mr.  DlWSU  had  given  I  -trikiiitf  DfOOf  "f  his  wide
reading  and  critical  powatl  in  answering  »  vol-
ume cut  it  led  ••  The  Grounds  "f  Christianity  Exam-
ined," by  George  B.  English  (Boston,  18(8).  Mr.
it  convicts  English  of  dishonesty  in  his  as-
sertions, and  of  plagiarism  from  Evanson,  Collins,
Toland,  Semtier,  Priestley,  Rabbi  Isaac,  and  <  >r« »l»i< ».
About  ninety-four  jtages  are  borrowed  from  other
writers,  while  English  credits  other  authors  with
twentv-four  pages  only.  In  1M1«»  Mr.  Everett  n--
tmu  home  and  entered  upon  the  duties  of  the
Oreek  professorship.  In  addition  to  his  regular
duties  he  published  a  translation  of  Buttn
Snail  grammar,  and  a  Greek  reader  based  upon
that  of  Jacol>s.  He  Ixxame  editor  of  the  "North
American  Review"  in  January,  1820,  and  in  the
next  four  years  contributed  to  its  pages  alxuit  fifty
{tapers,  to  which  are  to  be  added  sixty  more  written
while  the  "Review"  was  under  the  management
of  his  brother  Alexander  and  his  succ-eason,  In
May.  1822,  Mr.  Everett  married  Charlotte  Gray,  a
daughter  of  peter  Chaidon  Brooks,  whose  biogra-
phy he  wrote.  In  1824  Mr.  Everett  was  elected  to
congress  from  the  Boston  district,  and  sat  in  the
house  of  representatives  for  ten  years.  He  took
the  side  in  politics  maintained  by  the  friend-  ..f
President  John  tj.  Adams,  as  a  "National  Repub-
lican "  and  "  Whig";  but  gave  ■MOiaJ  attention  to
obtaining  pensions  for  the  survivors  of  the  Revo-
lution, ami  offend  vigorous  Opposition  to  the  re-
moval of  the  Indians  from  Georgia,  In  1835,  and
for  three  successive  years  thereafter,  he  was  elected
governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  at  the  next  election
was  defeated  by  only  one  vote  out  of  more  than
100,000.  In  1840  he  made  another  journey  to  Eu-
rope,  and  while  residing  in  London  he  was  appoint-
ed, chiefly  through  the  influence  of  Daniel  \\  eb-ter.
minister  to  England.  Daring  his  sojourn  in  that
country  he  received  the  degree  of  I>.  C.  L.  from  Ox-
ford and  thatof  LL.D.  from  Cambridge  and  Dublin.
He  was  recalled  by  President  Polk  in  1845.  From
1840  till  1849  he  was  president  of  Harvard  college.
and  on  the  death  of  Daniel  Webster,  in  1852.  was
appointed  secretary  of  state.  In  1853  he  succeeded
John  Davis  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  In  the  summer
and  autumn  of  this  year  he  spoke  on  the  Central
American  question,  addressed  the  New  York  his-
torical society  on  colonization  and  emigration,  re-
5 lied  to  Lord  John  Russell's  protest  again*!  the
octrines  of  the  U.  S.  government  in  the  note  de-
clining the  Tripartite  convention,  and  spoke  in
opposition  to  the  proposed  new  constitution  in
Massachusetts.  On  the  as>embling  of  coii^re—  in
Deoenber.  1853.  although  his  health  had  bsaa  im-
paired by  his  laltors,  he  continued  them  with  such
xeal  and  fidelity  in  the  discussion  of  the  bill  to  re-
peal the  Missouri  compromise,  and  other  important
inea-uie-of  that  session,  that  in  the  following  May
he  was  obliged  to  resign  his  seat.  In  1853  Miss
Ann  Pamela  Cunningham  originated  a  (dan  to
purchase  Mount  Vernon  by  private  snbeeription,
in  an  address  to  the  women  of  the  United  States,
signed  "A  Southern  Matron,"  and  in  this  praise*
worthy  object  she  found  an  efficient  advocate  in
Mr.  Everett,  who  delivered  in  its  behalf  his  oration
on  Washington,  from  1»  March,  1850.  till  June.  1
—  12*2  times — with  a  result  of  more  than  $58,000.
In  the  autumn  oj  MM  Mr.  Everett  contracted
with  RoU-rt  Bonner,  proprietor  of  the  New  York
"Ledger,"  to  furnish  an  article  weekly  for  that
paper  for  one  year,  in  consideration  of  $10,000,  to


888


EVERETT


EVERETT


Ik-  paid  in  advance  tot  hi-  Mount  Vernon  fund.  Mr.
Everett  also  invited  the  readers  of  t h«-  "  Iiedger"
to  transmit  each  the  sum  of  fifty  cents  or  more
toward  the  same  object,  mid  this  ap|>cal  produced
more  that  $3,000.  On  22  Dec.  1857,  he  delivered
an  address  on  charity  and  charitable  associations
for  the  benefit  of  the  Boston  provident  association,
which  was  repeated  fifteen  times,  with  receipt-  of
abort  $13,500.  On  17  Jan.,  1859.  he  delivered  an
address  in  Boston  on  the  "  Early  Days  of  Franklin,"
which  was  repeated  five  times,  yielding  about
$4,000  to  various  institutions.  The  receipts  of
t  bese  lectures  were  not  less  than  $90,000.  A  notice
of  the  "  Life  and  Works  of  Daniel  Webster,"  by
Mr.  Everett,  is  included  in  the  collective  edition
of  the  works  of  the  former  (6  vols.,  Boston,  1852).
From  his  pen  also  came  the  "  Life  of  General
Stark,"  in  Sparks's  "American  Biography,"  and
several  of  the  annual  r>ports  of  the  Massachusetts
hoard  of  education.  At  the  instance  of  Lord  Mac-
aulay.  he  contributed  a  life  of  Washington  to  the
"  Encvclopicdia  Britanniea"  (published  separately,
New  York,  1860).  Mr.  Kverett  had  substantial
claims  to  the  character  of  a  poet.  His  dirge  of
••  .Marie  the  Visigoth  "  and  the  beautiful  poem  of
"Santa  Croce"  are  among  the  few  compositions
that  the  remembrance  of  school-boy  declamation
can  present  without  fear  of  rebuke  to  the  maturer
judgment  of  riper  years.  In  addition  to  the  "  De-
fence of  Christianity,"  already  mentioned,  and  oc-
casional addresses,  official  letters,  reports,  etc,
Mr.  Kverett  published  "Orations  and  Speeches
on  Various  Occasions"  (Boston,  1836);  "Impor-
tance of  Practical  Education  and  Useful  Knowl-
edge,"  a  selection  from  his  "  Orations  and  other
Discourses,"  published  in  1836,  originally  prepared
for  the  Massachusetts  district-school  library  at  the
request  of  the  Board  of  education  (New  York,
1847);  "Orations  and  Speeches  on  Various  Occa-
sions from  1826  to  1850"  (2d  ed.,  2  vols.,  Boston,
1850;  this  edition  includes  all  that  were  in  the
edition  of  1836;  3d  ed.,  2  vols.,  1853).  These
volumes  contain  eighty-one  articles.  The  third
volume  of  Everett's  "Orations  and  Speeches"
(Boston,  1859)  contains  forty-six  articles,  and  also
a  copious  index  to  the  contents  of  the  three
volumes.  Volume  IV.  of  the  "  Orations  and
Speeches"  (Boston,  1859)  contains  fifty-nine  arti-
cles. Those  who  would  witness  a  remarkable  illus-
tration of  the  power  of  eloquence  to  transfuse  life
and  l>eauty  into  the  teachings  of  science,  the  les-
sons of  history,  the  ethics  of  politics,  and  vicissi-
tudes of  letters,  will  not  neglect  to  devote  their
"  days  and  nights  "  to  the  orations  of  Edward  Ev-
erett.  The  first  oration  that  drew  upon  Mr.  Ever-
ett the  eyes  of  his  countrymen  at  large  was  deliv-
ered at  Cambridge  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa
society,  27  Aug.,  1824.  The  subject  was,  "  The  Cir-
cumstances Favorable  to  the  Progress  of  Literature
in  America."  When  the  youthful  orator  had  ex-
cited to  a  painful  pitch  the  feelings  of  the  vast
assemblage,  he  suddenly  turned  to  the  illustrious
guest.  Lafayette,  who  had  seen  so  much  of  the  rise
and  fall  of  human  greatness,  who  had  witnessed
alike  the  destruction  of  a  throne  and  the  birth  of
a  nation,  and  addressed  him  in  an  apostrophe  never
to  be  forgotten  by  auditor  or  reader.  Perhaps
Mr.  Everett's  powers  as  an  orator  are  nowhere  dis-
played to  greater  advantage  than  in  that  passage
in  his  Fourth  of  July  address  delivered  at  Dorches-
ter, Mass.,  in  1855,  in  which  he  epitomizes,  in  a
single  eloquent  paragraph,  the  far-reaching  conse-
quences of  the  bat  tie  of  Lexington.  He  said:  "On
trie  19th  of  April  the  all-important  blow  was  struck  ;
the  blow  which  severed  the  fated  chain  whose  every


link  was  bolted  by  an  ad  of  parliament,  whose
every  rivet  was  closed  up  by  an  order  in  council —
which  bound  to  the  wake  of  Europe  the  brave  bark
of  our  youthful  fortune,  destined  henceforth  and
fop  mi-  to  ride  the  waves  alone — the  blow  which
severed  that  fated  chain  was  struck.  The  blow  WU
struck  which  will  lie  felt  in  its  consequences  to  our-
selves and  the  family  of  nations  till  the  seventh
.seal  is  broken  from  the  apocalyptic  volume  of  the
history  of  empires.  The  consummation  of  four
centuries  was  completed.  The  life-long  hot*--  ami
heart -sick  visions  of  Columbus,  poorly  fulfilled  in
the  subjugation  of  the  plumed  tribes  of  a  few  trop-
ical islands,  and  the  partial  survey  of  the  conti-
nent; cruelly  mocked  by  the  fetters  placed  apoa
his  noble  limbs  by  his  own  menial  and  which  he
carried  with  him  into  his  grave,  were  at  length
more  than  fulfilled,  when  the  new  world  of  his  dis-
covery put  on  the  sovereign  robes  of  her  separate
national  existence,  and  joined,  for  peace  and  for
war,  the  great  Panathenaic  procession  of  the  na-
tions. The  wrongs  of  generations  were  redressed.
The  cup  of  humiliation  drained  to  the  dregs  by  the
old  puritan  confessors  and  nonconformist  victims
of  oppression — loathsome  prisons,  blasted  fortunes,
lips  forbidden  to  open  in  prayer,  earth  and  water
denied  in  their  pleasant  native  land,  the  separations
and  sorrows  of  exile,  the  sounding  perils  of  the
ocean,  the  scented  hedge-rows  and  vocal  thickets  of
the  '  old  countrie '  exchanged  for  a  pathless  wilder-
ness ringing  with  the  war-whoop  and  gleaming
with  the  seal  ping-knife;  the  secular  insolence  of
colonial  ride,  checked  by  no  periodical  recurrence
to  the  public  will ;  governors  appointed  on  the
other  sine  of  the  globe  that  knew  not  Joseph  ;  t  he
patronizing  disdain  of  undelegated  power ;  tne  legal
contumely  of  foreign  law,  wanting  the  first  element
of  obligation,  the  consent  of  the  governed  expressed
by  his  authorized  representative ;  and  at  length  the
last  unutterable  and  burning  affront  and  shame,  a
mercenary  soldiery  encamped  upon  the  fair  emi-
nences of  our  cities,  ships  of  war  with  springs  on
their  cables  moored  in  front  of  our  crowded  quays,
artillery  planted  open-mouthed  in  our  principal
streets,  at  the  doors  of  our  houses  of  assembly,  their
morning  and  evening  salvos  proclaiming  to  the  ris-
ing and  the  setting  sun  that  we  are  the  subjects
and  they  the  lords — all  these  hideous  phantoms  of
the  long  colonial  night  swept  off  by  the  first  sharp
volley  on  Lexington  Green.  An  eloquent  review
of  Mr.  Everett's  orations,  by  Prof.  Cornelius  C.
Felton,  was  published  in  the  "North  American
Review"  for  October,  1850,  and  an  admirable  an-
alysis of  his  mental  characteristics  and  oratorical
style,  by  a  distinguished  critic,  himself  an  orator
of  renown,  George  S.  Ilillard,  will  be  found  in
the  same  periodical  for  January,  1837.  We  give
a  brief  extract  from  the  latter :  "  The  great  charm
of  Mr.  Everett's  orations  consists  not  so  much  in
any  single  and  strongly  developed  intellectual
trait  as  in  that  symmetry  and  finish  which,  on
every  page,  give  token  to  the  richly  endowed
and  thorough  scholar.  The  natural  movements
of  his  mind  are  full  of  grace;  and  the  most
indifferent  sentence  which  falls  from  his  pen  has
that  simple  elegance  which  it  is  as  difficult  to  de-
fine as  it  is  easy  to  perceive.  His  level  passages
are  never  tame,  and  his  fine  ones  are  never  super-
fine. His  style,  with  matchless  flexibility,  rises
and  falls  with  his  subject,  and  is  alternately  easy,
vivid,  elevated,  ornamented,  or  picturesque,  adapt-
ing itself  to  the  dominant  mood  of  the  mind,
as  an  instrument  responds  to  the  touch  of  a
matter's  hand.  His  knowledge  is  so  extensive  and
d  of  his  allusions  so  wide,  that  the  most


UKTT


fariiilinr  views,  in  pawing  t  hmuu'li  his  hand».  gather
-in  ii  ik  halo  of  luminous  illustrations  thai  their
|ffr«i—  (KHMii-  transformed.  iiikI  Vt  ■  nt.rtiiin
aVmbti  of  their  identity."  Iii  1880,  s  ban  secession
wan  seriously  threatened  bjf  Booth  Carolina.  Mr.
Everett,  against  hi-*  own  inclination  (u-  In-  w  rote  to
the  iuitlu>r  <if  this  sketch),  permitted  his  MUM  to  U-
used  by  the  Constitutioua'-l'uion  pnrtv  as  a  candi-
date for  the  vice-presidencv,  John  Bell,  of  Tonnes
nee,  being  the  candidate  for  president.  They  re-
ceived Hurt  v-nineelcctoral  rotei  thoSBOf  Virginia.
Kentucky,  and Ten  in  'i  i.i.. John.)

During  tin-  civil  war  Mr.  Kverett  labored  zealously

in  defence  of
the  Ciiioti,  but
was  always  dis-
posed to  extend
the  hand  of  fra-
ternal reconcil-
iation toward
those  whom  he
regarded  as  so
greatly  in  the
wrong ;  and  his
last  public  serv-
ice was  one  of
humanity  in  Im«
half  of  south-
ern sufferers  by
the  conflict,  at
the  meeting  in
Pimcuil  hall  on
Mondav.  I  Jan.,
1865,  for  tin-  re-
lief of  the  peo-
ple of  Savan-
nah.  On  his
return  home  after  a  day  of  fatiguing  engage-
ments, he  was  obliged  to  summon  his  physician,
and  did  not  again  leave  his  house.  ••  we  all  re-
memU'r  him,"  remarks  Daniel  Webster,  "  some
of  us  personal lv,  myself,  certainly,  with  great  in-
t.  in  his  delilH-ratioiis  in  the  congress  of  the
I'nited  States,  to  which  he  brought  such  a  degree  of
learning  and  abilitv  and  eloquence  as  few  equalled
and  none  surpassed.  He  administered,  afterward,
satisfactorily  to  his  fellow-citizens,  the  duties  of  the
chair  of  the  commonwealth.  He  then,  to  the  great
advantage  of  his  country,  went  abroad.  He  was
deputed  to  represent  his  government  at  the  most
iui[Mirtant  court  of  Europe,  and  he  carried  thither
many  qualities,  most  of  them  essential,  and  all  of
them  ornamental  and  useful,  to  fill  that  high  sta-
tion. He  had  education  and  scholarship.  He  had
a  reputation  at  home  and  abroad.  More  than  all,
he  had  an  acquaintance  with  the  politics  of  the
world,  with  the  lawsof  this  country  and  of  nations,
and  with  the  history  and  policy  of  the  countries
of  Europe,  And  how  well  these  qualities  enabled
him  to  reflect  honor  upon  the  literature  and  char-
acter of  his  native  land,  not  we  only,  but  all  the
country  and  all  the  world,  know.  He  has  um fumed
this  career,  and  yet  is  at  such  a  period  of  life  that
I  may  venture  something  upon  the  character  and
privilege  of  my  countrymen  when  I  predict  that
those  who  have  known  him  long  anu  know  him
now.  those  who  have  seen  him  and  see  him  now,
tho-c  who  have  heard  him  and  hear  him  now,  are
likely  to  think  that  his  country  bej  demands
uiMin  him  for  future  efforts  in  itsoeiliuej?  It  is
pleating  to  know  that  the  cordial  relations  that
united  the  hearts  of  Lheea  distinguished  patriots
never  disturbed  by  misunderstanding  nor
chilled  by  estrangement.  To  this  gratifying  truth
we  have  the  following  testimony,  which  occurs  in


a  letter  from  Webster  !••  Bvumtt,  written  a»«.ut
three  months  before  the  decease  of  the  Ion

"We  now  and  then  see  stretching  aoroai  the
heavens  a  clear,  Uue.  cerulean  sky,  without  cloud,
or  mist,  or  haze.  And  suoh  ap|>enrs  to  me  our
quaintaiice  from  the  time  when  1  heard  001  for  a
week  n-cite  your  lessons  in  the  little  school!
in  Short  strei-t.  to  the  date  hereof  h>|  ,|,dy.  1888],
Mr.  Biatotl  had  long  contemplated  a  w..'rk  upon
international  law.  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  lie
was  preparing  a  oovrteof  lectures  OB  this  1 1 . .
which  he  had  "proiulsad  to  deliver  before  the
Dane  law-school."  Hut  failing  health,  and  1 1  •  •
tigue  and  excitement  of  teasel  atietog from  "mueh
:ug"  in  patriotic  enterprises,  prevented  the
completion  Of  the  greatly  desired  treatise.  Tin
coni|)anying  illustration  is  a  view  of  Mr.  I
birthplace  in  Dorchester,  Mass.  The  house  is
posed  to  have  been  built  by  OoL  Koliert  OUit,
abotnl  1740. — Another  brother,  John,  b,  in  I
<h.sier.  Mass..  n  Fel...  1801  :  d.  in  Boston  in  !
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1M*.  At  In*  grad-
uation he  delivered  an  oration  on  "  Byron,"  and
the  year  previous  one  on  "The  Poeiry  of  the
Oriental  Nations"  at  a  college  exhibition.  On
14  July,  1818,  he  addressed  the  senior  class  on
the  "Prospects  of  the  Young  Men  of  America."
Shortly  after  leaving  college  he  accompanied  Presi-
dent liolly  to  Lexington,  Ky..  where  he  baOMM
tutor  in  Transylvania  university.  While  there  he
delivered  an  impromptu  oration  in  the  presence
of  Andrew  Jackson,  which  was  much  praised.  On
returning  to  Massachusetts,  Mr.  Kverett  enteral
the  law-school  at  Harvard,  subsequently  studied
with  Daniel  Webster,  and  WM  called  to  the  l»ar.
Before  completing  his  legal  studies  be  visited  Ku-
rope,  and  for  a  brief  period  was  connected  with
the  American  legation  at  Brussels  and  the  Hague,
where  his  elder  brother,  Alexander,  was  charge
d'affaires.  Mr.  Kverett 's  early  death  cut  short  a
career  that  promised  to  l*>  unusually  brilliant.  He
possessed  great  facility  in  exteni|>oraneous  debate.
and  was  a  leader  among  the  voung  men  of  BostOBh
His  poetical  abilities  were  also  considerable,  as  is
shown  by  his  "Ode  to  St.  Paul's  Church,"  and  by-
one  written  for  the  Washington  society,  and  sung
at  Concert  Hall,  4  July.  188&  He  is  the  author  of
articles  in  "The  North  American  Kevicw."  and  de-
livered the  oration  before  the  Washington  aooJetj  on
4  July.  1H-24.— William,  youngest  son  of  Kdward.
educator,!),  in  Watertown.  Mass..  10  Oct.,  1K19,  was

frraduatcd  at  Harvard  in  IKo!*.  and  at  Trinity  out
ege.  Cambridge.  Kngland.  in  1868.  He  was  tutor
and  assistant  professor  of  Latin  at  Harvard  from
INTO  till  IS??,  receiving  from  that  institution  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  classics  in  lH?.j.  In  1N?N  he  be-
came master  of  Adams  academy  at  (juincy.  Mass.,
where  he  still  (is*?)  remains.  He  occasionally
preaches,  under  a  license  from  the  Boston  minis-
ters' association,  as  a  strongly  const  native  I'ni-
tarian.  He  has  taken  an  acti\e  part  in  different
political  movements  since  I8B4  both  as  a  Republi-
can and  an lndc|>cmlciit.  notably  in  that of 1K84,

whan  he  supported  the  Democratic  ticket. He  is

a pronounced civil-service and tariff reformer.

Mr. Kverett is the author of "On  the Cam."  a

l  of  lectures  on  the l' diversity  of  Cambridge

(Boston. ist;.*i); two  IxM'ks for  Ih'ivs.  "Changing

nd  ••  Double  Play" (1870);  -  Hesi-

oue.  or  Burope  Unchained,*'  a  poem  (Boston,  1N69);

"Shool  Sermons  '  i  lssl  i  ;  and  various  pamphlets

on  political,  literary,  and  religious  subjects,

EVERETT.  Charles  Carroll,  theologian,  b.  in

Brunswick.  Me.,  in  June.  1888.  He  am  gradu-
ated at  Bowdoin  in  1850,  studied  some  time  in  the


31)0


EVERETT


EVERTS


I'ni versity  <>f  Berlin,  Germany,  and  after  his  return
was  librarian  and  for  two  years  tutor,  and  then  for
two  years  professor  of  modem  languages,  at  Bow-
doin.  lie  then  entered  Harvard  divinity-school,
and  was  graduated  in  1859.  For  the  next  ten  years
he  was  pastor  of  the  Independent  Congregational
church  in  Bangor,  Me.,  which  post  he  resigned  in
18(59  to  accept  the  Bussey  professorship  of  the-
ology in  Harvard  university.  In  1878  he  became
also  dean  of  the  theological  faculty.  He  has  pub-
lished, besides  pamphlets  and  reviews,  "  The  Science
of  Thought "  (Boston,  1809);  a  discourse  commemo-
rative of  Leonard  Woods  (1879) ;  "  Religions  before
Christianity,"  a  Sunday-school  manual  (Boston,
1883) ;  ana  "  Fichte's  Science  of  Knowledge,  a
Critical  Exposition  "  (Chicago,  1884).

EVERETT,  David,  journalist,  b.  in  Princeton,
Mass.,  29  March,  1770;  d.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  21
Dec.,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1795.  While  teaching  a  grammar-school  at  New
Ipswich  he  wrote  the  well-known  juvenile  recita-
tion, beginning,

"  You'd  scarce  expect  one  of  my  age
To  speak  in  public  on  the  stage.'
He  studied  law  in  Boston,  and  wrote  for  Russell's
"  Gazette  "  and  Dennie's  "  Farmer's  Museum."  He
contributed  to  a  literary  paper,  the  "  Nightingale,"
in  1796.  He  removed  to  Amherst  in  1802,  where
he  practised  law.  Returning  to  Boston  in  1807,  in
1809  he  edited  the  "  Boston  Patriot,"  and  in  1812
the  "  Pilot."  He  wrote  a  series  of  papers  on  the
Apocalypse,  which  were  published  in  a  pamphlet.
He  left  Boston  in  1813  for  Marietta,  Ohio,  for  the
purpose  of  establishing  a  newspaper,  but  death  in-
terrupted his  plans.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Com-
mon Sense  in  Dishabille  "  and  "  Farmer's  Monitor  "
(1799);  "The  Rights  and  Duties  of  Nations,"  an
essay;  "Junius  Americanus,"  in  the  "Boston
Gazette,"  in  defence  of  John  Adams ;  and  "  Da-
renzel,  or  the  Persian  Patriot,"  a  tragedy,  which
was  brought  out  in  Boston  (Boston,  1800).

EVERETT,  Edward  Franklin,  genealogist,
b.  in  Northfiold,  Mass.,  28  Mav,  1840.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1860.  lie  was  recording
secretary  of  the  New  England  historical  and  gen-
ealogical society  in  1862.  From  1862  till  1865  he
served  in  the  volunteer  army  as  lieutenant  in  2d
Massachusetts  heavy  artillery  regiment,  after  which
he  was  engaged  in  the  fire  insurance  business  in
Boston.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Genealogy  of  the
Everett  Family  "  (1860),  and  "  Genealogy  of  the
Capen  Family,"  published  in  the  "  New  England
Historical  and  Genealogical  Register"  (1866).
Since  1882  he  has  been  engaged  in  preparing  the
two  works  for  publication  in  book  form.

EVERETT,  Erast  us,  educator,  b.  in  Princeton,
Mass.,  in  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1836,  and  from  1840  till  1843  was  professor  of
English  history  at  Jefferson  college,  St.  James
parish,  La.  In  the  latter  year  he  assisted  in  found-
ing the  Orleans  high-school  at  New  Orleans,  and
in  1849  became  its  principal.  The  school  was
chartered  as  a  college  in  1854,  and  he  served  as  its
president  till  1855.  From  that  year  until  1875  he
taught  a  select  school  at  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  and  for
the  four  years  following  was  professor  of  Greek
and  Latin  in  Rutgers  female  college.  He  is  the
author  of  "A  System  of  English  Versification"
(New  York,  1848),  and  "  Progress,"  a  poem.

EVERETT,  Horace,  congressman,  b.  in  Ver-  l
mont  in  1780;  d.  in  Windsor,  Vt.,30  Jan.,  1851.  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1797,  studied  law,  and
practised  in  Windsor.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Vermont  legislature  in  1819-20,  1822-'4,and  1834,
a  prominent member  of  the  State  constitutional


convention  of  1828,  and  in  that  year  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Wtk  serving  from  1829  to  1843.
While  a  member  of  congress  he  was  a  zealous  ad-
vocate of  the  rights  of  the  Indians.

EVERETT,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Queen
Anne  county,  Md.,  17  June,  1788 ;  d.  in  Cambridge;
Md.,  16  Aug.,  1809.  While  living  a  licentious  life
he  was  converted  at  a  meeting  of  the  followers  of
Whitefield  in  1763,  and  entered  the  communion  of
the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  a  zealous  Whig.
and  fought  with  the  Maryland  militia  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war.  He  had  grown  less  earnest  in  re-
ligious matters,  when,  in  1778,  he  was  deeply  im-
pressed by  the  preaching  of  Francis  Asbury,  united
with  the  Methodist  church,  and  in  1780  became  an
itinerant  preacher.  He  was  ordained  a  deacon  in
1786,  and  an  elder  in  1788.  He  was  presiding
elder  of  Cecil  and  neighboring  circuits  in  1789-'90,
and  of  other  districts  in  Maryland  till  1800,  when
he  became  presiding  elder  in  Philadelphia,  and
afterward  of  the  Delaware  district.  In  1804  he
became  disabled  for  continuous  labor,  though  he
continued  to  preach  as  a  supernumerary.  He  was
distinguished  for  the  boldness  and  directness  of  his
preaching,  and  was  one  of  the  most  successful  of
the  early  Methodist  revivalists.

EVERHART,  Benjamin  Matlock,  botanist,  b.
near  West  Chester,  Pa.,  24  April,  1818.  His  father,
William  Everhart,  the  son  of  a  Revolutionary
soldier,  was  a  merchant,  and  a  member  of  congress
in  1853-'5.  Benjamin  was  educated  in  private
schools  in  West  Chester,  and  spent  his  early  life  in
mercantile  business  there  and  in  Charleston,  S.  C.
From  boyhood  he  was  an  ardent  student  of  botany,
and  since  retiring  from  business  in  1867  he  has  de-
voted himself  almost  entirely  to  that  science,  par-
ticularly to  cryptogamic  botany.  In  connection
with  J.  B.  Ellis,  of  New  Jersey,  he  has  been  active
in  issuing  yearly  fifty  volumes,  called  "  The  Cen-
tury of  North  American  Fungi,"  each  volume  de-
scribing 100  species.  At  the  same  time,  with  W.
A.  Kellerman,  of  Kansas,  they  are  publishing  the
"  Journal  of  Mycology."  He  is  a  specialist  of  de-
served repute  in  his  science,  has  discovered  many
new  fungi,  and  several  such  plants  have  been
named  for  him  by  his  fellow-scientists.  —  His
brother,  James  Bowen,  author,  b.  near  West
Chester,  Pa.,  26  July,  1821,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1842,  and  studied  law  in  West  Chester,
Philadelphia,  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school.  After
practising  law  in  West  Chester  for  a  few  years,  he
travelled  extensively  in  Europe  and  the  east,  and
then  devoted  himself  to  literature.  He  was  elected
to  the  state  senate  in  1876,  and  was  re-elected  in
1880,  but  resigned  in  1883,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Republican  to  congress,  where  he  served  in  1883-'7,
and  then  retired  to  private  life.  His  writings,
which  are  marked  by  terseness  of  style,  include
"  Miscellanies,"  in  prose  (West  Chester,  Pa.,  1862) ;
a  volume  of  short  poems  (Philadelphia,  1868) :  and
"The  Fox  Chase,"  a  poem  (Philadelphia,  1875).

EVERTS,  Orpheus,  physician,  b.  in  Union
county,  Ind.,  26  Dec,  1826.  His  father,  a  physician
from  Vermont,  was  a  pioneer  in  Indiana.  Orpheus
was  graduated  at  the  medical  college  connected
with  La  Porte  university,  Ind.,  in  1846,  practised  in
St. Charles.  111.. and  in  Indianapolis.  Ind., served  as
a  field  surgeon  during  the  civil  war,  and  in  1868
became  superintendent  of  the  Indiana  hospital  for
the  insane.  He  designed  the  female  department  in
the  hospital  on  an  original  plan.  In  1880  he  be-
came superintendent  of  the  Cincinnati  sanitarium,
a  private  hospital  for  the  insane.  Besides  papers  in
medical  journals,  he  has  published  "Giles  <.V  <  ...  >>r
Views  and Interviews concerning Civilization"


K\  I


KWELL


:::»1


(IiidiiiniqH.lis,  1h?H),  ami  "What  shall  we  do  with
tin-  Drunkard f  or,  Kational  he  Use  of

Alcoholic  Drinks  "  (Cincinnati.  I

EVERTS,  »  llllam  Wallace,  clergyman,  b.  in
tJranville.  Washington  '«-..  N.  V..  II  March,  1814
lb-  was  graduated  nt  the  Hatniltoo  literarv  and
theological  institution  (now  .M.-ulixon  uiii\«T-its )  in
1887,  and  in  the  same  vear  was  ordained  as  pa
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Barinlle,  N.  V.  In
Im  became  pastor  <>f  the  Tabernacle  Baptist  oanroli
in  New  York,  and  in  1H42  be  founded  the  I>aight
•  t  Baptist  church  in  tin-  Kama  l  ity.  Subee-
i)iit'iitlv  he  WM  pMtor  in  Wheatland,  N.  V.,  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  ami  in  Chicago,  where  he  remained  fi>r
twenty  vears.  While  there  he  whs  actively  engaged
in  bonding  the  Chicago  university  and  IhafTflrawn
Baptist  theoh >gieal  seminary.  He  removed  to
JeffM  y  City,  N.  .1.,  in  1879,  ami  Uk-hiiii'  pastor  of  a

Baptist  church  than,  but  reaignad  his  charge  in

18HT>.  I>r.  Kverts  is  the  author  of  the  following
works:  "The  Pastor's  Hand-Book"  (New  York,
1888);  "The  Bfbla  Prayer- Book":  "The  Scriptural
School  Header":  "  Life  and  Thoughts  of  John
Foster";  "The  Voyage  of  Life":  "The  Promise
ami  Training  of  Childhood";  "Words  in  Earnest  ":
and  "  Tracts  for  the  Churches."

KVKRTSKN,  Cornells.  Dutch  naval  officer,
b.  in  Zealand.  He  was  a  son  of  Admiral  Cornells
Kvertsen.  who  was  killed  in  a  battle  with  the  Eng-
lish in  WW.  He  commanded  a  squadron  of  fifteen
ships  that  was  despatched  against  the  Kngliab
colonies  in  1878.  After  capturing  or  destroying
the  Virginia  fleet  of  tobacco  ships  in  the  Chesa-
peake, he  sailed  northward,  and  on  7  Aug.  anchored
off  Stat  en  Island.  His  fleet  had  been  re-enforced,
and  now,  with  its  prizes,  numbered  27  sail,  with
1,000  men.  Evert  sen  demanded  the  surrender  of
the  city,  saying,  "  We  have  come  to  take  the  place,
which  is  our  own,  and  our  own  we  will  have."
Some  of  the  Dutch  citizens  visited  the  hostile  fleet,
and  described  the  state  of  the  defenses  to  the  offi-
cers. The  Dutch  militia  spiked  the  guns  of  a
recently  erected  battery.  On  8  Aug.  the  fleet
moved  up  the  bay,  exchanged  shots  with  the  fort,
and  landed  600  men  under  Capt.  Anthony  Colve,
to  whom  the  fort  was  surrendered  without  blood-
ribtd,  the  British  garrison  being  allowed  to  march
out  with  the  honors  of  war.  The  name  New  Or-
ange was  given  to  the  reconquered  city.  The
■aaghbotiBg  settlements  hastened  to  make  their
>ul>ini-Mon.  and  Kvertsen.  after  confiscating  the
Duke  of  York's  property,  restoring  the  old  form
of  municipality,  ami  proclaiming  Colve  governor-
general,  set  sail  for  Holland.

EWART,  Thomas  West,  lawyer,  b.  in  Grand
Yiew,  Washington  co.,  Ohio,  27  Feb.,  1816;  d.  in
Granville.  Ohio.  8  Oct..  1KM1.  He  was  self-educated,
but  rose  to  prominence  in  hi*  profession.  He  was
a  member  of  the  convention  that  formed  the
present  constitution  of  Ohio,  and  was  actively  en-
gaged for  more  than  a  generation  in  promoting  the
educational  and  missionary  work  of  the  Baptist
denomination,  with  which  he  was  identified. He

was  a  trust f  Dcnison  university,  president  of

the  Ohio  Baptist  state  convention,  and  vice-p resi-
dent of  the  American  Baptist  missionary  union.
In  1878  the. degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  l>v  Dcnison  university.

I  U  BANK,  Thoiiiiis,  s,  i,  ntist.  b.  in  Durham
county,  England,  11  March,  1798:  d.  In  New  York.
16  .Sept..  1870,  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was  ap-
prenticed toa  tin  and  oopper  smith,  and  aboul  1819
emigrated  to  New  York,  and  followed  the  trade  of
a  machinist,  occupying  at  first  Fulton's  factory  at
Paulus Hook, which had remained undisturlied


since  the  inventor's  death.  In  1888  he  bfgjH  the
manufacture  of  metallic  tubing  in  New  York,  and
retired  in  1*16  to  devote  himself  to  literary  and
scientific  pursuits.  From  |M4<»  till  U88  he  was
l'.  S.  commissi. ,u.-r  of  patents.  As  a  un-mln  r  of
the  commission  to  examine  ami  n-|Nirt  u|m,h  the
strength  of  the  marbles  offered  f.,r  the  agftasjajeaj
of  the  National  capitol,  he  aoggeated  the  ciuplov-
meiit  of  WOOlan  Instead  Of  the  plates  of  lead  usual-
ly placed  between  the st s.  Mild established the

fact  that  lead  caused  the  ftOSJM  to  give  way  at  half
the  pressure  they  would  sustain  without'  it.  and
that  consequently  in  all  previous  trials  there  had
liecn  an  undervaluation  of  the  power  of  resistance
to  pressure  in  building-stones.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  American  ethnological  society.  He
published  "  Descriptive  ami  Historical  Account  of
Hydraulic  and  Other  Machines,  Ancient  and  Mod-
em "  (New  York,  1888j  l"»th  ei!..  with  additions,
1888)]  -The  World  a  Workshop,  off  the  Phv-ical
Relation  of  Man  to  the  Earth*  0855);  "Life  in
Brazil,"  describing  a  visit  to  that  country  in
ls.).-(-'6,  with  an  appendix  on  a  collection  of  Ameri-
can ant iquities  (1887);  "Thoughts  on  Matter  and
Force"  (1858);  "Reminiscences  in  the  Patent  of-
fice "  (1859);  and  a  variety  of  miscellaneous  essays
on  the  philosophy  and  history  of  inventions,  which
appeared  chiefly  in  the  "Transactions  of  the
hranklin  Institute."  His  "  Kxiteriments  on  Ma-
rine Propulsion,  or  the  Virtue  of  Form  in  Propel-
ling Blades."  was  reprinted  in  Europe.  In  1*60 he
Iiublished  an  essay  that  he  had  read  lx>fore  the
Ethnological  aoeiety,  entitled  "Inorganic  Forces
Ordained  to  Supersede  Human  Slavery."

EWELL,  Benjamin  Stoddert,  soldier  and  edu-
cator, b.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  10  June,  1810.  He
is  a  grandson  of  Benjamin  Stoddert.  first  s,
tary  of  the  navy.  He  was  graduated  at  the  I'.  S.
military  academy  in  1832,  and  assigned  to  the  4th
artillery.  He  served  in  the  military  academy  as
assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  1832-7).  and
as  assistant  professor  of  natural  and  experimental
philosophy  in  1835-'6,  when  he  resigned.  From
\KU\  till  1839  he  was  one  of  the  principal  assist-
ant engineers  of  the  Baltimore  and  Susquehanna
railroad.  He  was  professor  of  mathematics  at
Ham|»dcn-Sidney  from  1*40  till  1N46.  when  he
was  elected  to  the  Cincinnati  professorship  of
mathematics  and  military  science  in  Washington
college,  Lexington.  Va.,  which  office  he  held  two
years.  In  1848  he  was  elected  professor  of  mat  he-
matics and  acting  president  of  William  and  Mary,
and  became  president  in  1854.  He  held  this  of-
fice till  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  when  the
college  was  suspended.  He  then  ■erred  in  the
Confederate  army  aa  colonel  of  the  88d  Yirginia
regiment  in  1881-%  and  afterward  was  appointed
adjutant-general  to  (Jen.  Joseph  K.  Johnston,
when  he  commanded  the  departments  of  Tennessee
and  Mississippi.  He  was  again  elected  president
of  William  and  Mary  in  1868, end  still  (1K*7)  re-
tains the  office.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  from  Hobttrt  college  in  1*74.  lb-
was  made  an  honorary  member  Ox  the  Koyal  his-
torical society  of  Greet  Britain  in  1888.  Dr.  Fwell
urged  the  election  and  re-election  of  (Jen.  (irant  to
the  presidency  baejOJsM  of  his  moderation  sad  mag-
nanimity at  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  Be  WM  Op-
posed to  secession  in  1861,  thinking  it  unnecessary
and  unconstitutional,  and  resisted  the  measure  un-
til war  was  waged. Since  \HHTt  he  has  exerted  him-

eetf  to  footer  ihim  between  the  north  and  the

south,  and  loyalty  to  the  National  government.
He  s|Hike  in  the  house  of  reprcscntat i ves  at  Wash-
ington on  1  April.  1M?4.  and  apiiu  on  2"i  .Ian.,  1876,


893


SWELL


EWER


^^


in  support  of  the  petition  of  William  mid  Mary  col-
lege foruii  appropriation  <>n  account  of  the  dettrno-
i  ion  of  its  buildings  ami  property  during  the  civil
war.— His  brother.  Richard  Stoddcrt,  soldier,  b.
in  Georgetown,  I).  ('..  8  Felt..  1817;  d.  in  Spring-
field,  Tcnn..  98  .Ian..  1878.  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1840.  His  first  experience  of
actual  warfare  was  obtained  in  Mexico,  where,  in
August,  1847,  he  was  engaged  at  Contreras  and
at  Churubusco.  He  was  promoted  to  captain,  4
Aug.,  1849,  and  in  June,  1857,  won  distinction
fighting  against  the  Apaches  in  New  Mexico.  When
the  civil  war  hftgan  ne  resigned  his  commission,
entered  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  active-
ly engaged  throughout  the  war.  He  was  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  major-general,  and  fought  at

Blackburn's  Ford,
18  July,  1861,  and
at  Bull  Run,  21
July.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  he  dis-
tinguished himself
under  Jackson,  by
whom  he  was  great-
ly trusted,  and  took
an  active  part  in
the  various  move-
ments preceding
the  second  battle
of  Bull  Run,  losing
a  leg  at  Warren-
ton  Turnpike  on  28
Aug.,  1862.  He
took  part  also  in
the  Maryland  cam-
paign. When  Gen.  Jackson  was  fatally  wounded
at  Chancellorsville,  Ewell,  at  his  request,  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-general,  and  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  2d  corps.  At  the  head  of  Jack-
son's veterans  he  fought  valiantly  at  Winchester,  at
Gettysburg,  and  at  the  Wilderness  on  the  Confed-
erate left.  He  was  captured,  with  his  entire  force,
by  Sheridan  at  Sailor's  Creek,  6  April,  1865.  After
the  war  he  retired  to  private  life.  Gen.  Grant  says
in  his  "  Memoirs  " :  "Here  "  [at  Farmville]  "  I  met
Dr.  Smith,  a  Virginian  and  an  officer  of  the  regu-
lar army,  who  told  me  that  in  a  conversation  with
Gen.  Ewell,  a  relative  of  his  "  [who  had  just  been
made  a  prisoner],  "  Ewell  had  said  that  when  we
had  got  across  the  James  river  he  knew  their  cause
was  lost,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  their  authorities
to  make  the  best  terms  they  could  while  they  still
had  a  right  to  claim  concessions.  The  authorities
thought  differently,  however.  Now  the  cause  was
lost,  and  they  had  no  right  to  claim  anything.
He  said  further,  that  for  every  man  that  was  killed
after  this  in  the  war,  somebody  is  responsible,  and
it  would  be  but  very  little  better  than  murder.  He
was  not  sure  that  Lee  would  consent  to  surrender
his  army  without  being  able  to  consult  with  the
president,  but  he  hoped  he  would."  Grant  says
this  gave  him  the  first  idea  of  demanding  the  sur-
render.— Another  brother,  Thomas,  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Mexico,  in  1847.

EWELL,  Marshall  Davis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Oxford,
Oakland  co.,  Mich.,  18  Aug.,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Michigan  state  normal  school  in  1864,
studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  De-
troit in  1888.  He  was  elected  judge  of  probate  in
Mason  county,  Mich.,  in  1874,  and  since  187?.  has
been  professor  of  common  law  in  the  Union  c\  lege
of  law,  Chicago,  111.,  and  is  an  editor  or  the
"American  Law  Register,"  of  Philadelphia,  and  of
the  "  Chicago  Law  Times."  He  has  also  given
much  attention  to  microscopy  and  nictorology.  and


is  professor  of  microscopical  technology  in  North-
western university,  Branaton,  111.,  and  secretan  of
the  Medico-legal  society  of  Chicago.  In  1886  he
was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Hoval  microaoopica]
society  of  London.  Michigan  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL,  I>.  in  1878,  and  Chicago  medical
college  that  of  M.  D.  in  1884.  Dr.  Ewell  has  pub*
liahed  "  Blackwell  on  Tax  Titles"  (Boston.
"  Leading  Cases  in  Disabilities"  (1876);  "Treatise
on  the  Law  of  Fixtures"  (Chicago,  1877);  "Illi-
nois Reports  "  (vols.  xxxii.-xxxvi.  inclusive,  1877);
"Washburn's  Manual  of  Criminal  Law"  (1878);
••  Branson  Agency"  (1879);  "Lindley  on  Partner-
ship" (1881);  "Student's  Manual  of  Medical  Juris-
prudence" (1887);  and  an  abridgment  of  Blackst  <  me.

EWEN,  Mary  Cecilia,  actress,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1836 ;  d.  there,  10  Nov.,  1866.  Her  maiden
name  was  Taylor.  She  made  her  first  public  ap-
pearance, at  ten  years  of  age,  at  a  concert  given  in
New  York,  and  sang  a  scene  from  "  Der  Freisch  ut  z."
Shortly  afterward  she  appeared  in  the  chorus  of
"Amilie"  at  the  National  theatre.  Her  special
forte  was  light  comedy,  and  she  became  so  great  a
favorite  that  she  was  familiarly  known  as  "Our
Mary."  Among  her  greatest  successes  in  the  vari-
ous theatres  where  she  played  were  "  Life  in  New
York,"  "  Child  of  the  Regiment,"  and  "  Pride  of
the  Market."  She  married,  11  Nov.,  1852,  W.
Ogilvie  Ewen,  and  retired  from  the  stage.

EWEN,  William,  patriot,  b.  in  England  about
1720;  d.  in  Georgia  soon  after  the  Revolution.
He  came  to  Georgia  about  1734  as  an  apprentice  to
the  trustees,  and  was  one  of  the  earliest  and  most
active  of  the  Revolutionary  leaders  of  that  state.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Council  of  safety,  and  as
first  president  of  the  executive  council  performed
the  duties  of  governor  in  1775.

EWER,  Ferdinand  Cartwright,  clergyman,
b.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  22  Mav,  1826;  d.  in  Mont-
real, Canada,  10  Oct.,  1883.  lie  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1848.  His  parents  were  Unitarians,
but  he  was  baptized  by  the  rector  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  Nantucket.  This  gentleman
was  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  "  Ritualists,"  and
young  Ewer  entered  zealously  into  the  novelties  in
worship  of  that  day  in  the  Episcopal  church.  It
was  his  purpose  to  enter  the  ministry,  but  instead
he  chose  civil  engineering  as  his  profession,  and  in
1849  sailed  for  California  by  way  of  Cape  Horn.
There  he  became  a  journalist,  and  for  eight  years
was  busily  occupied  in  editorial  work.  In  1852,
after  years  of  doubt,  he  returned  to  the  Episcopal
church,  was  ordained  deacon  in  1857,  and  priest  in
1858.  He  soon  became  rector  of  Grace  church,
San  Francisco,  where  he  labored  for  two  years.
His  health  having  become  impaired,  he  returned
to  the  east  in  1860,  was  for  a  while  assistant  min-
ister in  St.  Ann's  church.  New  York  city,  and  in
1862  was  chosen  rector  of  Christ  church.  Here  he
began  the  introduction  of  practices  not  usual  in
Episcopal  churches,  which,  after  a  time,  created
disturbance  among  the  people,  and  the  rector  felt
it  best  to  resign  his  charge.  This  was  in  1871,
when  some  friends  organized  a  new  parish  for  him
by  the  name  of  St.  Ignatius.  Here  ne  was  at  lil>-
erty  to  carry  out  fully  his  views  as  to  doctrine  and
ritual,  and  he  became  the  foremost  champion  of
what  he  called  catholic  principles.  Dr.  Ewer  was
a  man  of  genial  spirit  and  temper,  and  was  an  able
writer  on  theological  and  controverted  points.
While  preaching  in  St.  John's  church.  Montreal,
Sunday.  7  Oct,  1883,  he  was  stricken  with  paraly-
sis, and  died  the  third  day  afterward.  Among  other
works  he  wrote  "Two  Eventful  Nights.  «>r  the'  Fal-
libility of  Spiritualism  Exposed " (New  York.  1866  ".


i:\\  iNfl


KWING


J&UaXA^^S^c^^


"Catholicity  in  it^  Relatione  t.,  Prof  not  ontl

R  The  Deration  of  the  Roll

Spirit  "< 1880);  MM  "Grammar  of  The*

SWING, iadrew, Confederate -•Mi-r. I>. in

Na-h\ille.  Ti-iiii.  :  <l.  in  At Imii.i.  (i...  Hi  June,
1804.  Hi*  studied  law  and  Itccamc  eminent  in  hi-
profession,  ami  fur  year-  participated  in  Um  |»oliti-
cal  controversies  that  distinguished  the  lii>t<>r%  of
Tennessee  at  that  time.  Be  represented  the  Nash-
ville  district  in  congress  from  :i  Dec.,  |K4».  to  :!
March.  1851,  having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat.
In  February,  IS<»1.  he  was  elected  as  a  Unionist  t"
represent  Davidson  county  in  the  proposed  State
convention,  which  was  voted  down  In  the  po.pl, -.
Subsequently  he  whs  drawn  away  from  his  alle-
giance  to  the  I'nion,
and  t<M>k  an  active
part  against  thegov-
erniiient.  After  the
fall  <>f  Fort  Donel-
son  he  left  his  home,
and  until  he  died
held  an  oflice  in  the
Confederate  arinv.

KW I NG.  Charles,
jurist,  b.  in  Burling-
ton count  v.  N.  .1..
8  Julv.  17*0;  d.  in
Trenton,  N.  J.,  5
Aug.,  1888,  He  was
the  son  of  James
Swing,  a  Revolu-
tionary patriot,  and
a  commissioner  of
loans  for  New  Jer-
sey. Charles  was
graduated  with  hon-
ors at  Princeton  in  1798,  studied  law,  was  admit  ted
to  the  bar  in  1802,  and  practised  successfully  in
Trenton.  In  1812  he  became  a  counsellor,  and
from  1824  till  his  death  was  chief-justice  of  New
Jersey.  His  knowledge  of  law  was  profound,  and
he  was  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  ju-
rists in  the  state.  He  was  also  prominent  in  re-
ligious matters,  and  was  for  many  years  an  elder
in  the  Presbyterian  church.

BWDfCk  Finis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bedford  coun-
ty. Vs.,  10  June.  l??:f;  d.  in  Lexington,  Mo„
4  July,  1841.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  and
both  his  parents,  were  eminent  for  piety.  His
early  education  was  neglected,  but  it  is  said  that
he  studied  for  a  time  in  college.  After  the  death
of  his  parents  he  settled  near  Nashville.  Teiui..  and
in  \y*'2'.\  married  a  daughter  of  William  Davidson,
a  Revolutionary  general.  Son  afterward  he  went
to  LogM  county.  Ky..  where  he  was  licensed  to
preach,  and  in  008  WSJ  ordained  by  the  Cumltcr-
land  presbytery,  lie  met  with  remarkable  success
as  a  nvivalist.  but  his  ordination  was  not  reoog*
ni/.-d  by  the  Kentucky  synod,  and  the  presbytery
l«eing  dissolved,  and  the  action  <>f  the  -vnod  having
boon  sustained  bv  the  general  assembly,  he,  with
two  others. organized  in  1810  the  new  Cumberland
'Vtcrian  church,  which  now  numbers  about
2,<NMt  congregations.  In  doctrine  thev  OOOUpy  a
middle  ground  between  Calvinism  and  Arminian-
isin.  A  few  roan  after  originating  the  new  de-
nomination >! r.  Kwing  removed  to  Todd  county,
Ky..  and  beeaUM  pastor  ol  Lebanon  congregation,
near  Kwingsville.  In  1890  he  proceeded  to  Mi-
-on ri.  settled in  what is now  Cooper  county,  and

organised  a< gregation  at  New  Lebanon,  whirh

still  flourishes. In ItVM  In-  removed  to  Lexing-
ton, Lafayette  county,  where  ho  preached  till  his
i. lie  i-  the  author  of  " Lectures  on  Dirin-


whi<  h  contain-  the  pom  Of  UM  peculiarities!
of  the  creed  of  the  Cumberland  Presbyterians.
I  w  I  NO,  Jame*.  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster  county,

Pa..  .'I  Aug..  1 7:i«» ;  d.  in  llellam.  Vork  co..  Pa.,  1
Mimli,  Imm;.  lb-  Wlls  of  Si-ot <h- Irish  descent,  his
father  having  emigrated  from  the  north  of  Ireland
to  I'eiiii-vlvania  in  \TM.  The  -,,n  received  a  good
education.  During  Porbe'i  expedition  to  Fort
Du.piesnc  he  entered  the  provincial  satrioe,  and
was  commissioned lieutenant 10 M  lb-

was  a  memlxT  of  the  men]  assembly  from  1771
till  1775.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  be
was  on  the  committee  of  safety  for  York  county,
and  was  chosen  one  of  the  two  brigadier-gcnerali
of  the  Pennsylvania  ■OMoJatOfB,  41  July.  I T?«J.  lb-
had  a  |wrt  assigned  to  him  at  the  surprise  of
Trenton,  but  was  prevented  from  8JQSSJM  the
Delaware  as  previously  arranged,  owing  to  tie
and  high  wind,  lb-  -erved  Bf  vie. ■  |.i.-id«nt  |  f
Pennsylvania  from  7  Nov..  17*2.  till  (i  Nov..  K-t
In  the  latter  year,  and  under  the  constitution  of
l?89-'90,  he  was  a  iiicihIht  of  the  assembly  of
Pennsylvania,  and  served  as  state  senator  from
17'.»-~>  till  I7!»!».  He  was  one  of  the  original  trus-
tees of  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle.

KWING,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Nottingham.
Md..  U  June,  1  T:J2 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  P.
Sept..  18081  Hi-  ancestors  emigrated  from  Ire-
land and  settled  in  Pennsylvania.  After  attend-
ing the  academy  of  Dr.  Francis  Alison  in  New
Loudon,  ho  enured  Princeton,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1754,  and  served  as  tutor  in  17"»»i.
He  then  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Alison,  and
WSJ  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Newcastle.
While  employed  in  instructing  the  philosoph-
ical classes  in  the  College  of  Philadelphia,  during
the  absence  of  its  provost,  in  175!».  he  was  called
to  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  that  city,  lb
was  commissioned  in  lll'.i  to  solicit  contribu-
tions in  Great  Britain  for  the  support  of  the
academy  of  Newark,  in  Delaware,  anu  was  success-
ful. He  had  frequent  interviews  with  the  prime
minister.  Lord  North,  and  Dr.  Johnson.  The
last  affirmed  that  the  Americans  were  as  ignorant
as  they  wen*  rebellious,  and  said.  '•  You  never  read.
You  have  no  books  then-."  'Pardon  me,"  was
the  reply,  "we  have  read  the  'Rambler.  In
1775  he  returned  from  Europe,  and  from  l
till  his  death  held,  in  conjunction  with  his  pas-
torate, the  office  of  provost  of  the  liiiveisity  of
Pennsylvania.  He  was  a  thorough  mathematician
and  scientist,  and  assisted  Rittenhouse  in  survey-
ing the  boundaries,  of  several  states.  The  CuiveV-
sity  of  Edinburgh  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1773.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  made  OfTaral  contribu-
tions to  its  "Transact ions."  among  which  was  an
"Account  of  the  Transit  of  Venue  over  the  Sun."
Hi- collegiate  lectures  on  natural  philosophy,  and
a  biography  by  Bar.  R.  Patterson,  were  published
after  his  death  (2  vols.,  1808%  and  also  a  volume  of
his  ->  rmoii-.  with  a  memoir  (Philadelphia,  1N12).

KWING Thomas, statesman, b. mar R

Liberty,  <»hi Via,  88  I  ><•<•..  I7*i»:  d.  in  I-ancas-

t.r.  OtliOtMOot,  187L  His  father.  (Jeorge  Kwing.
ssrvod  In  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  removed  with
his  family  in  1 7!»2  to  the  Muskingum  river,  and
then  to  what  is  now  Athens  oounty,  Ohio.  In  this
Onoettied  district  young  Kwing's  education  was
necessarily  imj>erfect.  Hi-  -i-ter  taught  him  to
read,  ami  in  the  evenings  he  studied  the  few
1km. ks  at  his  command.  In  his  twentieth  year  he
left  hi-  home  and  worked  ill  the  Kanawha  sail  es-
talilishnients,  pursuing  his  studies  at  night  by  the
light  of  the  furnace-lire-, lie  remained  here  till


394


KWINO


BWING


he  had  earned  enough  money  to  clear  from  debt
the  farm  that  his  father  had  bought  in  1?!)',?.  and
hail  qualified  himself  to  enter  the  Ohio  univer-
sity at  Athens,  where,  in  1815,  he  received  the
first  degree  of  A.  R  that  was  ever  granted  in  the
Northwest. He  then  studied  law  in  Lam  aster,  was

admitted  to  the
bar  in  1816,  and
practised  with
success  for  fif-
teen years.  1  n
1831-'7  he  served
as  U.  S.  senator
from  Ohio,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as
a  Whig.  He  sup-
ported the  pro-
tective tariff  sys-
tem of  Clay,  and
advocated  a  re-
duction in  the
rates  of  postage,  a
recharteroftheU.
~~J < '  S.  bank,  and  the

' •  ^  --l---v_^7  revenue collec-

tion bill,  known
as  the  "  force-
bill."  He  opposed  the  removal  of  the  deposits  from
the  U.  S.  bank,  and  introduced  a  bill  for  the  settle-
ment of  the  Ohio  boundary  question,  which  was
passed  in  1836.  During  the  same  session  he  brought
forward  a  bill  for  the  reorganization  of  the  general
land-office,  which  was  passed,  and  also  presented  a
memorial  for  the  abolition  of  slavery.  In  July,
1836,  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  issued  what  was
known  as  the  "  specie  circular."  This  directed  re-
ceivers in  land-offices  to  accept  payments  only  in
gold,  silver,  or  treasury  certificates,  except  from
certain  classes  of  persons  for  a  limited  time.  Mr.
Ewing  brought  in  a  bill  to  annul  this  circular,  and
another  to  make  it  unlawful  for  the  secretary  to
make  such  a  discrimination,  but  these  were  not
carried.  After  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1837
he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  be-
came secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1841,  under
Harrison,  and  in  1849  accepted  the  newly  created
portfolio  of  the  interior,  under  Taylor,  and  organ-
ized that  department.  Among  the  measures  rec-
ommended in  his  first  report,  3  Dec.,  1849,  were
the  establishment  of  a  mint  near  the  California
gold-mines,  and  the  construction  of  a  railroad  to
the  Pacific.  When  Thomas  Corwin  became  secre-
tary of  the  treasury  in  1850,  Mr.  Ewing  was  ap-
pointed to  succeed  him  in  the  senate.  During
this  term  he  opposed  the  fugitive  slave  law,  Clay's
compromise  bill,  reported  a  bill  for  the  establish-
ment of  a  branch  mint  in  California,  and  advo-
cated a  reduction  of  postage,  and  the  abolition
of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia.  He  re-
tired from  public  life  in  1851,  and  again  resumed
his  law-practice  in  Lancaster.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  peace  congress  of  1861.  During  the  civil  war
he  gave,  through  the  press  and  by  correspondence
ami  personal  interviews,  his  counsel  and  influence
to  the  support  of  the  National  authorities.  While
he  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  political  subjects,  t  lie
law  was  his  favorite  study  and  pursuit.  He  early
won  and  maintained  throughout  his  life  unques-
tioned supremacy  at  the  bar  of  Ohio  :  and  ranked
in  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States  among
the  foremost  lawyers  of  the  nation.  In  1829,  just
after  his  father's  death,  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,
then  a  boy  nine  years  of  age,  was  adopted  by  Mr.
Swing,  who  afterward  appointed  him  to  the'U.  S.
military  academy,  and  in  1850  he  married  Ellen,


the  daughter  of  his  benefactor.— His  son.  Hugh
Boyle,  soldier.  1).  in  Ijancaster.  Ohio,  ::i  <>et.,
182*6:  was  educated  at  the  LT.  S.  military  academy.
At  the  time  of  the  gold  fever,  in  1849,  be  went  to
California  l>v  way  of  New  Orleans  and  Texas,
and  travelled  extensively  through  that  country,
going  to  the  High  Sierra  in  an  expedition  sent  by
his  father,  then  secretary  of  the  interior,  to  rescue
emigrants  from  the  snows.  In  1852  he  returned
by  way  of  Panama,  as  bearer  of  despatches  to
Washington.  He  then  went  to  Lancaster  ami
completed  his  law  studies,  began  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  St.  Louis  in  1854,  and  two  years
later  opened  an  office  with  his  brother  Thomas  in
Ijeavenworth,  Kansas.  In  1858  he  removed  to
Ohio,  in  order  to  assume  charge  of  his  father's
salt-works.  In  April,  1861,  he  was  appointed  bri-
gade-inspector of  Ohio  volunteers,  with  the  rank
of  major,  and  took  part  in  the  early  combats  in
the  mountains  of  West  Virginia  under  McClellan
and  Rosecrans.  He  commanded  the  30th  Ohio
regiment  in  August,  1861,  was  appointed  brigadier-
general,  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  brevetted  major-general
in  1865.  He  led  a  brigade  at  Antietam,  and  at
the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  and  a  division  at  Chicka-
mauga,  which  formed  the  advance  of  Sherman's
army,  and  which,  in  a  desperate  battle,  carried
Mission  Ridge.  He  was  afterward  ordered  to
North  Carolina,  and  was  preparing  a  secret  joint
military  and  naval  expedition  up  the  Roanoke,
when  the  war  came  to  an  end.  In  1866  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  minister  to  Holland,  where  he  served
for  four  years.  After  his  return  he  bought  a
small  estate  near  his  native  town,  where  he  has
since  resided.  Gen.  Ewing  has  travelled  widely
in  this  country  and  abroad,  and  is  author  of  "  The
Grand  Ladron,  a  Tale  of  Early  California,"  and
"A  Castle  in  the  Air"  (1887).  —  Another  son,
Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lancaster.  Ohio,  7  Aug.,
1829,  was  educated  at  Brown  university,  which  gave
him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1860.  He  was  private
secretary  to  President  Taylor  from  1849  till  1850,  and
subsequently  studied  law  in  Cincinnati,  where  he
began  to  practise  his  profession.  In  1856  he  re-
moved to  Leavenworth,  Kansas,  and  became  a
member  of  the  Leavenworth  constitutional  con-
vention of  1858,  and  in  1861  became  the  first  chief-
justice  of  the  state.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Peace  conference  of  1860.  He  resigned  his  judge-
ship in  1862,  recruited  the  11th  Kansas  regiment,
was  made  its  colonel,  and  served  with  distinction
in  the  civil  war,  taking  part  in  the  battles  of  Fort
Wayne.  Cane  Hill,  and  Prairie  Grove.  He  was
made  brigadier-general,  13  March,  1863,  for  gal-
lantry at  the  last-named  battle,  commanded  the
district  of  the  border,  and  subsequently  at  Pilot
Knob,  28  Sept.,  1864,  with  a  thousand  men,  held
his  position  against  the  repeated  assaults  of  the
Confederates  under  Price,  thus  checking  the  inva-
sion of  Missouri.  He  made  a  retreat  to  Rolla  in
1864,  and  in  1865  was  brevetted  major-general  of
volunteers.  After  the  war  he  practised  law  in
Washington,  D.  C,  but  returned  to  Lancaster  in
1871,  and  in  1877-81  was  a  member  of  congress,
where  he  prepared  a  bill  to  establish  a  bureau  of
labor  statistics.  He  also  actively  supported  the
measures  that  stopped  the  use  of  troops  at  the
polls,  advocated  the  remonetization  of  silver,  and
the  retention  of  the  greenback  currency.  In  1879
he  was  the  unsuccessful  candidate  tor  governor  of
Ohio.  At  the  close  of  his  last  term  in  ooflgreai  he
declined  a  renomination,  and  removed  to  New  York
city,  where  he  has  since  practised  law. — Another
son,  Charles,  soldier.  i>.  in  Lancaster,  Ohio.  6
March,  1835;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  G,  M  .Mine,


EWTNG


KYRR


BOfl


1888,  wa*  educated  in  hi-  iiativi-  town,  nt  it  I>oinin-

•  1  ul  tin-  l'iii\.T-ity  of  Virginia. At

the  beginning  of  the  civil war  In-  received  n  iniii-

■iaioa  in  Um  regular  army  m  captain  of  Um  ista

in  fun  try.  iiinl  also  served  for  some  tunc  <ni  tin-  stall
of  his  brother-in-law,  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman.  He
wan  brovottod  major  in  1WI  for  gallantry  in  the
assault  at  Vickshurg,  where  he  was  wounded
while  planting  tin-  tliivr  <>f  his  battalion  mi  tin-
met  He  wu  alio  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel
in  1884 for  services  in  the  Atlanta  cain|»aign,  ami

eoMoel  In  i**^  for  gallant  conduct  daring  Um  war.
i  »n  8  March.  \Htl~t,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers. Hen-signed  till  iMMIIllll— lull

in 1^'iT.  ami  practised  law  successful  Iv  in  Waah-
tegton.  1>.  ('..  daring  the  remainder  of  nis  Ufa
I  \MM..  William  llellfbrd.  physician,  l».  in

iwich.  X..I..  in  177<i;  d.  there,  88  April.  ((
II.  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1794.  studied
■adloina  al  Trenton  under  Dr.  Nicholas  BettviUa,
and  Ix'iran  to  practise  his  profession  in  the  island
of  St.  t'roix,  where  he  continued  for  two  years.
Hi-  then  tattled  in  Greenwich,  where  he  practised
for  twenty-eight  years.  Eor  many  years  he  was
■raiding  judge  of  the  county  courts,  for  ten  years
a  nieinlx-r  of  the  legislature,  and  a  member  of  the
Jersey  constitutional  convention  of  1841.  In
1888  he  was  president  of  the  New  Jersey  medical
society,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  oldest  fellows.

E»  IN(»,  William  Lee  Davidson,  senator.  I>.
in  1796  {  d.  in  Ohio,  25  March.  lH4t>.  He  received
an  academic  education,  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  har,  and  tiegnn  practice,  lie  became  re-
ceiver of  public  moneys  for  the  district  of  Vanda-
lia  in  1886.  and  in  lM'Jf^-'T  was  U.  S.  surveyor  of
public  lands  and  general  of  state  militia.  He
served  as  major  of  the  "Spy  battalion "  in  the
Black-Hawk  war  in  1832,  became  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  that  year,  and  was  its  speaker  in
1884,  acting  as  governor  from  15  Nov.  till  9  Dec.
On  21)  Dec.,  1835,  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate to  fill  the  vacancv  caused  bv  the  death  of  Elias
K.  Kane,  and  he  served  till  4  March,  1837.  He
was  speaker  of  the  state  house  of  representatives
in  1H40.  and  in  1H43  was  chosen  state  auditor,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.

EX.MOITH,  Edward  Pollen,  Viscount.  Eng-
lish naval  officer,  b.  in  Dover,  England.  18  April.
I7"i7:  «1.  in  Teiirnnioiith,  23  Jan..  1K3:{.  Reentered
the  navy  in  1770,  and  joined  the  frigate  "  Blonde,"
which  sailed  to  tbe  relief  of  Quclicc.  His  first  dis-
tinction was  gained  in  the  battle  of  Lake  Chain-
plain.  11  Oct..  177(1.  against  the  flotilla  of  Arnold.
whom  he  nearly  made  prisoner.  In  command  of  a
body  of  seamen,  he  rendered  great  assistance  to  the
army  of  llurgoyne  in  its  difficult  advance  to  Sara-
wa-  -int  to  England  with  despatches,  and

fromoted.  He  beaninc  poat-eaptain  in  1788,  and
rom  17H<>  till  17*9  was  stationed  otT  Newfound-
land.  In  the  war  with  Eranec  he  commanded  the
frigate  "Nvmphe."  of  thirty-six  guns,  in  1793,
and  captured  the  Erench  frigate  "La  Cleopativ,"

after  a  desperate  battle.  This  was  the  Hrst  prim
taken  in  the  war.  and  Exmouth  was  knighted,
ami  afterward  employed  to  blockade  the  BOOtl  01
Erame.  In  17!»<«,  DV  his  bravery  and  presence  of
mind,  he  saved  the  lives  of  all  on  bmru  a  wrecked
transport  near  Plymouth,  and  for  this  action
In-  tat  made  a  baronet.  He  was  elected  to  par-
liameiit  in  lHirj.  He  n-turned  to  the  navy  in
1804,  oai  promoted  rear-admiral,  and  made  i-oin-
inander-in-chief  in  the  East  Indies,  when-  h.
nihilated  the  Dutch  fleet  in  isiki.  He  became  vice-
admiral  in  lMOH.  was  sent  to  command  forces  in  the
Mediterranean  in  1*10,  ami  during  this  serviot  (in-


cluded treaties  with  AL'i.T*,  'ruin*,  and  Tri|«.li.
for  the  abolition  of  Christian  slavery.  In  1*14  at
was  created  liaroii  Exmouth  of  Canoiitrign  and
admiral  of  the  blue,  ami  in  1816  wan  advanced  to
a  viscounty  for  hi*  gallantry  in  bomliHrding  and
destroying  the  fleet  and  arsenal  of  Algiers  in  that
year. He  was  retired  from  active  service  in  1M2L

I  I  I'll.l.Y,  Jean  Charles  Marie,  French  au-
thor, b.  in  Salmi.  Bouches-du-Khone,  H  S-i.t.F  1KM.
lie  was  a  relative  of  the  famous  geograpner.  .ban
Joseph Expillv. received his education at the

B  Charlcmagi f  Paris,  was  graduated  inlaw

at  Aix,  and  afterward  airvod  hi-  time  in  a  regiment
of  lancers.  Since  1h4(i  he  ha- devoted  his  time  en-
tirely to  literary  work.  He  went  toSmth  America
in  1852  and  remained  till  1N5M,  studying  the  coun-
try and  the  potttfesj  and  economical  situation.
After  his  return  to  Paris  In- resumed  for  sometime
his  work  as  a  contributor  to  the  prominent  jour-
nals, but  soon  turned  his  attention  entirely  to
political  economy.  His  works  on  this  subject  soon
gained  him  a  reputation,  and  were  the  cause  of  his
appointment  in  August.  1M»«I.  as  commissary  of
emigration  in  Havre,  and  in  im>8  to  the  same  place
in  Marseilles.  He  published  "  Ix-  Brief]  tel  qu'il
est"  (1862) ;  "  Lcs  femraes  et  lea  meurs  du  Bresil "
(1803);  "  Du  mouvement  d'emigration  dans  le  port
de  Marseille"  (1864):  "  I^a  Traite,  1  emigration  et
la  colonisation  au  Bresil  "  (1865);  "  La  verite  sur  le
conflit  entre  Le  Bresil,  Buenos  Ayres,  Montevideo
et  le  Paraguay  devant  la  civilization"  (lH«i.*u;
"  L'ouverture  de  l'Amazone,  ses  consequences  poli-
tiques  et  commerciales  "  (1867);  "  I^a  politique  du
Paraguay"  (1869):  and  several  novels,  including
"  L'epee  de  Damocles"  (1843);  "Grande  dame  et
lorette"  (1854);  M  Les  fliles  de  Mahomet  "(18
"  Le  pirate  noir"  (1858);  "  \m  Cabra  d'or"  (1864);
and  "  lies  aventures  du  capitaine  Cayol  "  (1866).

EY.MA,  Louis  Xavler,  French* author,  b.  in
St.  Pierre,  Martinique,  West  Indies.  Hi  Oct..  1816;
d.  in  Paris,  29  March,  1876.  When  nineteen  he
was  appointed  in  the  navy  department  in  Paris,
where  he  remained  eleven  years,  and  in  1846  he  was
sent  by  the  government  on  missions  to  the  Weal
Indies  and  the  United  States.  After  his  return  in
1*48  he  published  interesting  re|>orts  alioiit  the
primary  instruction  and  the  general  school  system
of  the  countries  which  he  had  visited.  BOOB  after-
ward he  travelled  for  ■  second  time  through  the
United  States,  and  s]H-nt  several  years  in  studying
the  institutions  and  natural  features  of  the  country.
He  recorded  his  observations  in  several  works  peb-
lished  after  his  return,  of  which  the  Ix-st  known
are"  Lcsfeinines  du  nouveau  nionde '*  (1853) :  "  !.■  -
deux  Anieriques"  (1853);  "  Ia's  |H>aux  rouges"
(1854):  "Les  peaux noii-  - .  "  \* MfMD-

lique  Atnericaine  ;  -e-  institutions  j ses  homn
(2  vols.,  lsiii)-.  ••  Lestrentequatrc  etottei  d<-  l'union
Aincricaine"  (2  vul-..  lsii'J):  and  ••  I  <a  C  basse  a  res-
clave  "  (18«M>). Healsojiublishedan  "  Intnxluction
a  une  politique  gem-rale  "(1S42):  and  manv  novels.

EYRE,  Edward  John.  British  diplomatist,  b.
in  England  in  August.  1816,  Patting  to  secure  a
ci.mmis-ion  in  the  army,  he  went  to  Australia  in
1KW.  where  he  imfaaen  in  -heep-fanniim.  •■■  ap-
pointed magistrate  <>f  his  district  and  protector  ef
the  aborigines,  and  la-came  distinguished  at  «n
explon-r.  alter  serving  tot  some  time  as  governor
Of  New  Zealand,  he  wits  appointed  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  the  island  of  St.  \  inceiit  in  1864  :""1  >»
•  '80  w.i-  in  the  island  of  Antigua,  acting  as
administrator  of  the Leeward i-lamb  during  the

■hawinn  <>f  tin-  governor, in  l-^ni  ha  retained  to

England  t<.  recruit  his  health,  which  had  bsetJM
im|Miired by  loiiv; residence in tropical climates.


896


KYKK


EYZAGUIRRE


ami  in  1862  he  was  chosen  t«>  administer  the  gov-
ernment (if  Jamaica  and  its  (lc|H'mlcncics  daring
the  ■harm  re  <»f  Qot.  Darling:  He  found  thi-  i
matter  <if  difficulty,  as  the  inhabitants  were  dis-
affected and  on  the  point  of  rebellion.  The  col-
ored population,  constituting  1)7  |>er  cent,  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  island,  suffered  from  agricul-
tural depression  and  loss  of  trade,  and  attributed
their  destitution  to  the  misgovernment  of  their
white  legislators,  who  had  recently  increased  the
taxes  and  voted  money  for  public  works  of  a  specu-
lative character.  They  were  further  incensed  by
new  laws  prescribing  flogging  for  petty  offences,
and  introducing  cruel  puni-hments  in  the  prisons.
In  1864  Mr.  Eyre  was  appointed  captain-general,
governor,  and  vice-admiral  of  the  island  of  Ja-
maica, and  in  October,  1865.  suppressed  an  insur-
rection. The  means  that  he  adopted  in  accom-
E betting  this  were  censured  by  many  in  Great
Britain,  especially  his  condemnation  to  death  of
a  rich  mulatto,  George  William  Gordon.  A  com-
mission of  inquiry  was  despatched  to  Jamaica,  and
Gov.  Eyre  was  superseded  temporarily  by  Sir  Henry
Storks. Though  the  report  of  the  commission.

Eublished  in  June,  1866,  disproved  the  charges
rought  against  Eyre,  he  was  nevertheless  recalled,
and  on  his  arrival  in  England  was  prosecuted  by  the
"Jamaica  Committee"  for  his  action  in  suppress-
ing the  revolt;  but  this  and  other  prosecutions,
extending  over  four  years,  costing  him  £10,000,
failed  to  substantiate  the  charges  against  him.

EYRE,  Sir  William,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Hat-
field, England,  in  1805:  d.  in  Warwickshire,  Eng-
land, 8  Sept.,  1859.  He  was  a  son  of  Sir  George
Eyre.  He  entered  the  army  in  1823,  accompanied
the  73d  regiment  to  Canada,  and  was  aide-de-camp
to  the  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Canada.  Sub-
sequently he  served  in  the  Caffre  war  and  attained
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  had  command
of  a  brigade  in  the  Crimean  war,  and  for  his  ser-
vices was  created  a  knight  of  the  bath,  a  com-
mander of  the  legion  of  honor,  and  a  knight  of
the  Turkish  order  of  Medjidie.  In  June,  1856,  he
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  all  the  troops
in  Canada,  and  he  also  administered  the  govern-
ment during  the  absence  of  Sir  Edmund  W.  Head,
the  governor-general.

EYSTER,  Nellie,  author,  b.  in  Frederick,  Md„
in  1831.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Abraham  Bless-
ing, and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  married  David  A.
T.  Eyster,  of  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  where  she  resided
till  her  removal  to  San  Jose,  Cal.,  in  1875.  She  has
contributed  frequently  to  H  Harper's  Magazine,"
"  Saint  Nicholas,"  and  "  Wide  Awake,"  and  has
published  in  book-form  "Sunnv  Hours"  (1865);
"Chincapin  Charlie"  (Philadelphia,  1866);  "On
the  Wing";  "Tom  Harding  and  his  Friends"
(1869);  "Robert  Brent's  Three  Christmas  Hays";
and  "  Lionel  Wintour's  Diarv  "  (1882).

EYTINGE,  Rose,  actress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  September,  1835.  She  first  appeared  in
Brooklyn  as  an  amateur  in  1852.  and  during  the
following  year  went  west,  playing  with  Hough's
dramatic  company.  Later  she  was  connected  with
the  Green  street  theatre  in  Albany,  and  acted  there
for  some  time.  Her  first  appearanc*  in  New  York
was  in  1862  at  the  Olympic  theatre,  under  the
management  of  Laura  Keene.  where  vhe  filled  an
engagement  of  two  weeks.  Subsequently  she  was
connected  with  Edwin  Booth,  and  afterward  Was
engaged  at  the  Winter  Garden  theatre.  In  lS(i8-'!)
-lie  was  leading  lady  in  Wallaek*s  company,  play-
ing Nancy  Sykcs,  Lady  (Jay  Spanker.  Beatrice,
and  other  characters.  She  then  starred  through
the  country  in  various  roles,  succeeded  best  in  Rose


Michel,  and  afterward  played  Oervaise  in  "Drink"
at  the  Standard  theatre.  New  York,  making  a  great
success.  Subsequently  she  appeared  in  the  titular
role  of  '■Felicia"  at  the  Union  square  in  New
York.  In  1880  she  visited  England,  where  she  was
well  received,  and  in  1NH4  made  a  starring  tour
through  the  United  States,  playing  in  legitimate
drama.  While  in  Albany  she  married  David
Barnes,  from  whom  she  was  afterward  divorced,


and married  George H.  Butler,  for  a  time  I '.  S.

kgypt. Later  she  married  Cyril

Searle,  who  was  her  leading  support  while  travelling.


consul-general  to  Egyt


EYZAGUIRRE  (ay-thah-ghee'-ray),  the  name
of  five  brothers,  Chilians,  who  lived  in  the  18th  and
19th  centuries. — Air  list  in.  statesman,  b.  in  Santia-
gode Chili  in  1766;  d.  there.  17  July,  1837.  During
the  first  days  of  the  revolt  of  Chili  against  Spanish
domination  in  1810  he  was  a  member  of  the  mu-
nicipal corporation  of  Santiago,  and  joined  the
revolutionary  cause  with  enthusiasm,  and  in  1812
was  elected  deputy  to  the  first  congress.  When,  in
1813,  Gen.  Carrera  marched  to  meet  the  invasion
of  Pareja,  the  senate  appointed  a  temporary  gov-
ernment, and  Eyzaguirre  was  elected  a  member.
He  took  an  active  part  in  founding  the  national
academy  and  many  schools,  and  in  promulgating
the  liberty  of  the  press;  and  during  this  adminis-
tration the  first  republican  paper  was  printed  at
Santiago.  After  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Ranca-
nea,  bl  October,  1814,  he,  with  other  patriots,  was
imprisoned  on  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez,  untd
the  battle  of  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,  1817,  restored  the
exiles  to  their  families.  During  the  presidency  of
O'Higgins,  Eyzaguirre  retired  to  private  life  and
devoted  himself  to  his  commercial  interests.  Dur-
ing this  time  he  organized  the  famous  Calcutta
company,  for  direct  trade  between  the  East  Indies
and  Valparaiso,  and  thus  was  the  first  that  oaaaad
the  Chilian  flag  to  float  in  Asiatic  seas.  After  the
downfall  of  the  O'Higgins  government,  28  Jan.,
1823,  Eyzaguirre  was  twice  called  to  the  executive
chair  of  the  republic,  first  as  a  member  of  the  pro-
visional government,  and  again  after  the  resigna-
tion of  President  Freire,  whom  he  succeeded  as
vice-president,  10  Sept.,  1826,  to  26  Jan.,  1827,  when
lie  resigned  in  consequence  of  a  military  mutiny,
and  returned  to  private  life. — Miguel,  jurist,  b.  in
Santiago  about  1770;  d.  in  Lambayeque,  Peru,  in
1821.  In  1805  he  was  appointed  prosecutor  of  the
royal  supreme  court  of  Lima,  and  afterward  was
made  judge  of  the  same  court ;  but,  on  account  of
the  participation  of  his  brothers  in  the  liberation
of  Chili,  he  fell  under  suspicion,  was  arrested  and
sent  as  prisoner  to  Spain,  but  died  on  the  way. —
Domingo,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Santiago,  17  July,
1775;  d.  there  in  April,  1854.  He  studied  in  the
seminary  of  his  native  city,  and  showed  remarka-
ble aptitude  for  mathematics  and  chemistry.  When
scarcely  nineteen  years  old  he  was  appointed  as-
sayer  of  the  royal  mint  of  Santiago,  but  resigned
the  next  year,  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the
cultivation  of  a  farm  near  Santiago, inherited  from
his  father.  There  his  labors  tended  more  to  the
improvement  of  the  condition  of  the  laboring
classes  than  to  his  own  pecuniary  interest.  He
improved  the  yield  of  some  of  the  poorest  lands
by  his  knowledge  of  chemist ry.  introduced  modern
agricultural  implements,  and,  by  giving  his  labor-
ers  better  than  the  accustomed  wages  and  caring
for  their  moral  and  material  we  If  are,  soon  assembled
a  colony  of  well-to-do  and  contented  people.  He
also  introduced  looms,  which,  although  imperfect,
served  to  weave  from  native  wool  the  coarse  cloth
worn  by  the  peasantry.  From  the  first  \.
his  country  life  he  agitated  the  project  of  a  <  anal


VCl'IKKK


KZKKIKL


891


tin-  barren  plain  -urn.iiTi.lin^  San'
which  had  been  begun  some  lime  hefore,  bo!
abandoned.  Thi'  Spanish  government  approved
tlif  plan,  and  in  1808  iiia.l.-  Rysaguirre  director.
II.'  pushed  tin-  \v..rk  with  eiicrgv  until  it  was  in-
terrupted by  tin-  revolution  ..f  1*10,  „n,|  notwith-
standing In-  s_\  inpathi/ed  with  tin-  pat  ri«  -t  ic  cause.
he  attained  from  any  participation.  His  pn
Man  honorable  an<l  impartial  man  was  so  great
that.  even  when  his  brothers  were  exiled,  he  suf-
fered no  persecution  from  the  Spanish  authorities,
ami  was  whlltd  to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  his
oompatriot*.  When  the  independence  of  chili  was
finally  established  in  1H17,  he  resumed  his  favorite
work,  ami  in  IN'20.  amiil  great  festivities,  the  canal
of  Maipo  was  opened,  'Phis,  with  many  smaller
lateral  canals.  s<M>n  converted  the  arid  plain  into
a  fertile  garden.  It  was  placed  by  the  government
under  the  administration  of  a  board,  01  which  Fy-
zaguirrc  was  appointed  president.  In  1H'J:{  he  was
com  missioned  to  reorganize  the  charitable  institu-
tions, ami  uadartuua:  the  task  of  building  a  home
for  wayfarers  and  needy  |f fTI n ill.  Within  a  few
years  he  had  collected  the  necessary  means,  and  a
new  and  commodious  building  was  erected.  In
I  be  was  appointed  first  governor  «>f  the  de-
partment of  Victoria,  the  capital  of  which  he  had
founded  and  spent  a  good  part  of  his  fortune  in
improving,  lie  established  the  agricultural  so-
ciety in  1K18.  and  was  elected  its  president.  He
was  several  times  deputy  to  the  National  congress,
where  he  soon  became  noted  for  his  honesty.  In
!M~>  ha  attempted  to  establish  a  socialistic  colony
in  the  country,  where  the labor  and  produce  should
be  shared  bv  all.  hut  soon  dissensions  broke  out,
and  the  project  failed.  A  few  years  later  he  un-
dertook to  establish  a  large  cloth-factory,  with  the
object  of  improving  the  condition  of  the  poor  and
giving  oceupation  to  women  and  children.  In  this
enterprise  he  invested  the  greater  part  of  his  for-
tune, but  before  the  factory  was  finished  bodied.
The  Maipo  canal  board  erected  a  statue  to  his
memory.— Jose"  Alejo,  clergyman,  b.  in  Santiago
in  lTtti:  d.  there  in  1850,  studied  in  the  semi-
nary of  hi9  native  city,  and  in  the  University  of
San  KelijH'.  where  he  was  graduated  in  law  in  1803.
He  liegan  the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  at
the  same  time  was  made  professor  of  canonical
law  in  the  university.  In  1805  he  accompanied  his
brother  Miguel  to  Lima,  but  decided  to  enter  Un-
church, and  in  1M07  was  consecrated  priest.  He
returned  in  1815  to  Chili,  and  was  appointed  at-
torney of  the  ecclesiastical  court  of  the  archdiocese
of  Santiago,  and  afterward  rector  of  the  parish  of
Sagrario,  where  he  became  known  as  the  most  emi-
nent pulpit  orator  of  .South  America  In  182'2  he
was  lianished  by  the  dictator  O'Higgins  to  Mendo-
za,  where  he  was  well  received  by  the  clergy,  ami
for  two  years  directed  an  educational  institute
that  was  founded  by  him.  Then  he  returned  to
Chili,  and  by  the  government  of  Freire  was  ap-
pointed on  several  Important  oomnileelone  The
archbishop  made  him  his  vicar,  and  afterward
canon  of  the  cathedral.  He  was  elected  three
times  to  congress, and  as  each  signed  the  consti-
tution of  ls-.'S.  and  later  was  councillor  of  state.
S.me  years  later  be  was  elected  dean  of  the  cathe-
dral, and  when the  new  bishopric  of  Serena  was

founded 06 was offered the seat,  but declined  it.

In  1K43,  on  the  death  of  Archbishop  Vicuna,  be
was  ap|Miiutcd  capitular  vicar,  and  so..n  alerted  to
the  archbishopric,  in  which  dignity  he  oontln
his  simple,  unostentatious  life.  Toward  the  end
Of  1846,00  aOOOnnl  Of  declining  health,  he  resigned
the  a  re  hi  episcopal  seat,  and  lived  in  privacy  at  San-


tiago till  his  rtoafh  Ifjfjj  I  if  ii  in- io.  senator,  b.  in
Santiago  aboul  1787;  d,  then-  about  ih.v».  t.«-k
a  prominent part in  the  Chil  .for  1  i  I  >-

any,  was  banished  with  his  brother  Augustin  to

.luan  Fernandez,  and  returned  in  1H7.  In  1888
ho  was  appointed  and

in 1KM senator  of  the republic, which phv  ■
held  until his  death. In U87  he  wrote  ah:
of  the  Chilian  revolution.— His  son.  Joae  Ignarin
Victor, clergyman, b. in Santiago  de Chi;
.March.  1884;  d.  in  Alexandria.  Ejrypt. 8  Oct..  I
studied in tin-  seminary of Santiago, was  early
consecrated  priest,  and  soon  liecama  famous  as  an
orator. In  1M.VI  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  in
1868 Ix-caiue vice-president Of the lower house.
At  the  same  time  he  was  a  mcmlicr  of  several  U--

lle\oIellt s,M-ietirs. alld received high credit for

promoting  public  instruction  and  protecting  the
|>oor.  He  was  also  professor  of  the  humanities,
theology,  atld  sacred  sejence.  He  travel]. -d  exten-
sively in  Palestine.  Furope,  and  the  I'nited  Stat.-.
and  published  a  work  descriptive  of  that  count  rv.
In  1H71  he  founded  in  Home  a  South  American
seminary,  and  was  appointed  a  tnonsignor.  Fvza-
guirre  was  elected  inemt»er  of  several  scicntili
cieties  in  Italy  and  France,  and  honorary  member
of  the  Spanish  academy.  Returning  from  one  of
his  trips  to  Palestine,  ■>  died  OB  board  a  steamer
in  the  port  of  Alexandria.  His  most  importanl
publications  are  -La  Materia  oniorlaatioa. pofftioa
y  literaria  de  Chile  " ;  "  Kl  catolicismo  en  presencia
de  sus  diaidentei " :  and  ••  Los  intanaee  cat.'.licos  en

America*':  all  of  which  were  published  in  Chili,
and  translated  into  French  i  Paris.  1874).

I  /I  h  I  II..  Moses  Jacob,  sculptor,  b.  in  Rich-
mond. Va..  86  Oct..  1H44.  He  is  of  Hebrew  parent-
age, and  at  an  early  age  manifested  his  talent  by
painting  panoramas.  \\,-  entered  the  Virginia  mili-
tary institute,  at  Lexington,  in  1861,  and  was  gradu-
ated there  in  1888, after  earring  in  the  Confeder-
ate army  in  1864-'5.  He  then  •erred  in  his  fathers
dry-goods  store,  but  devoted  a  portion  of  each  day
to  his  art,  and  executed  some  creditable  jmintings.
among  which  was  "The  Prisoner's  Wife."  Sh>ii
afterward  he  gave  his  attention  to  sculpture,  and

C  reduced  "Cain,  or  the  Offering  Rejected,"  an  ideal
ust  that  showed  dramatic  talent.  After  study-
ing anatomy  in  the  Medical  college  of  Virginia  ne
removed  to  Cincinnati  in  1888,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  went  to  Berlin.  Germany.  In  1*72  he
modelled  the  colossal  bust  of  Washington,  now  in
Cincinnati,  which  gained  him  admission  into  the
Society  of  artists  of  Berlin,  In  1*7:1  he  won  the
Michael  Peer  prize,  which  had  never  before  been
awarded  to  a  foreigner.  In  1H74  the  Jewish  se-
cret order  Bona  of  the  Covenant  commissioned  him
to  .\ecute  a  group  entitled  "Religious  LiU-rty"
for  the  Centennial  exhibition.  This  was  unveiled
in  Fainnount  Park,  Philadelphia,  86  Nov..  ls;>;.
and  now  stands  in  front  of  Horticultural  Hall.  He
was  afterward  commissioned  to  execute  statues  f,,r
the  outside  niches  of  the  Corcoran  art-gallery,
Washington,  1).  C.  Since  1NM<;  his  subjects  have
liecn  mainly  ideal.  Anions  his  works  are  busts  ,.f
Liszt  and  Cardinal  Hohenlohe  :  a  statuette  of  "  In-
dustrv"  (1888);  reliefs  of  Schiller  and  Qoetha
£870);  boa  relief  portraitaef  Farmgut  (1819) and

Robert  F.  Lee  >'.■'>):  "Pan  and  Amor."  a  Iws-
relief  (1878)]  "Fountain  >.f  Neptune."  Netturno,
Italy  (1884)]  a  bn>nze  Medallion  of  William  W.
Corcoran  for  his  gallery  in  Washington  (1886);
and  a  group  entitled  "  Art  and  Nature."  in  Frank-
fort, Germany  (1887),  He  received  the  cavalier's
cross  of  merit  for  art  and  science,  with  a  diploma
from  the  grand-duke  of  Saxe-Mciningcn.  in  1X*7.


398


I'Al'.KK'l


FABREGAT


F


FABKRT,  Antoine(fah-bare).  French  traveller,
b.  in  Moirans,  Franche-Comte,  in  1532:  d.  in  Zag-
uato,  Mexico,  2  March,  LS74  Hfl  settled  in  Mexico
in  00 1.  where  he  soon  acquired  a  competency.
Thenceforward  he  decided  to  devote  himself  to  ex-
ploring the  northern  part  of  the  country.  He  de-
part ed  on  his  fust  expedition  in  1565  with  Father
Pinto,  a  Franciscan  monk.  The  party,  consisting
of  four  Europeans  and  thirty  porters,  after  thirty-
two  days  of  steady  marching,  reached  a  large  town
called  Chaco,  in  the  province  of  Las  Tiguas,  where
the  hostility  of  the  Indians  forced  them  to  turn
back,  and  on  the  return  journey  Father  Pinto  died
of  a  fever.  Fabert  was  made  bailiff  of  Cuatro
Gienegas,  in  New  Biscay,  in  1566,  retaining  the  of-
fice for  four  years.  He  finally  decided  to  under-
take a  new  exploring  trip,  and  set  out  from  Cua-
tro (Jienegas,  7  Oct.,  1570,  accompanied  by  fifteen
soldiers,  numerous  slaves,  and  one  hundred  horses
and  mules  laden  with  arms  and  provisions.  Tak-
ing his  former  route,  he  had  penetrated  by  Decem-
ber to  the  country  of  the  Tobosos,  who  disputed
his  passage.  He  set  out  on  his  return  journey  on
11  Dec.,  taking  with  him  as  prisoners  a  dozen
Tobosos,  after  burning  two  of  their  villages.  His
third  expedition  was  his  most  important.  Leaving
San  Bartolom6,  8  Nov.,  1573,  with  25  soldiers,
200  slaves,  and  140  baggage-horses  and  mules,  he
reached  the  Conchos  territory  on  the  11th.  Turn-
ing eastward,  he  avoided  the  Tobosos,  and  on  14
Dec.  entered  the  country  of  the  Cumanes,  or
Patarabuyes,  a  warlike  tribe,  who  inhabited  the
borders  of  the  Rio  del  Norte,  and  who  were  quite
advanced  in  civilization.  Their  principal  town
was  built  of  stone,  its  streets  wore  straight  and
clean,  and  it  contained  several  squares,  ornamented
with  fine  trees. A  march  of  140  miles  through  a

Sine  forest  brought  Fabert  to  the  borders  of  the  Rio
el  Norte,  a  thickly  populated  region.  On  29  Jan.
he  entered  the  Cumanes  territory,  where  he  saw
four  cities  and  estimated  their  population  at  about
25,000.  The  capital  was  Cia,  a  commercial  city.
The  inhabitants  were  clothed  in  garments  of  woven
cotton.  On  1 1  Feb.  he  reached  the  country  of  the
Ameyas,  which  contained  five  towns  with  a  popu-
lation of  about  30,000.  On  the  16th  he  visited  the
city  of  the  Acomas,  built  in  the  midst  of  rocks,
and  60  miles  farther  on  he  reached,  on  20  Feb.,
the  Zufli  country,  the  capital  of  which  was  Cibola.
Fabert  here  found  the  cross  planted  by  Francisco
Vasquez  de  Coronado  in  1540.  marking  the  graves
of  three  of  his  companions.  On  26  Feb.  he  arrived
at  the  province  of  Mohotze  and  stopped  in  the
principal  town.  Zaguato,  which  had  a  population
of  about  10,000  inhabitants.  Here  Fabert  died  of  a
fever.  His  companions  raised  a  tomb  to  his  memo-
ry, and  conducted  the  expedition  back  to  San  Bar-
tolorae,  where  it  arrived  15  May,  1574.  The  coun-
tries through  which  Fabert  passed  were  explored
about  ten  years  later  by  Espejo  (q.  v.).  Fabert  is
mentioned  by  Mendoza  in  his  "Historiadel  Grande
Reyno  de  China"  (Madrid,  1589);  by  Hakluyt  in
his  "  Voyages";  by  Humboldt  in  his  "  Essai  |>oli-
tique  sur  Te  Royaume  de  la  Nouvell  Espagne  " ;
and  by  Bordier  in  his  "  Histoire  du  Mexique.

FABRE,  Charles  Edward,  Canadian  R.  C.
archbishop,  b.  in  Montreal,  28  Feb.,  1827.  At  the
age  of  nine  he  was  sent  to  the  College  of  St.  Hya-
cinthe,  where  he  remained  until  1843.  After  spend-
ing two  years  in  Paris,  he  entered  the  ecclesiastical
seminary  of  Issy. In  1846  he  visited  Italy,  ob-


tained an  audience  with  the  pope,  and  returned  to
Canada.  He  was  ordained  priest.  L':!  1-Vli..  1850,
and  stationed  as  curate  in  SoraL  On  80  Oct..  18
he  was  appointed  pastor  of  Pointe-Claire,  where  he
exercised  his  ministry  for  two  years.  He  wai  then
summoned  to  Montreal,  and  became  distinguished
as  a  pulpit  orator;  also  for  his  influence  among  tin-
students  of  the  city,  his  lectures  and  retreats  hav-
ing wrought  a  marked  change  among  the  medical
students.  He  made  a  second  visit  to  Rome  in
1869  at  the  time  of  the  Vatican  council,  and  thence
went  to  Belgium  to  study  the  method  of  articular
tion  in  use  in  the  deaf-and-dumb  asylums.  II,
afterward  turned  his  experience  to  account  in  the
institution  that  he  founded  in  Montreal.  On  1
April,  1873,  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Gratian-
opolis  and  coadjutor  of  Montreal.  He  was  ap-
pointed bishop  of  Montreal,  11  May,  1876,  and  in
1886,  the  diocese  of  Montreal  having  been  erected
into  an  archiepiscopal  see,  Dr.  Fabre  became  the  fir-t
archbishop,  8  June. — His  brother,  Louis  K.  Hec-
tor, Canadian  journalist,  b.  in  Montreal,  9  Aug.,
1834,  was  educated  at  the  College  of  L'Assomption
and  St.  Hyacinthe,  and  at  St.  Sulpice  of  Montreal.
He  studied  law  with  his  brother-in-law,  the  late
Sir  George  E.  Carrier,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  of
Lower  Canada  in  1856.  He  has  been  long  con-
nected with  the  newspaper  press  of  Quebec.  He
was  for  some  time  editor  of  "  L'Ordre, '  Montreal,
and  from  1862  till  1866  had  editorial  management
of  "  Le  Canadien,"  Quebec.  In  1869  he  founded
"  L'Eveneraent,"  Quebec,  and  was  its  editor  and

groprietor.  He  has  been  a  vice-president  of  the
tominion  editors'  and  reporters'  association,  and
president  of  the  Literary  and  historical  society  of
Quebec.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  a
seat  in  the  house  of  commons  in  1873,  but  was
called  to  the  senate  in  1875.  He  is  the  author
of  "Esquisse  biographie  sur  Chevalier  de  Lori-
mier"  (Montreal,  1856);  "  Ecrivains  Canadiens"
(" Canadian  Review,"  1865-'6) ;  " Canadian  Litera-
ture" (1866);  and  "Confederation,  Independence,
Annexation"  (Quebec,  1871).

FABREGAT,  Luis  (fah-bray-gaf),  Mexican
scholar,  b.  in  Mexico  in  1746;  d.  there  in  1809.
He  was  the  son  of  a  rich  Mexican  ship-owner,  and
was  himself  engaged  in  commerce  for  some  time,
but,  after  suffering  several  severe  losses,  he  decided
to  give  up  business  and  devote  himself  to  study.
He  entered  the  Jesuit's  college  in  Mexico  in  1774,
and  was  debating  as  to  what  branch  he  should  pur-
sue, when  Father  Figueira,  superior  of  the  order,
suggested  that  he  apply  himself  to  deciphering
some  Aztec  manuscripts  in  the  college  library.
Father  Fabregat  immediately  set  to  work,  became
greatly  interested,  and  was  soon  able  to  read  the
manuscripts.  He  spent  much  time  in  wandering
about  the  country,  examining  private  libraries,
and  searching  for  stones  bearing  Aztec  inscrip-
tions. He  soon  gathered  a  magnificent  collection,
which  he  spent  his  time  in  deciphering.  The
Jesuits  now  urged  him  to  go  to  Rome,  where  he
could  profit  by  the  labors  of  such  men  as  Boturini,
Veytia,  Borunda,  and  Antonio  Gama,  some  of
whom  were  still  living,  and  where  the  treasures  of
the  Vatican  would  aid  him  in  his  researches.  He
accordingly  set  out  for  Rome,  where,  to  facilitate
his  studies.  Cardinal  Borgia  made  him  librarian  in
1780.  Thenceforward  Father  Fabregat  lived  al-
ternately in  Rome  and  Mexico.  The  French  in-
vasion of 1800  forced him  to  return  to  Mexico


I  A  IK


BOO


Krmancntly.  and  he  remained  then*  till  hi*  death.
it  her Fabregal's  works  are  of  creat  vain,
was  one  of  the  first to  explain  1 1 1« -  signification  of

A«te<-  mamiaoilrHs.  tad  therefore  «••  own  to  him  all
knowledge  of  Mexican  history  before  the  Spanish

|iiest. It is  much  to  In-  rngfOttad  that Father

irogat  died  before  the  completion  of  his  la

ainl left behind him but few  notes,  for  since  his

time  hut little  advance  has  been  made  in  knowl-

■  ■  on  these  subjects. 1 1  tit  1  he  lived  a  few  yean

longer,  many  points  would  have  baafl  decide<l  that
ti>  this  day  remain  contested.  Father  Pahregat
left  a  manuscript in  Italian  in  the  Vatican  library

entitled  ••  Bxpnontiona  delli  flguri  bierogiinohi  del
Oodiec  Me\i<ano."  This  work  was  published  by
Kamire/  (1887),  and  opened  the  way  to  Important

discoveries.

I  \(.  NAM,  Joseph  (fan-vah'-nee).  artist,  b.  in
Naples,  Italy.  24  Dei'..  1819;  d.  in  New  York  city.  81
May,  1H?:{.  He  studied  art  In  the  Royal  academy  of
Naples,  and  began  his  career  at  an  early  age.  His
reputation  was  established  by  several  crayon  por-
t  rai t  s,  aim  >n g  the  m<  >st  remarkable  of  which  was  that
of  Baron  Smucker.  He  removed  to  Vienna,  and
painted  a  portrait  of  the  Archduke  Charles.  In
1842  he  accepted  the  offer  from  the  queen  regent  of
Spain.  Maria  Christina,  to  make  album- portraits  of
the  distinguished  parsons  that  sharetl  her  exile.
While  under  this  engagement  he  formed  the  ac-
quaintance of  Sir  Robert  Peel  and  Sir  Henry  Bul-
wer.  with  whom  he  came  to  New  York  in  1851,
and  there  married  an  American.  In  1858  he  vis-
ited KurojH'.  and  was  ordered  !>y  Queen  Christina,
then  ac  Malmaison,  to  paint  two  portraits  of  her-
self and  portraits  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  La-
dislas  Czartoriski.  In  1860  he  painted  two  por-
traits of  Richard  Cobden,  one  of  which  was  given
by  Fagnani  to  the  New  York  sanitary  fair,  where
it  was  bought  by  Morris  Ketchum,  Esq.,  who  pre-
sented it  to  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce;
the  other  was  purchased  by  the  National  portrait
gallery  of  London.  His  principal  works  are  the
portraits  of  Garibaldi,  Victor  Emanuel,  the  Prime
Minister  Ratazzi  and  Gen.  Cialdini,  Sir  Henry
Bulwer,  Lord  Byron,  the  ex-Empress  Eugenie,  and
the  Countess  Guicciola.  Among  his  drawings  is  a
sketch  of  President  Tavlor,  taken  after  his  death,
and  a  portrait  of  Sir  Henry  Bulwer,  executed  in
Madrid  in  1840.  His  house  in  New  York  contained
many  rare  specimens  of  art,  collected  from  all
parts  of  Europe.  This  collection  was  sold  shortly-
after  his  death.  His  paintings  of  the  "  Nine
Muses,"  now  in  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art,
New  York,  attracted  much  attention,  as  well-known
American  beauties  had  served  as  models.

FAGOAGA,  Francisco  (fab  go  sh'-gah),  Mexi-
can philanthropist,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  7  Feb..
I  Tss  ;  d.  there.  80  July,  1861.  He  was  a  son  of  the
first  Marquis  of  A  part  ado.  Fagoaga  entered  the
College  of  San  Ildefonso  in  1T!*!».  where  he  studied
philosophy,  went  to  Paris  in  1808  to  finish  his
studio,  and  afterward  travelled  through  Europe.
After  his  return  to  Mexico  he  was  elected,  in  1820,
deputy  for  the  province  of  Mexico  to  the  Spanish
aortas,  and,  sympathizing  with  the  struggle  for  in-
dependence in  his  native  country,  spoke  often  in
defence  of  its  political  rights,  and.  together  with
Ramos  Ariaps, prepared  the  recognition  of  its  in-
dependence. He  returned  to  Mexico  after  the
fall  of  Iturbide  in  1SW.  and  was  immediately
elected  president  of  the  municipal  council  of
Mexico,  where  he  made  many  improvements.  In
1882  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  foreign  rela-
tions bf  Bustamante,  but.  the  government  of  the
latter having been  overthrown by  Santa  Anna.


Fagoaga  was  forced  to  emigrate  to  Europe,  where

he  lived  for  several  rear*.  After  his  return  ad-
verse circumstances  OaUfled  him,  in  1H4I,  to  make
an  assignment,  and.  giving  up  his  art  oollc
and  his  lihrarv  to  his  creditors,  he  retired  from
public  life.  When  his  elder  brother,  the  Mai
of  Apartado,  died,  leaving  the  greater  |«rt  of  his
fortune  for  charitable  purposes,  Fagoaga  was  ap-
pointed trustee,  and  soon  was  recognized  as  one
of  the  public  U-ncfactors  of  Mexico.  He  rebuilt
and  endowed  the  Foundling  ho-pita'.  the  convents
of  the  Capuchin  nuns  and of  Corpus  Christi.  the

boapital  of  BnaJnands  Mosand  the  insane  asy-
lum of  San  Hipolito,  the  Charitable  bone,  aiid

many  other  kindred  institutions.  In  the  Aconlada
prison  he  endowed  the  School  of  IxM.kbindcry  and
the  I*anca*terian  schools,  established,  together
with  Luis  de  la  Rosa,  the  School  of  design,  and
with  Francisco  Carvajal,  the  School  for  trades
ami  mechanical  teaching.  Moreover,  privately
and  without  ostentation,  ne  relieved  innumerable

u Iv  families. He  was  elected  senator  in  three

legislatures,  a  member  of  tha  board  of  mines,  and
<>f  several  scientific  associations  and  public  boards.
At  his  death  the  inmates  of  the  Charitable  home
petitioned  that  his  body  !*•  buried  in  the  chapel  of
the  institution,  which  was  done.

FAHY,  Anthony  1).,  clergyman,  b.  in  Loughrea,
Ireland,  in  1804;  d.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  is;i.  He
studied  theology  in  St.  Clement's  Irish  convent  of
Dominicans,  Rome,  where  he  became  a  member  of
the  order.  After  being  ordained  priest  he  came
to  the  United  States,  and  for  more  than  ten  vears
was  employed  in  missionary  dutv  in  Ohio  and  Ken-
tucky. In  1843  he  was  invitisi  by  the  Irish  resi-
dents of  Buenos  Ayres  to  become  their  pastor,  and
went  thither.  In  1857  he  brought  out  Sisters  of
Mercy  from  Ireland,  by  whose  aid  he  founded  the
Irish  convent,  and  in  1861  he  erected  a  large  build-
ing for  them  in  the  Calle  Rio  Bamba.  As  his  eoun-
t  rymen  increased  in  numbers  and  prosperity,  he  pro-
vided them  with  chaplains  at  Luxan.  Mercedes,
Capilla  del  Sefior.  San  Antonio,  and  in  all  the  min-
ing districts.  He  founded  burses  in  the  missionary
college  of  All-Hallows,  Dublin,  specially  for  this

fmrpose,  and  aim  established  Irish  reading-rooms,
ibraries,  and  schools.  Notwithstanding  his  age
and  ill-health,  he  continued  his  attendance  on  the
sick  during  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of  1X71.  un-
til he  was  prostrated  by  the  disease  three  days  be-
fore his  death.  He  died  so  poor  that  his  funeral
expenses  had  to  be  borne  bv  his  jiarishioners.

FAILLON.  Michel  Etienne,  author,  b.  in
Tarascon,  France,  in  1799;  d.  in  Paris,  25  Oct.,
1870.  He  was  a  Sulpician  of  Paris,  ami  came  to
Montreal  in  1854  as  a  visitor  to  the  houses  of  that
congregation  in  America.  His  contributions  to
the  history  of  Canada  embrace  lives  of  the  Yen.
M.  Olier  (1853);  Margaret  Bourgeoys,  foundress
of  the  Congregation  Sisters  (1852);  Mile.  Maure,
foundress  of  the  Hotel  Din  (1854);  Madame
iTYouville.  foundress  of  the  Grey  Sisters  (1*
Mile,  le  Bit.  the  recluse  (1860);  and  an  extended
history  of  the  French  colony  in  Canada,  of  which
three  volumes  (1865-'fi)  appeared  before  his  death,
embracing  only  a  small  portion  of  his  plan.

FAIR,  James  Graham,  capitalist.  !>.  near  Bel-
fast. Ireland,  ;{  Dec.,  1831.  His  parents  emigrated
to  the  United  States  in  1843,  and  set  tied  in  Illi-
nois, where  he  attended  the  public  schools.  He
completed  his  education  in  Chicago,  received  a  busi-
ness training  there,  and  paid  much  attention  to  sci-
entific studies.  He  went  to  California  in  1849. and
after  engaging  in  mining  till  181H),  he  removed  to
Nevada,  where  he  amassed  a  fortune  of  $50,000,000.


400


FAIRBANKS


FAIIN'HILD


lie  was  eraeciaUy  successful  hi  the  construction  of
quartz-mills,  water-works,  and  chlorinizing  fur-
In  1865  he  became  superintendent  of  the
Ophir  mine,  and  in  1867  of  the  Hale  and  Norcross.
In  the  latter  year  he  also  formed  a  partnership
with  John  W.  Mackay,  James  C.  Flood,  and  Will-
iam S.  O'Hrien,  and  purchased  tin-  control  of  sev-
eral well-known  mines.  The  yield  of  gold  and  sil-
ver in  these  mines  during  Mr.  Fair's  service  as
superintendent  is  estimated  to  have  reached  $ 200,-
000.000.  Mr.  Fair  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
from  Nevada,  as  a  Democrat,  to  succeed  William
Sharon,  Republican,  and  served  form  1881  till
lss?.  He  is  largely  interested  in  manufactories
on  the  Pacific  coast.

FAIRBANKS,  Erasttis,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Brimfleld.  Mass..  28  Oct.,  1792;  d.  24  Nov.,  1864.
He  was  fifth  in  descent  from  Jonathan  Fairbanks,
who  came  from  England  and  settled  in  Dedham,
Mass..  in  1633.  The  old  Fairbanks  house  in  Ded-
ham, built  by  Jonathan's  brother,  John,  and  still  in
possession  of  the  family,  is  represented  in  the  ac-
companying illustration.  Krastus  began  to  study
law,  but  gave  it  up  on  account  of  an  affection  of
the  eyes,  and  engaged  in  trade  in  various  places,


finally  removing  to  St.  Johnsburv.  Vt,  He  formed
a  partnership  with  his  brother  Thaddeus  in  1824,
and  began  the  manufacture  of  cast-iron  plows  and
stove-castings.  In  1826  the  firm,  with  several  oth-
ers, formed  the  St.  Johnsburv  hemp-dressing  com-
pany, and  in  1831  the  brothers  gave  their  entire
attention  to  making  the  platform-scales  invented
by  Thaddeus.  Erastus  remained  at  the  head  of
the  firm  till  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1836-'8,  president  of  the  Passumpsic
railroad  company  in  1849,  and  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Vermont  in  1851  and  1860,  rendering  effi-
cient aid  to  the  government  in  the  earlv  days  of
the  civil  war. — His  brother,  Thaddens,  inventor,
b.  in  Brimfleld.  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1796;  d.  in  St.
Johnsbury,  Vt.,  12  April,  1886,  removed  with  his
father  in  1815  to  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt,  and  aided
him  in  a  saw- and  grist-mill,  also  making  carriages.
He  had  an  aptitude  for  mechanics,  and  in  1826,
while  engaged  in  the  business  of  dressing  hemp,
observed  the  rudeness  of  the  methods  in  use  for
weighing  it.  The  result  was  the  invention  of  his
platform-scale,  for  which  he  received  a  patent  on
21  June,  1831.  Platform-scales  were  not  unknown
before  that  time,  but  had  been  little  used.  The
most  essential  improvements  invented  by  Mr.  Fair-
banks were  the  employment  of  only  two  levers,  and
the  use  of  knife-edge  bearings,  resting  on  plane
polished  steel  surfaces.  Other  improvements,  cov-
ered by  about,  fifty  patents,  were  afterward  made,
and  the  Fairbanks  scales  are  now  used  in  all  parts
of  the  world.  It  has  been  estimated  that  they
weigh  a  million-million  pounds  a  week.  The
scales  have  received  medals  at  eight  international


exhibitions,  and  Thaddeus  Fairbanks  received  in
1878,  from  the  emperor  of  Austria,  the  cn>s>  of  the
order  of  Francis  Joseph. — Another  brother.  Joseph
Paddock,  b.  in  Brimfleld,  Mass..  20  Nov.,  lHMi;  d.

15  May.  1886,  studied  law.  hut  became  a  member
of  the  firm  in  1N34,  and  took  charge  of  the  intro-
duction of  the  scales  into  general  use. —  EraMu.-'s
son,  Horace,  b.  in  Baroet,  Vt..  2]  March.  1880;
d.  in  New  York  city,  18  March,  188*.  sui

his  father  as  manager  of  the  firm,  and  became
president  of  the  Fairbanks  .JBBtar±0t>mpan v.  84
Nov.,  1NT4.  He  has  served  as  state  senator,  end
in  1876  was  elected  governor  of  ▼Sermont.  Mr.
Fairbanks  manifested  the  same  benevolent  traits
that  had  characterized  his  father.  Among  his
many  benefactions  the  principal  one  is
Johnsbury  athenaeum — an  institution  boasting  a
library  of  over  ten  thousand  volumes  and  a  gallery
that  contains  not  a  few  gems  of  the  painter's  ail.
among  them  Bierstadt's  "  Yosemite. — Another
son,  Franklin,  b.  18  June,  1828,  has  contributed
several  inventions  toward  perfecting  the  scales,  and
has  also  patented  modifications  of  the  special  ma-
chinery used  in  their  manufacture.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Vermont  legislature  in  1871— '2,  and
was  speaker  of  the  house. — Thaddeus's  only  son,
Henry,  b.  in  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  6  May,  1830,  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1853,  and  at  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1857.  He  was  ordained
in  1858,  held  pastorates  in  Burke  and  Barnct.  N't.,
and  in  1859  became  professor  of.  natural  philoso-
phy at  Dartmouth.  He  exchanged  this  chair  for
that  of  natural  history  in  1865,  and  since  1868  has
resided  at  St.  Johnsbury,  giving  his  time  to  me-
chanical experiments.  He  has  patented  several  in-
ventions relating  to  the  manufacture  of  scales  and
to  other  industries.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  Dartmouth  college  since  1870.

FAIRCH1LD,  Ashbel  Green,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hanover,  N.  J.,  1  May,  1795;  d.  in  Smithfield,
Pa.,  in  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1813,  studied  theology,  and  was  licensed  as  a
preacher  in  1816,  ordained  in  1818.  and  served  in
various  places  as  a  missionary.  From  1822  till
1854  he  was  pastor  at  Georges  Creek,  whence  he
went  to  Tent,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  Besides  frequent  contributions  to  the  re-
ligious press,  he  published  many  tracts  and  dis-
courses. His  principal  work  was  the  "Great  Sup-
per," which  was  translated  into  German  and  had  a
circulation  larger,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  than
any  other  book  published  by  the  Presbyterian
board.  Among  his  other  works  are  "Baptism,"
"  Faith  and  Works,"  and  "Confession  of  Faith."

FAIRCH1LD,  Ciissi  us.  soldier,  b.  in  Kent,  Ohio,

16  Dec,  1828:  d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  26  Oct.,  1868.
In  1846  his  father  settled  at  Madison,  Wis.,  where,  as
state  treasurer  and  in  other  responsible  offices,  his
time  was  so  fully  occupied  that  Cassius,  the  elded
living  son,  devoted  himself  mainly  to  the  care  of
his  father's  private  business.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1860.  On  Presi-
dent Lincoln's  first  call  for  troops  in  1861,  he  was
commissioned  major  of  the  16th  Wisconsin  volun-
teers. In  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  6  April,  1862,  he
received  a  wound  that  disabled  him  until  18  April,
1863,  when  he  rejoined  his  regiment  at  Lake  Provi-
dence, and  took  command  of  it  on  18  Juno.  He
served  on  general  court-martial  at  Vieksburj;.
from  10  Oct.,  1863,  till  7  March,  1864.  at  which
date  he  again  took  command  of  his  regiment,  par-
ticipated in  the  march  from  Clifton,  Tenn.,  to
Ack  worth,  Ga.,  and  was  engaged  in  the  hat  ties  of
Big  Shanty  and  Kenesaw  Mountain,  and  many
other  conflicts. He  was  detached  on  recruiting


iaii;<  iiii.d


FA  I II


■en' i'  'l.  hut  rejoined  hit  regiment  at

Beaufort.  S. ('..  in  .lanuary fbUowiag. Beooea-

manded  ■  brigade  of  the  ed  division  of  tin-  17th

army  oorpi  from  1")  .Ian..  1885,  till  1  April,  ami.  mi

g  mustered  out  in  July,  was  hrvvctled  hrigadicr-

m  mission to  date  from l:i  March,

<  »n  his  return  to  Wisconsin  hi  wan  ipptrfat-

S.  inar»hal.  the  duties  of  which  office  li«'  con-
tinued to  discharge  until  his  death,  whieh  wan
caused  by  tin'  reopening  of  hii  wound.

I  \n:i  mi  ii  <  ■arlee  gtebblas,  ■eoretarvof

tht-  treasury,  h>  in  Caxenovia,  N.  V..  :{(>  April.  1842.
Be  wee  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1868,  and,  after
studying  at  the  law-school  of  that  university,  wasad-
initted  to  the  liar  in  \*li.~>.  Subsequently  he  lieenme
a  Bemberof  the  law-firm  of  Hand.  Male.  Swart/  i
Fairchild.  and  continued  actively  engaged  in  the
practice  of  his  profession  for  several  years.  In  1^71
he  was  deputy  attorney-general  of  New  York,  and
in  lN?ti  was  efeeted,  as  a  Democrat,  to  t In-  attorney-
generalship. He served in that  capacity  for  two

fears,  and  then  si»ent  some  time  in  travel  abroad.
In  1886  he  settled  in  New  York  city,  and  devoted
himself  to  the  practice  of  law.  He  continued  so  en-
gaged until  188T),  when  he  was  appointed  assistant
etary  of  the  treasury.  While  holding  this  office,
he  was  frequently  called  on  to  represent  Sec.  Daniel
Manning, and  when  the  latter  was  compiled  to  give
up  the  duties  of  the  place,  Mr.  Fairchild  became
acting  secretary.  On  1  April,  1887,  the  resignation
of  Mr.  Manning  went  into  effect,  and  the  portfolio
was  then  given  to  Mr.  Fairchild.  who  thus  liccame
a  memlierof  President  Cleveland's  cabinet.

FAIRCHILD,  Herman  Le  Kov,  naturalist.  1>.
in  Montrose,  Pa.,  21)  April,  1850.  He  was  gradu-
ated  at  Cornell  in  1874.  where  he  received  the  de-
gree of  B.  S.  From  1874  till  1876  he  was  professor
of  natural  sciences  in  Wyoming  seminary,  and  from
18 77  till  1878  professor  of  geology  ad  interim  at
Vassar.  Prof.  Fairchild  then  went  to  New  York,
where  he  has  been  <iccupied  as  lecturer  in  natural
sciences  in  New  York  schools  and  in  the  Cooper
Union.  He  is  a  member  of  several  scientific  socie-
ties and  is  secretary  of  the  New  York  academy  of
sciences.  His  contributions  to  literature  include
articles  on  comparative  physiology  in  the  "  Popu-
lar Science  Monthly,"  and  more  technical  papers
in  t he  ••  Transactions  of  the  New  York  Academy
of  Sciences."  He  has  also  published  "  A  History  of
the  New  York  Academy  Of  Sciences,  formerly  the
Lveeimi  of  Natural  Historv"  (New  York.  188«).

'FAIRCHILD.  James  Harris,  educator,  b.  in
Stockbridge,  Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1817.  While  he  was
a  child  his  father  removed  to  Olierl in.  Ohio,  and  he
was  graduated  there  in  1838,  was  tutor  in  1838-'42,
ordained  in  1841,  professor  of  languages  in  18 1 .
professor  of  mathematics  from  1847  till  1858,  and
professor  of  moral  philosophy  and  theology  from
[858  till  18M.  He  was  elected  president  of  the  ool-
in  lNGti.  During  the  years  1870-'l  he  travelled
in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.  In  1884  he  visited  the
Hawaiian  Islands.  Be  has  edited  "Memoirs  of
Chariest;.  Finnev"(New  York.  1878), and  "Finney's
inatic  Theology"  (Oberlin,  1878):  and  is  the
author  of  "Moral  Philosophy"  (New  York.  1888);
"Oberlin,  the  Colonv  and  the  College"  (Oticrlin,
:  and  "  Woman's  Right  to  the  Ballot  "  (1*70).

I  \IK<  HMD.  Lucius,  statesman,  b.  in  Kent.
Portage  co..  Ohio.  87  Dec..  188 L Bfl  was  educated

in  the  public  schools  of  Cleveland,  and  at  Carroll

IOoUege  in  Waukesha.  Wis. In  ls-p; his fathi
to  Wisconsin,  then  a  territory,  and  settled
in  Madison. On  the  discovery  of  gold  in  California.
:.  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  joined  with  others,
and  with  a  foiir-vokc  ox-leam  Ml out  for  tin-  gold


fields  across  the  plains.  After  month-  of  toil  and
travel  the  party  arrived  in  Sun  Francisco  with  a
capital  of  t went \ -seven  cents.  Fur  six  years  he
worked  as  digger,  miner,  prooneotor,  ami  laborer,
then  returned  to  Wisconsin  In  loSo,not  mnofa  richer
than  when  he  left.  His  entrance  into  polities  U--
gau  in  California  with  his  ,  lection  as  delegate  to  a
convention  (Or  the  nomination  of  governor.  <>n  his
way  to  the  gathering  his  mule  fell  ..ff  a  height,
carrying  with  him  all  of  voting  Fai  re  hi  Id's  baggage.
He  finished  the  remainder  of  his  journey  CO  f'-'i,
ami  sat  in  the  convention  without  a  coat  and  with-
out a  cent  in  his  pooket.  Be  was  sleeted  clerk  of
rail  court  In  1858, and  in  l*oo  admitted  to

the  Imr. At  the  beginning  Of  the  civil  war  he  was

a  member  of  a  local  company  known  as  thewQov<

ernor's  (Juanl."  and  promptly  enlisted,  lb- entered
the  service  as  captain  in  the  l>t  Wleoonin  regi-
ment, and  served  in  the  three  mouths' campaign.
In  August,  1881,  he  was  commissi,  ,ned  by  PrOfMml
Lincoln  a  captain  in  the  Hith  regiment  of  tl.
lar  army,  also  about  the  same  time  a  major  in  the
Id  Wis.(i|isin  infantry.  lie  accepted  l<oth  aj>-
pointments,  and  was  the  first  officer  of  the  regular
army  to  receive  leave  of  al»scnce  to  serve  with  a
volunteer  regiment.  At  Bull  Ran  he  commanded
the  consolidated  2d
and  7th  Wisconsin
regiments,  forming
part  of  the  famous
"iron  brigade."  At
the  beginning  of  the
battle  of  Antietam
he  was  sick  in  an
ambulance  at  the
rear,  but  went  into
action,  where  his
regiment  lost  more
than  half  its  force.
As  colonel  of  the  2d
Wisconsin,  in  the  bat-
tle of  Gettysburg,
he  led  a  charge  at
Seminar v  Hill,  where
he  lo>t  liis  left  arm.
While  recovering  from  his  wounds  he  was  cm-
missioned  a  brigadier-general,  1!)  Oct..  lsM,  ami
shortly  afterward  elected  secretary  of  state  in  Wis-
consin, where  he  remained  two  years.  He  was
then  elected  governor,  and  served  for  six  ooe>
secutive  years,  during  which  time  he  aided  the
Soldiers'  orphans'  home  in  Madison,  and  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  State  board  of  charities
and  reform. Hen. Fairchild was  appointed U.S.

consul  at  Liverpool  in  November,  1*72,  and

>\  yeara,  Be  was  consul-general  iii  Paris  in
90,  and  then  C.  S.  minister  to  Spain  till
1882,  when  he  resigned  and  returned  to  Madison.
Wis.  In  lssi;  h,.  was  elected  coinniander-iii-chief
of  the  Grand  armv  of  the  republic.

FAIRFAX,  Thomas,  sixth  baron,  b.  is
land  in  HUM  :  d.  in  (Jreenway  court.  Ya.,  in  1788.
His  family  was  a  very  old  one.  During  the  m
of  the  Hoses,  his  ancestor.  Sir  (iuv  Fairfax,  head
of  a  younger  branch  of  the  family.  beoMM  lord
chief  justice of F.ngland. His great-grandson,

Thomas.  «as  raised  to  the  peerage hj  Charles  i.  sj

BarOB Fairfax, of  Cameron. Thomas's brother,
Bdward,  was  well  known  for  his  translation  of  the

freat  iM>em  of  Tasso;  his  grandson.  Thomas,  third
jOfd  Fairfax,  was  commander-in-chief  of  the  \mr-
liamentary  forces  in  the  reltcllion  against  Charles  I.
The  great  general  was  succeeded  in  the  baronetcy
by  his  cousin.  Henry,  whose  sons  were  Thomas,
fifth  Ixird  Fairfax,  atid  Henry. Thomas  married


1^ lt  . - < <'n/"L-


4()'2


FAIRFAX


FAIRFAX


Catherine,  daughter  <>f  Lord  Culpepper,  and  thus
acquired  the  title  i«>  vasf  estates  in  the  northern
naok  <>f  Virginia,  and  also  in  the  Shenandoah  valley.
Their  Bon,  Thomas,  was  educated  at  Oxford,  an*
joyed  tin-  reputation  of  a  man  of  wit  and  letters,
and  WSJ  in  early  life  a  contributor  to  the  '"Spec-


tator." When  he  became  sixth  Lord  Fairfax,  he
sent  his  cousin,  Sir  William,  son  of  Henry,  to  take
charge  of  the  Virginia  estates.  Sir  William's
daughter,  Anne,  married  Lawrence,  elder  brother
of  George  Washington.  In  1739.  Thomas  came
himself  to  Virginia.  Remaining  about  a  year,  he
returned  to  England,  when,  on  account  of  an
alleged  disappointment  in  love,  he  closed  his  affairs
in  England  and  came  a  second  time  to  his  Vir-
ginia estate  in  1745.  His  inherited  domain  em-
braced all  that  section  lying  between  the  Potomac
and  Rappahannock,  comprising  the  twenty-one
counties  of  Lancaster.  Northumberland,  Richmond,
Wesl  inoreland,  Stafford,  King  George,  Prince  Will-
iam, Fairfax,  Loudoun,  Fauquier,  Culpeper,
Clark,  Madison,  Page,  Shenandoah,  Hardv,  Hamp-
shire, Morgan,  Berkely,  Jefferson,  and  Frederick.
The  area  was  5,282.000  acres,  and  formed  nearly
one  quarter  of  the  commonwealth  of  Virginia.
Lord  Fairfax  lived  for  several  years  with  Sir  Will-
iam at  Belvoir,  and  thus  in  1748  he  made  the  ac-
quaintance of  George  Washington,  then  a  youth  of
sixteen,  and,  impressed  with  his  energy  and  talents,
employed  him  to  survey  his  lands  lying  west  of  the
Blue  Ridge.  This  was  the  beginning  of  an  inti-
macy between  Fairfax  and  Washington,  which
survived  all  differences  of  opinion  on  political  sub-
jects, and  terminated  only  with  the  death  of  the
former.  So  favorable  was  the  report  of  Washing-
ton, that  his  employer  soon  afterward  took  up  his
residence  at  Green  way  court  (see  illustration),  in
the  midst  of  a  manor  of  10,000  acres,  about  twelve
miles  from  Winchester,  where  he  resided  during
the  remainder  of  his  life.  Here  he  laid  out  a
farm,  and  put  it  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation.
He  was  very  fond  of  hunting.  He  was  indulgent
to  all  who  held  lands  under  him  and  around  him.
kind  to  the  poor,  and  allowed  them  a  large  part  of
the  surplus  produce  of  his  estate. During  the

Sank  on  the  Virginian  frontier  after  the  defeat  of
(raddook,  Fairfax  organized  a  troop  of  horse,  and,
as  lord-lieutenant  of  Frederick  county,  called  out
the  local  militia.  Although  a  pronounced  loyalist,
his  hospitality  and  noble  qualities  caused  him  to  be
held  in  so  much  esteem  and  veneration  that  dur-
ing the  entire  Revolutionary  war  he  was  never  in-
sulted or  molested,  and  his  property  was  equally
respected  by  Americans  and  British.  The  great
wealth  in  the  immense  clay  deposits  in  that  sec-
tion of  Virginia  being  unavailable,  Lord  Fairfax
had  brought  from  England  the  brick  used  for  the
erection  of  Christ  church.  Alexandria,  the  church
at  Falls  Church  Corners,  and  the  hotel  in  Alexan-


dria where  Washington  had  his  headquarters.  He
was  a  friend  and  jiatnm  of  Washington'!  early
life,  and  >aw.  with  the  most  Intense  anguish,  that
the  widow's  son,  who  surveyed  his  (andl
destined  to  be  the  great  instrument  for  dismem-
bering the  British  empire.  The  surrender  .at
Yorktown  deeply  wounded  his  national  pride,  and.
according  to  tradition,  was  the  immediate  cause  of
his  death,  which  happened  soon  afterward.  Be
was  a  dark,  swarthy  man,  more  than  six  feet  in
height,  of  large  frame,  and  extraordinary  strength.
Hia  remains  wen-  deposited  under  the  communion
table  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  Winchester,  but
were  removed  in  1833, and  the  old  church  was  torn
down  to  make  way  for  the  erection  of  a  pile  of
buildings.  He  never  married,  and  his  extensive
domain  descended  to  his  only  surviving  brother.
Robert  Fairfax,  who  became  the  seventh  Lord
Fairfax,  but,  as  the  estate  was  in  the  possession  of
Thomas  during  the  Revolution,  it  was  confiscated. —
George  William,  b.  in  England;  d.  in  Bath,
England.  3  April,  1787,  was  the  son  of  Thomas's
first  cousin,  Col.  Sir  William  Fairfax,  lieutenant  of
the  county  of  Fairfax,  and  member  and  president
of  the  council  in  Virginia.  He  was  educated  in
England,  and,  coming  to  Virginia  in  early  man-
hood, became  quickly  identified  with  the  country.
He  was  the  early  companion  of  Washington  and  his
associate  as  surveyor  of  lands.  Some  property  in
Yorkshire  having  descended  to  him  in  1773,  he  went
to  England,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  political
troubles  which  followed,  did  not  return  to  America.
During  the  war  he  evinced  much  kindness  to
American  prisoners  who  were  carried  to  England.
A  part  of  his  Virginia  estate  was  confiscated,  by
which  his  income  was  much  reduced.  In  making
his  will,  he  named  Washington  as  his  executor,  but
the  office  was  declined  on  account  of  the  pressure
of  public  engagements.  He  left  no  children,  and
bequeathed  his  property  to  Ferdinando,  the  second
son  of  his  only  surviving  brother,  Bryan,  or  Brian.
— His  brother,  Bryan,  eighth  baron  Fairfax,  b.
about  1730;  d.  in
Monteagle,  Va.,  in
August,  1802,  was
the  third  son  of
Sir  William  Fair-
fax, and  a  life-long
friend  of  Washing-
ton, notwithstand-
ing their  political
differences.  In  1789
he  became  an  Epis-
copal clergyman,
and  presently  took
charge  of  the  parish
at  Alexandria,  Va.
On  Robert's  death
in  1793,  the  title  to
the  Scottish  peerage
descended  to  him,
and  his  claim  was
recognized  as  valid  by  the  house  of  lords  in  1800,
but  he  never  asserted  it. — His  son,  Thomas,  some-
times called  ninth  Lord  Fairfax,  b.  in  1762,  d.  at
Vaucluse,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  21  April,  1846,  lived
on  his  Potomac  estates.  He  married  Miss  Cary.
Thomas's  eldest  son,  Albert,  died  during  the  life-
time of  his  father. — Albert's  son.  Charles  Snow-
den.  b.  in  Vaucluse,  8  March,  1829;  d.  in  Balti-
more, 7  April.  1880,  was  speaker  of  the  California
house  of  representatives  in  1854,  and  clerk  of  the
supreme  court  of  that  state  from  1857  till  1862.
He  was  chairman  of  the  California  delegation  to
the  Democratic  national  convention  held  in  NVw


(f^/xW^Oi^ap


FAIRFIKLD


FAIRMAN


406


k in  July,  lHrtH.— Another  .1  ••>)  n «  oiitec.

slorontn  representative  of  the  t  it  If.  l>.  18  Sept.,
18HO,  is  h  physician,  residing  at  Northampton,
Pri  Md.— Bryan's  Real

llon.il.l  M.S.  ill.  nnviil  officer,  I>.  in  Virginia,
in  .'.  became  h  midshipman,  IS

red  under  Duponl  oa  tho  west  ooa-t  of
Hi  \  and  California  (luring  the  Mexican  war.
and  was  at  tin  'rupture  ofserera]  towns,  lie  was
promoted  to  a  Lieutenancy.  96  Feb..  1861,  made  com-
mander. i<»  .inly.  1888, ana aerredon  the'
..f  the  west  gulf  ■Quadron,  fr.»m  Jane,  1888,  till

I'YIirti.ir  i.lcr Farnigut, whni he was

transferred  t.>  the  coinnmml  i>f  the  steamers"  Nan-
tiuket  "  and  "  .M"iitank."  of  the  South  Atlantic
squadron,  in  which  he  made  several  attacks  <>n  the
defences  of  Charleston  harbor,  nmler  Dupoiit
and  Dahlgreii.  In  ls»M  '■*>  he  was  in  command  of
the  naval  academy,  promoted  to  a  captaincy.  88
.In:  red  >>n  the  flag-ship  ••  Rhode  Island."

in  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  1N<W>'7,  and
on  the  steam  sloop  "Susquehanna"  in  1887-X.
He  was  advanced  t<»  the  rank  of  commodore,  M
Aiiir..  1878,  and  made  rear-admiral.  11  July,  1880.
Admiral  Fairfax  was  in  service  forty-eight  years
and  live  months;  of  this  time,  twenty  years  and
four  months  were  span!  at  sea,  his  last  cruise  ter-
minating in  1888.  See  "Magazine  of  American
Historv."  vol.  xiii.,  pp.  817-88(1

FAIRFIKLD.  Francis  (Jerry,  journalist,  b.  in
Stafford,  Conn.,  18  Aug.,  1844 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
4  April.  1**7.  lie  was  educated  at  a  private  school
in  Massachusetts,  at  the  Pennsylvania  college  in
Cetty-burg,  and  finished  his  course  in  a  Lutheran
theological  seminary.  When  only  twenty  years  of
age  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  Lutheran  church
in  Waterloo,  X.  Y.  After  about  two  years  he
abandoned  his  calling  and  came  to  New  \ork  city,
which  beoaeae  his  home. Here  he  was  at  first  am-

5 loved  in  the  editorial  department  of  the  "  Home
ournal."  and  later  wrote  for  the  "  Daily  News,"
the  M Herald,"  and  other  papers.  He  then  went
to  Mexico,  where  he  was  an  eye-witness  at  the  exe-
cution of  Maximilian,  an  account  of  which  he  fur-
nished to  several  journals.  On  his  return  to  New
York  city  he  became  a  space  writer  for  several
newspapers,  and  contributed  poems,  sketches,  short
stories,  and  literary  criticisms  to  various  periodi-
cals. Tempted  by  the  prospect  of  greater  emolu-
ments. Fairfield  for  a  brief  period  followed  the
pursuit  of  a  veterinary  surgeon.  Dieappointed,  he
returned  to  his  former  occupation,  and  at  the  last
was  employed  as  an  occasional  writer  for  the  New
York  "Sunday  Mercury"  and  Albany  "Argus."
Fairfield,  in  the  best  period  of  his  life,  was  a  forci-
ble and  incisive  writer,  and  his  signed  articles
were  always  read  with  attention.  Hut  he  !>e.-ame
addicted  to  the  morphine  habit, and  gave  way  to
mental  vagaries  and  irregularities  that  eventually
reduced him to iMivertv. He published "  The

Clubs  of  New  York"  (New  York.  1878), and " Ten

V.ars  with  Spiritual  Mediums"  (1H7."»).

FAIRFIKLD.  John, senator,  h.  in  Saco,  Me.,
N  Jan..  17!I7;  d.  in  Washington. I). ('..  M I  »-•<•..
He received a common-school education,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in 1888,  and
practised  successfully  in  his  native  town. He  was
appointed  reporter  of  the  state  mpreme  court  in
1888,  and  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
ting from  7  Dec.,  1*X>.  t..  :! March,  ls:{«).
He  was  governor  of  Maine  in lsct'.l-'lO,  and  again,
■  .'.  was  chosen V.  S.  senator  from  Maine,  in
p!a<e  of  Rettel  William-,  resigned,  and  served  from
I Dec.,  1843.  till  his  death, lie  was  the  author  of
"Supreme  Court  Reports"  (Augusta,  lxt">--7).


I  Villi  II  I  It.  Mitini.i-  Lincoln,  poet,  b.  in
Warwick,  Ma—..  •.'•*•  June,  1808;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
\m„  <>  March.  184A  |||„  father  died  when  he  was
three  year-  old,  and  the  mother  with  her  two  chil-
dren removed  to  a  small  farm  in  western  Minnie
obueetta  Fairlleld  entered  Brown,  but  sickness
prevented  his  graduation,  and  he  banjjBa  I  tutor
in  (i.orgia  and  South  Carolina.  There  he  paean]
several  years  and  prepared  Mnwlf  for  entering  the
university,  but  changed  hie  purpose  and  returned
to  the  northern  states.  Meanwhile,  as  he  savs,  hi
had published "two pamphlets  of rhymes.'' In

December,  brneld  took  jMuwage  for  Kng-

laml.  AlMiut  this  time  hi-  "(  itie-  of  the  Flam*'
was  published  in  Buckingham's"  Oriental  Herald."
During  his  absence  in  HUrope  be  contributed  let-
ters to  several  New  York  city  weeklies.  He  re-
turned home  in  July,  was  married,  and  removed  eft
Klizatx'th.  N.  .1.,  but  afterward  went  t<>  rrftltmi.
Harper'e  Perry,  Philadelphia,  hik!  other  places,
winning  a  precarious  subsistence  by  writing  for  the
press.  In  1828  he  became  principal  <>f  the  New-
town academy,  near  l'hiladelphia.  but  soon  after-
ward left  for  New  York  city.  In  1888  he  b
the  publication  of  the  "  North  American  Magazine"
in Philadelphia,  continuing  as  it- editor  and  DID*

Crietor  during  five  year-.  Shim  afterward  hi-
ealth  failed  entirely.  Fairfield  excelled  as  an  in-
structor in  history  and  literature.  He  had  more
than  the  ambition  of  a  Suit  hey  for  writing  epic-,
and  was  equally  unfortunate  in  finding  few  leaden
and  no  admirers,  He  stoutly  maintained  that  Bul-
wer-Lytton  had  taken  thoughts  and  subject-mat-
ter from  him  in  the  const  met  ion  of  his-  La-t  Days
of  Pompeii."  Fairfield's  published  volumes  in-
clude "Lavs  of  Melpomene n  (New  York.  iv
"The  Sisters  of  St.  Clara  "  (1887) :  "Cities  of  the
Plain  "  (1888) ;«  Heir  of  the  World  "  (1888)  ^Abad-
don, the  Spirit  of  Destruction  "  (1830) :  "  The  I^ast
Night  of  Pom|H-ii"  (New  York.  1832);  MPoenM
and  Frose  Writings"  (l'hiladelphia.  1840);  and
"Select  Poems"  (1800). —  His  wife.  June  Frazee,
published  her  husband's  "  Life,"  including  a  few
of  his  poems (1840). — Their  eldest  daughter,  (iene
vieve  Generra,  has  written  several  volumes  of
mi-cellaneous  literature.

FA  IK  LA  MR,  James  Heiiiiinrton.  musician,  h.
in  Philadelphia.  Fa..  2:5  .Ian..  1888.  He  received
his  first  musical  instruction  from  his  mother.  At
the  age  of  twenty,  after  earring  as  organist  of
churches  in  Philadelphia,  he  went  to  Paris,  where
he  pursued  his  instrumental  and  vocal  studies  un-
der Hannontel,  Prudent,  and  Masset,  of  the  then
Conservatoire  Imperlole,  and  Mine.  IWkholtz-Fal-
coni.  Ijater  he  studied  under  Main-Mini  in  Flor-
ence. Subsequently,  while  l'.  S.  c.nsul  at  Zurich,
he  visited  Leip-ic,  Berlin,  and  Stuttgart.  Soon
after  his  return  !<>  this  countrv  he  received  from
King  Karl  of  WurtemU-rg  the  "great  gold  medal
for  art  and  science."  Between  1889  and  1KKO  he
was  successively  director  of  the  music  in  different
church.-  in  Washington.  D.  C  He  was  called  to
a  similar  office  in  the  Church  of  the  Ascension.  New
York  city,  and  a  year  later  to  that  of  St.  Ignatius.

His  published  works,  chietiv  Beared  oompoattione
and  sonirs  (the  latter  including  contributions  to  the
St.  Nicholas  -oiig-hook).  DUnwer  nearly  a  hundred,
exclusive  of  "Valerie."  a  romantic  opera  in  five
acts,  which  was  successfully  produced  in  Washing-
ton, and  of  erhiohn large  part  is  published  in  sheet
form.  "  LeonaUo,wa  grand  o|H>rainfi\e  a«t-.  and  a
ma—  in  B  fiat,  are  still  in  manuscript.

FAIK.M  \  Y  Ciilcon,  engraver',  b.  in  Newtown.
Conn..  2<>  Juno.  1774;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  18
March, ls-J7. He SAM  apprenticed to  a firm  of


404


PALARDEAU


FALKNER


jewellers  and  engravers  in  Albany,  and  in  1810  set-
tled in  Philadelphia  u  one  of  a  firm  of  bank-note
engravers.  In  trie  war  of  18P,"  lie  entered  the  army
us  captain,  and  rose  to  a  colonelcy.  In  1819  he  be-
came a  partner  with  Jacob  Perkins,  and  went  to
England,  where  he  resided  and  conducted  the  en-
graving business  for  three  years, and  then  returned
to  Philadelphia.  He  contributed  moch  toward  the
elevation  of  the  art  of  engraving  in  the  United
States.— His  brother,  David  (1782-1815),  and  Rich-
ard ( 1 787-1 H21),  were  also  engravers.

PALARDEAU,  Antony  Sebastian,  artist,  b.
in  St.  Ambrose,  near  Quebec,  Canada.  13  Aug.,
1822.  He  manifested  from  his  childhood  a  strong
love  for  art,  but  it  met  with  no  encouragement
from  his  father,  who  took  him  from  school  when
twelve  years  old  and  set  him  to  work  on  a  farm.
When  he  was  fourteen  years  old  he  ran  away  to
Queliec,  where  he  endured  hardships  of  every  kind,
and  was  for  several  years  a  servant.  He  still  contin-
ued to  draw  and  paint  during  his  hours  of  leisure,
and  after  he  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  employ-
ment as  clerk  in  a  mercantile  house  he  was  en-
abled to  take  lessons,  and  some  of  his  pictures  began
to  attract  attention.  He  wished  to  continue  his
studies  in  Europe,  so  he  sold  his  pictures  for  $160,
and,  with  some  help  from  his  patrons,  set  out  for
Montreal  in  the  summer  of  1846.  Lord  Cathcart,
the  governor-general,  received  him  kindly,  and
furnished  him  with  a  letter  of  recommendation
that  was  afterward  of  great  value  to  him.  He
finally  reached  Florence,  and,  after  many  disap-
pointments, was  admitted  to  the  Academy  of  fine
arts.  During  the  Revolution  of  1848  he  refused  to
enter  the  civic  guard  of  the  fine  arts,  and  was
obliged  to  leave  the  academy,  but  re-entered  it
after  the  battle  of  No  vara.  Prom  this  time  he
worked  hard,  but  led  a  life  of  great  poverty  until
1850,  when  an  American  gentleman  purchased
some  of  his  pictures.  He  then  studied  in  the  prin-
cipal Italian  cities,  and  in  1857,  when  he  was  in
Parma,  won  a  prize  that  had  been  offered  for  the
best  copv  of  the  Saint  Jerome  of  Correggio,  excit-
ing much  enthusiasm  by  his  work.  He  was  chosen
an  honorary  member  of  the  Academy  of  the  fine
arts,  and  afterward  presented  the  picture  to  the
grand  duke,  who  created  him  knight  of  the  order
of  Saint  Louis.  After  this  he  had  orders  for  pict-
ures from  the  empress  dowager  of  Russia  and  other
persons  of  rank.  In  April,  1862,  he  visited  Canada,
where  he  was  received  with  enthusiasm.  His  pict-
ures are  considered  by  art  critics  to  be  distin-
guished for  finish  and  elegance  rather  than  vigor.

FALCONER,  John  M„  artist,  b.  in  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  22  May,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  the
high  school  in  Edinburgh,  and  came  to  the  United
States  at  the  age  of  sixteen.  He  studied  art  in  the
National  academy  of  design,  and  with  the  Society
of  painters  in  water-colors  in  New  York  city,  in
the  Graham  art  school  and  that  of  the  Art  associa-
tion of  Brooklyn,  and  in  the  Louvre  at  Paris.  He
became  a  member  of  the  New  York  art  reunion  and
New  York  sketch  union  in  1847,  was  a  member  of
the  Society  of  painters  in  water-colors,  and  ex-
hibited in  their  collection  in  the  Crystal  Palace,
New  York,  in  1854.  He  became  an  honorary  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  design  in  1856,  of
the  Artists'  fund  society  in  1861,  of  the  American
water-color  society  in  1872,  of  the  New  York
etching  club  in  1879,  and  fellow  of  the  Painters'
and  etchers'  society  of  London,  England,  in  1882.
He  proposed  the  first  exhibition  of  engravings  in
the  United  States,  which  was  successfully  held  in
Brooklyn  in  1864,  as  part  of  the  art  depart  Hunt  of
the  U.  S.  sanitary  fair,  and  organized  the  first


chronological  exhibition  of  American  art  in  the
United  States  which  was  held  at  the  opening  of
the  galleries  of  the  Brooklyn  art  association  in
1872,  and  the  first  exhibition  of  water-color  paint*
ings  by  the  Artists'  fund  society  of  New  York,  out
of  which  grew  the  present  American  water-color
society.  He  has  made  numerous  painting!  in  ofl
of  American  and  European  subjects,  including
"  Kenilworth  Castle,"  "  House  where  tin-  Declara-
tion of  Independence  was  Written,"  and  "  Robert
Pulton's  House  in  Philadelphia."  In  water-colors
he  produced  the  "  William  Penn  Mansion,"  ex-
hibited, with  others  of  his  works,  by  the  American
water-color  society  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  in
1876,  and  a  series  of  "  Historic  Houses"  in  enamel
on  porcelain,  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Long
Island  historical  society.  He  has  also  n
many  oil-paintings,  and  etched  on  copper  fifty
plates  from  his  own  works,  and  twenty  from  those
of  other  artists.  He  wrote  a  "Sketch Of  the  His-
tory of  Water-Color  Painting"  for  the  Society  of
painters  in  water-colors  (1852),  and  has  compiled
the  "Catalogue  Raisonnee  of  the  Chronological
Exhibition  of  American  Art "  (Brooklyn,  1872).

FALES.  Vim  ira  L.,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
York ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  8  Nov.,  1868.  She
was  for  some  time  a  resident  of  Iowa,  but  her  hus-
band, Joseph  T.  Pales,  having  received  an  appoint-
ment as  examiner  in  the  patent-office  in  Washing-
ton, she  thenceforth  made  that  city  her  home.  As
early  as  1860,  from  her  extended  knowledge  of
southern  feeling  and  action,  she  foresaw  and  pre-
dicted the  approaching  struggle,  and,  much  to  the
surprise  of  her  friends,  began  the  collection  and

E reparation  of  articles  for  hospital  use.  At  the
Bginning  of  the  war  she  entered,  fully  prepared,
on  the  care  of  sick  and  wounded  soldiers,  and  at
Pittsburg  Landing  and  other  battle-fields  of  the
west  was  busy  in  ministering  to  the  wants  of  the
sufferers.  The  government  placed  an  ambulance
at  her  command,  and  during  the  war  she  was  un-
remitting in  her  visits  to  the  hospitals  in  the
neighborhood  of  Washington,  at  Fredericksburg,
on  the  Peninsula,  and  elsewhere.  In  the  yard  of
her  own  house  she  pitched  a  large  tent,  into  which
she  gathered  sick  and  disabled  soldiers,  and  there
ministered  to  their  needs  until  means  could  be  pro-
vided to  send  them  to  their  homes.  For  some  time
Mrs.  Fales  was  charged  by  the  government  with
the  superintendence  of  soldiers  sent  from  the  hos-
pitals in  and  around  Washington  to  the  hospitals
in  New  York  and  elsewhere.  Amid  all  this  ac-
tivity she  found  time  to  correspond  extensively
and  obtain  pecuniary  aid  to  carry  on  her  work.

FALKNER,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Man-
chester, England,  in  1710;  d.  in  Plowdenhall,  Sa-
lopshire,  England,  30  Jan.,  1784.  He  studied  under
his  father,  who  was  a  distinguished  surgeon  in
Manchester,  and  afterward  attended  the  hospitals
in  London.  He  went  as  a  surgeon  on  board  of  a
ship,  visiting  Guinea,  and  then  proceeded  to  Cadiz,
where  he  re-embarked  in  1731  for  Buenos  Ay  res,
and  during  an  illness  there  was  nursed  so  devot-
edly by  the  Jesuits,  that  on  his  recovery  he  de-
termined to  join  the  order.  He  entered  one  of
their  colleges,  and  was  sent  in  1734  to  evangel-
ize the  vast  territory  comprised  in  the  viceroyalty
of  Buenos  Ay  res.  and  the  country  south  of  the  Rio
de  la  Plata."  He  had  extraordinary  snco
his  missionary  labors,  which  was  largely  due  to
his  ability  in  curing  the  sick,  his  dexteritv  in
surgical  operations,  and  his  knowledge  of  mechan-
ics. During  forty  years  he  lived  at  different  sta-
tions on  the  Chaco,  the  Paraguay,  the  Tucuman,
and  on  the  Pampas. The  statin  of  St.  George


FALLOWS


M\<i


100


IflTlrirhH so  well  that in  17?:{  it Im.l  7,00

I/..1 Indians, five  churches,  three coim-nts. two

hospitals,  ■  college,  and  a  library. He  ■

hy  the  Spanish  government  in  1750  to  draw
it  nap  of  the  ooaal  of  South  Aroorioa  from  tin-
•oath  of  Hni/.il  toTierradd  Fuego,  which  oa  its
oompletion  was  printed  in  1781  at  Quito,  and  b
BOted  f'»r  its  accuracy.  He  also  designed  a  chart
of  Paraguay  in  1757, » chart  <>f  thexuouman  in
•nl  several  others  of  Irs*  im|H.riance.  On
the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits  he  was  teat  to  Spain,
hikI  aflat  ward  went  t<<  England,  when-  be  beoams
chaplain  in  an  old  English  Roman  Catholic  family
near  Worcester. Here  he  wrote  his  "  Inscription

of  Patagonia  and  of  the  Neighboring  Countries  of

Booth  America"  (Hereford  and  London,  1774 J
(ierman  translation,  (tot ha,  1775;  French  transla-
tion,entitled  "  Description des  terres  Magcllauiqucs
at  des  pavs  adjacent  s,"  |  vols.,  (ieiieva  and  Paris,
This  work  is  valuable  for  its  deaoriptiOM
of  the  countries  in  which  he  lived;  hut  Falkner's
•operfloia]  knowledge  of  natural  history  dimin-
ishes the  value  of  his  aceount  of  the  natural  pro-
ductionsof  South  America.  He  also  published  '•  A
Treatise  OQ  the  language  of  the  Indians  of  South
America";  "  Botanical.  Mineral,  and  like  Observa-
tions made  by  himself  <>n  the  Products  of  South
America";  "A  Treatise  on  South  American  Die-
tempers  cured  hy  American  Drugs."  SereraJ
South  American  plants  were  introduced  by  him
into  the  Kuro|>ean  materia  medica,

FALLOWS*  Samuel,  bishop  of  the  Reformed
Episcopal  church.  I>.  in  Pendleton,  near  Manches-
ter, England,  13  Dec..  1888,  He  removed  with
his  parent-  to  Wisconsin  in  isjs,  was  graduated  at
the  State  university  there  in  1850,  and  was  rieo*
president  of  Qainsville  university  till  1801,  when
ne  was  ordained  in  the  Methodist  Episcojml  church.
He  served  as  a  colonel  in  the  civil  war,  and  was
We  lotted  brigadier-general.  <>n  returning  to  civil
life  he  became  a  pastor  in  Milwaukee.  He  iraa
chosen  state  su|N>rintendent  of  public  instruction
for  Wisconsin  in  1871,  and  was  twice  re-elected.
In  1H74  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Illinois
Wesl.van  university  at  Bloom  iugton.  In  1875  he
united  with  the  Reformed  Episcopal  church,  and
became  rector  of  St.  Paul's,  Chicago,  in  May  of  that
year.  In  January,  1H7(I.  he  was  appointed  chief
editor  of  the  "  Appeal,"  the  organ  of  the  Reformed
Epi-c.ipal  church,  ami  on  15  July,  1870,  he  was
elected  a  bishop.  He  was  regent  of  the  University
of  Wisconsin  in  lM04-'74.  and  received  the  degree
of  D.  I),  from  Lawrence  university  in  1M78.  He
has  published  a  "Supplemental  Dictionary  "  (Chi-
cago, 1884),  and  "  Past  Noon  "  (1880).

FANEUlL,  Peter,  merchant,  b.  in  New  Ro-
chelle.  N.  V.,  in  17<Hi;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8
March,  1748. His  parents  were  French  Huguenots.

Hi  Ineame  a
merchant  in
Boston,  and
in  1 740.  after
the project

of  ■rooting  ■

tnbtie  mar-
et -house  in
that  city  had
In-cll  discuss-
ed for some

he  of-
fered, at  a
public  met-
ing, to  build
a  suitable  edifice  at  his  own  cost  as  a  gift  to  tin-
town;  but  so  strong  was  the  op|x>sit ion  to  market


houses  that,  although  a  PQU  of  thanks  was  passed
unanimously,  the  offer  was  i  \  a  majority

of  only  seven.  The  building  was  bognB  in  DoOl
square  in  September  of  the  BUM  year,  and  llnished
in  two  Mars.  It  eomptisod  a  market-house  0B  the
ground  Boor, and  a  town-hall,  with  other  rooms,
OVOf  it.  In  1701  it  was  destroyed  by  hrv,  nothing
but  the  brick  walls  remaining.  It  was  rebuilt  by
the  (own  in  1768,  and  In  1775,  during  the  British
OOOnpationof  Iioston.it  was  used  for  a  theatre.  In
18Q0  it  was  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  another
story,  ami  increased  fort)  feet  In  width.  The  large
hall  is  abont  eighty  loot  snuare.  and oontaini  nanny
One  painting!  of  distinguished  men.  During  the
Revolutionary  |>eriod  it  was  the  usual  m<
place  of  the  patriots,  and,  from  the  stirring  d<  bates
and  hnpottant  resolutions  that  WON  often  heanl
within  its  walls,  it  gained  the  name  of  "the  cradle
of  American  liberty." (Set  illustration.)

FANNIN.  Jumes  W„  soldier,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina abont  1H(H»;  (1.  at  (ioliad.  TeXM,  87  March,
1X50.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  Texan  service  in
1880,  and  on  "^M  Oct..  at  the  head  of  ninety  men.

with  ("apt.  Bowie,  defeated  ■  superior  m
force  near Bexar, (bn.  Houston soon  afterward
made  him  colonel  of  artillery  and  Hirptfinr  gjn
eral. In  January.  1888,  he  set  out  to  re-enforce  Dr.
James (irant. who W0J in  command of an un-

anthoriaed  expedition  to  Matamoraa.  At  Refugio
he  learned  of  the  destruction  <>f  Qranfi  party,  and

fell  back  to  (ioliad,  which  he  put  in  a  state  of  de-
fence; but  by  Houston's  order  he  manlied  to-
ward Victoria,  and  0B  1!»  Manh  was  attacked  on
the  Coleta  river  by  a  Mexican  force  under  Sen.
I'rrea.  Throwing  up  a  breastwork  of  wagons,  hag-
gage,  and  earth,  the  Texans  defended  themselves
with  spirit  until  night  interrupted  the  lighting.
Col.  Fannin  being  among  the  wounded.  The
battle  was  renewed  on  the  2()th,  but  the  Mexicans
having  received  a  re-enforcement  of  5<Ml  men.  with
artillery,  a  capitulation  was  signed,  by  which  it
was  agreed  that  the  Texans  should  be  treated  as
prisoners  of  war,  and  eeeoonao  possible  senl  to  the
United  States.  After  surrendering  their  arms
they  were  taken  to  (ioliad.  where,  on  the  -0th.  an
order  was  reoeired  from  Santa  Anna  requiring
them  to  lie  shot.  At  daybreak  the  next  morning
357  of  the  prisoners,  all  of  them  but  four  physi-
cians and  their  aatistanta.  wen-  marched  out  under
various  pretexts,  and  fired  upon  in  divisions.
Fannin  was  killed  last.  Many  attempted  to  es-
cape, and  were  cut  down  by  the  cavalry,  but
t  went v-se\en  are  beUered  to  have  eluded  pursuit.

FANNING,  Alexander  C.  W„  soldier,  b.  in
Massachusetts  in  1788;  <1.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  18
Aug.,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  lSl'J.  anil  immediately  went  into
service  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  lieing  engaged  in
the  capture  of  York  (now  Toronto),  Canada.  27
April,  1818,  where  he  was  severely  wounded  bv
the  explosion  of  the  enemy's  maga/ine  He  took
part  in  the  defence  of  Sackett's  HarU.r.  four  weeks
later,  and  in  November  following  distinguished
himself  in  the  Iwittle  of  French  Creak,  when  the
British  flotilla  was  repulsed.  For  his  braxery  in
the  defence  of  Fort  Erie  when  besicpt]  by  the
British  forces  from  l|  Aug.  till  17  Bent.  M  was
brevet  ted  major.  lie  wis  then  transferred  to  the
Florida  frontier  and  served  then-  till  1S1!».  partici-
pating in  Jackson's  campaign  against  the  BennV

nole  Indians  in  1817-'lH,  and  in  the  capture  of  St.
Mark's,  7  April.  1S1H,  and  was  the  provost-mar-
shal at  the  execution  of  Arbuthnot  ami  Amhrister.
British  subject-.  OB  88  April.  1818.  He  was  in
command  in  St.  Mark's  in  1818-'U»,  ami  was  then


400


PANNING


KING


transferred  to  Poll  Gadsden. On  the  mrgeniiri

tion  of  the  army  in 1  N*J  1 .  In-  was  appointed  cap-

tain  in  the  2d  artillery,  and  served  in  the  garrison
at Detroit in L829-'8,  F«»rt Mackinaw. Mich., in

ls-j:;.  ami  Port  Oolnmboa  in  18S4,  after  which  he

was  appointed  acting  major  of  the  artillery-school
at  Fortress  .Monroe,  Va.  On  15  Aug.,  1H24.  be  re-
ceived a  brevet  lieutenant-colonelcy,  and  became
major  on  3  Nov.,  1832.  He  took  part  in  the  war
against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1835-'9,  was  bre-
vetted  colonel,  31  Dec,  1n:{.">,  and  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  4th  artillery,  10  Sept.,  1838.
During  the  Canada  border  disturbances  in  1840-'l
he  was  on  the  frontier,  after  which  he  was  on  re-
cruiting service  in  the  western  department.

FANNING,  David,  freebooter,  b.  in  Johnston
county,  N.  ('.,  about  1754;  d.  in  Digby,  N.  S.,  in
1825.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  carpenter,  but
claimed  that  he  was  a  "planter  in  the  back  part
of  the  southern  provinces."  He  trafficked  with
the  Indians,  and  was  connected  with  the  notori-
ous Col.  McGirth  on  the  Pedee.  When  Wilming-
ton was  occupied  bv  the  British  in  1781,  Fanning,
having  been  robbed  by  a  party  of  men  who  called
themselves  Whigs,  attached  himself  to  the  Tories,
collected  a  small  band  of  desperadoes,  and  scoured
the  country,  committing  frightful  atrocities,  but
doing  such  good  service  to  the  British  that  Maj.
Craig  gave  him  a  commission  as  lieutenant-colonel
in  the  militia.  By  the  rapidity  and  secrecy  of  his
movements  he  succeeded  in  capturing  many  promi-
nent Whigs,  and  hanged  those  who  had  incurred
his  personal  resentment.  At  one  time  he  dashed
into  the  village  of  Pittsborough,  where  a  court  was
in  session,  and  carried  off  the  judges,  lawyers,  offi-
cers, and  some  of  the  citizens.  Three  weeks  later
he  captured  Col.  Alston  and  thirty  men  in  his  own
house ;  and  soon  afterward,  at  Hillsborough,  took
Gov.  Burke  with  his  whole  suite  and  a  number  of
the  principal  inhabitants.  He  was  excepted  in
every  treaty  and  enactment  made  in  favor  of  the
royalists,  and  was  one  of  the  three  persons  ex-
cluded by  name  from  the  benefit  of  the  general
"act  of  pardon  and  oblivion"  of  offences  com-
mitted during  the  Revolution.  When  the  Whigs
fained  the  ascendency  in  North  Carolina  he  went  to
'lorida,  and  afterward  to  St.  John's,  N.  B.,  where
he  became  a  member  of  the  assembly,  but  about
18(X)  was  sentenced  to  be  hanged.  He  escaped,  and
was  pardoned.  Fanning  wrote,  in  1790,  a  "Nar-
rative of  Adventures  in  North  Carolina,"  which,
with  an  introduction  and  notes  by  John  H.  Wheel-
er, was  printed  privately  (Richmond,  Va.,  1861).

FANNING,  Edmund,  partisan,  b.  in  Long  Isl-
and in  1737 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  28  Feb.,  1818.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1757,  and  settled  as  a
lawyer  in  Hillsborough,  N.  C,  where  he  was  elected
colonel  of  militia  in  1763,  clerk  of  the  superior
court  in  1765,  and  subsequently  went  to  the  legisla-
ture. Among  the  offices  held  by  him  was  that  of  re-
corder of  deeds,  and  it  was  alleged  that  to  his  abuses
of  this  trust  and  his  exorbitant  charges  was  due  the
rebellion  of  the  regulators  in  Gov.  Tryon's  admin-
istration. By  his  vicious  character  "  nearly  all  the
estates  in  Orange  county  were  loaded  with  doubts
as  to  their  titles,  and  new  and  unnecessary  deeds
were  demanded."  Through  his  actions  as  recorder,
added  to  his  zeal  in  quelling  opposition  to  the  se-
vere exactions  of  the  government  and  in  bringing
the  leaders  of  that  opposition  to  the  scaffold,  he  be-
came obnoxious  to  the  people,  and,  to  escape  the
popular  indignation,  he  accompanied  Gov.  Tryon,
who  was  his  father-in-law,  to  New  York  as  his  pri-
vate secretary  in  1771.  Be  subsequently  applied
to  the  North  Carolina  legislature,  through  Gov.


S&ftrttJ*)  C7**r*


&/~>*T*+V  f


Martin,  the  noOMROT  oi  GOT.  Tryon.  for  reparation
for  loam  from  destruction  of  bis  property  :  but  the
petition  was  unanimously  rejected,  and  the  gov-
ernor was  relinked  for  presenting  it  and  thus  'tri-
Bingwitfa  the  dignity  OX  the  house."  In  1?TI  Fan-
ning received
from  the  Brit-
ish government
the  lucrative  of-
fice of  surveyor-
general,  as  a
reward  for  his
services  to  the
crown  and  his
losses  in  North
Carolina.  In
1777  he  raised
and  command-
ed a  corps  of
460  loyalists,
which  bore  the
name  of  the  "as-
sociated refu-
gees,"or  "king's
American  regi-
ment." While
his  regiment
was  on  Long  Island  some  of  his  men  entered  a
house,  tied  the  owner  of  it  to  a  bed-post,  and  held
a  candle  under  the  ends  of  his  fingers,  to  force  him
to  disclose  the  hiding-place  of  his  money.  Fan-
ning was  equally  severe  toward  all.  During  the
war  he  was  twice  wounded,  and  in  1779  his  property
was  confiscated.  He  removed  to  Nova  Scotia  near
the  close  of  the  war,  and  became  councillor  and
lieutenant-governor  on  23  Sept.,  1783,  and  three
years  later  governor  of  Prince  Edward  Island.  This
office  he  held  for  nineteen  years.  He  was  made  a
major-general  in  the  British  army  in  1793,  lieuten-
ant-general in  1799,  and  general  in  1808.  The  de-
gree of  A.M.  was  given  him  by  Harvard  in  1764,
and  bv  Kings  in  1772;  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  by
Oxford  in  1774,  and  that  of  LL.D.  by  both  Yale
and  Dartmouth  in  1803. — His  brother.  Thomas,  of
Suffolk  county,  N.  Y.,  delivered  the  address  before
Gov.  Tryon  in  November,  1776,  and  was  deputed
to  present  the  submission  of  the  committee  of  that
county.  In  June,  1778,  Fanning  was  captured
and  carried  off  by  a  party  of  Whigs.

FANNING,  John  Thomas,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  31  Dec,  1837.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  and  normal  schools  of  his  native  city,  and
then  studied  architecture  until  1858.  During  the
three  following  years  he  perfected  himself  in  build-
ing construction  by  labor  as  a  mechanic,  meanwhile
pursuing  studies  in  theoretical  engineering.  In
1861  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  3d  Connecticut
regiment,  and  rose  gradually  until  he  attained  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  l)egan  the  general
practice  of  engineering  and  architecture  in  1862,
opening  an  office  in  Norwich,  where  he  remained
until  1870,  having  charge  during  that  time  of  all  the
engineering  work  of  the  city,  including  the  laying
out  of  its  cemetery  and  the  construction  of  its
public  water-works,  also  making  plans  for  numer-
ous mills  and  water-powers  in  New  England.  From
1870  till  1880  he  was  engaged  principally  as  chief
and  consulting  engineer  in  building  water-works  for
cities.  While  superintending  the  construction  of
water-works  for  Manchester,  N.  H.,  he  removed  his
office  to  that  city,  where  he  designed  various  pub-
lic buildings.  After  1880  he  was  called  on  by  an
association  of  citizens  of  New  York  and  Brooklyn
to  make  a  report  concerning  an  adequate  public
water-supply  for  these  cities,  and  t>f  all  the  cities


I  \i;..«'


FARIBAULT


in  Um  Budson  valley,  from  the  appsi  Raton  riftt
lied. Thin  proiecl  contemplated  an  aque-
duct 225  mild  in  length,  capable  of  oonvoj  big  from

lirondack  region  1.(nkmmni.(NKI  ^ull. m-,  ..f
water  dailv  t<>  New  York  ami  Brooklyn,  at  an
estimated  ood  Of  160,000,000.  In  I860  !><•  pre-
pared  plans  fur tin- further  development «>f the

.iirt-|M.«iT  of  St.  Anthony's  talk  on  Um
Mississippi  river,  at  the  city  of  Minneapolis,  Minn..

and  ill !**»>  constructed now  (lams  on  the  works.
Daring  the  same  fear  be  was  oonenlting  m
<>f  the  tipper  Red  river  valley  drainage  communion.
Mid  directed  the  detailed  topographical  nrt
Repotted  on  the  drainage  of  :i,(Mni  square  miles  of

prairie  bade  in  the  vallev  of  the  |{cd  river  of  the
North  at  an  estimated  cost  of  $1,000,000.  Mr.  Faii-
eired  in  1hs;{  from  the  New  England  agri-
cultural society  its  highest  prize  for  architectural
and  engineering  designs,  and  he  has  secured  pat-
ent- tot  ■  water-wheel,  a  turliine  motor  valve,  a
steam  boiler,  a  steam  piiinping-cnginc,  for  im-
provements in  fire-proof  building  const  ruction,  ami
numerous  original  designs  for  hydraulic  apparat  us.
He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  a  manlier  of  other
scientific  associations.  Besides  a  great  numberof
reiM.rts  on  technical  matters,  he  has  pnbUehed  a
"Treatise  on  llvdraulic  and  Water-Supplv  Engi-
neering*' (New  York.  lsTT:  rev.  cd.,  1880).'

FARliO.  William  Itcorge,  expressman,  b.  in
PomiM'V.  N.  Y..  M  Mav.  [818;  d.  in  Buffalo.
N\  Y..  A  Aug.,  1881.  He  worked  for  his  living
from  the  age  of  thirteen,  attending  school  for  a
few  winters  only. Ho  was  engaged  for  some  time

in  mercantile  busi-
ness, but  in  1841  re-
moved to  Auburn
and  became  freight
agent  for  the  Au-
burn and  Syracuse
railroad  company.
He  left  this  place  in
1841  to  become  mes-
senger for  I'oineroy
anil  company's  ex-
press, running  from
Buffalo  to  Albany,
and  was  made  resi-
dent agent  of  the
company  in  HufTalo
in  lK4;t.  Mr.  Fargo,
in  connection  with
Henry  Welti  and
Daniel  Dunning,  or-
ganized in  .January.  1844,  the  first  express  com imny
running  west  from  Buffalo,  under  the  name  of  Welu
and  company.  At  first  the  line  reached  only  to  De-
troit, but  the  business  was  gradually  extended  to
Chicago,  Milwaukee,  Cincinnati,  and  St.  Louis.  In
1845  the  firm  lieoame  Livingston  and  Fargo,  ami
remained  thus  until  1850,  when  the  American  ex-

Srees  company,  uniting  the  interests  of  several
rms,  was  organized.  Henry  Wells  was  president
and  William  (J.  Fargo  secretary  of  this  company
till  its  consolidation  with  the  Merchants'  union  ex-
press company  in  1808,  when  Mr.  Fargo  succeeded
to  the  presidency.  At  the  time  of  his  death  the
corporation  had  a  capital  of  $1n.ooo.ooo,  main-
tained 2,700  offices,  ami  gave  employment  to  more
than  5.000  men.  of  whom  000  wen-  messengers.  In
ls'il  he  was  associated  with  Henry  Wells  and
others  in  the  organization  of  a  company  which  un-
dertook the  transaction  of  express  business  between
New  York  and  San  Francisco  bv  way  of  the  isth-
mus, and  also  operated  interior  lines  mi  the  Pacific


coast  under  the  firm  nan f  Walla,  Fargo  and

coimotin. This  was  continued  until  the  coin;
of  tin-  trans-continental railways.  when  the  man-
agement was  transferred  to  western  capitalists,  but
Mr.  Fargo  remained  a  director  of  thscompaaj  ami
its  vice-president. Mr. PUISO was  a ilir*  •
various  railroads,  was  largelj  Interested  in  i
Buffalo  enterprises,  and  from  1869  till lv'

ma\or  of  that  citv.-lhs  brother.  Julius  Cong-
del.  b.  in  Pompey,'  N.  Y„  5  Mav.  1820.  entered  the
employ  Of  Wells  and  company  in  1*11  m  Buffalo,
ami  remained  there  until  wA  Hi  MM  then  trans-
ferred to  Detroit,  and  a  few  years  later  to  Chicago,
where  he  became  agent  and  manager  of  the  Aimri-
i  an  express  company.  In  1HIM1  he  earns  U)  New
York  citv  as  the  general  su|>erinteiident  and  man-
ager of  the  com|Miny's  inten-ts,  which  ofBsi  he  held
until  18MI,  when  he  ■DOOtOdad  to  the  presidency  of
the  company.  Mr.  Fargo  is  afcn  president  of  the
Men  hunts'  despatch  transportation  company,  and
director  of  several  Important  railroad  ami  snrsm
OOf] Mirations.  —  Another  brother.  Charles,  (>.  in
Pompey,  N.  Y..  15  April.  1k.'U.  entered  the  express
bmdneai  in  Detroit  in  180L  In  1*5:»  he  was  made
agent  of  the  Toledo  oflOB  of  the  American  ""p— f
Company,  and  three  years  later  returned  to  Detroit
to  take  charge  of  that  office.  Much  of  the  devel-
opment of  Michigan  is  credited  to  his  cm
pushing  the  express  into  remote  districts,  making
|M.ssjlile  the  ready  transportation  of  produce  to  the
markets.  In  1800  be  became  assistant  general  su-
perintendenl  of  the  company,  with  general  manage-
ment of  the  Chicago  Office,  and  after  the  death  of
William  G.  Fargo  he  became  BBOOnd  vice-president
and  general  western  manager.

FARUUES,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  OucIh-c.
Canada,  in  1780;  d.  there.  11  Dec.,  1S47.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  IT'.i?.  and  soon  afterward
sailed  for  Scotland,  where  be  studied  medicine  at
the  University  of  Edinburgh,  ami  obtained  a  de-

free,  after  defending  a  Latin  thesis  on  "Chorea."
le  subsequently  practised  for  several years  in

London,  and  became  intimate  with  the  eccentric
physician,  John  Altcrncthy.  Dr.  Fargues  returned
to  Quebec  in  1811,  and  soon  took  a  high  rank  as  a
medical  practitioner.  He  was  a  man  of  extensive
reading.  Keen  powers  of  observation,  and  unusual
strength  of  intellect,  and  owned  the  l>cst  private
medical  library  in  the  province,  which  was  pur-
chased after  his  death  and  given  to  the  Laval  uni-
versity. He  was  repeatedly  solicited  to  take  a  seat
in  the  provincial  legislature,  but  preferred  to  de-
vote himself  exclusively  to  professional  work.

FARIBAULT,  Ueorge  Bartholomew .  Cana-
dian antiquarian,  b.  in  Quebec.  -I  Dec..  1788;  .!.
there.  81  Dec.  1866.  lb-  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Quebec  l>ar  in  1811.  During  the  war
of  1812— *15  he  served  as  lieutenant  in  the  Cana-
dian militia.  In  1881  be  was  appointsd  secretary
of  committees  and  French  translator  to  the  legis-
lature, .f  Lower  Canada,  and  in  1K12  promoted  tO
the  post  of  assistant  secretary.  On  tin-  union  of
the  two  Canada*  in  1K41  he  was  named  assistant
secretary  of  the  legislative  asscmhlv,  which  office
he  held  until  1855.  While  fulfilling  the  duties  ,,f
tins,- (itlics  he  found  leisure  for  the  formation  of
a  collection  of  works  and  documents  relating  to
the  history  of  Canada.  This  collect  ion,  amounting
to  KI.IKMI  volumes,  was  lost  in  the  fire  that  de-
stroyed the  legislative  buildings  in  Montreal  in
|si;i.  ParihauU  at  once  began  to  mrmaosoond
collection,  and  was  sent  by  the  legislature  to  exam-
ine the  libraries  of  BuTOps.  At  first  he  rSOStTSd
evi  ry  aid  from  the  French  ministers  m  his  investl-
,  gat  ions:  but  the  events  of  |  Dec.,  1852,  interfered


408


FAKIBAULT


FARLEY


with  liis  researches,  and  the  death  of  his  wife  de-
cided him  to  return  to  Canada.  He  then  devoted
himself  to  the  formation  of  the  new  national
library,  which  had  reached  20,000  volumes  when
the  legislative  buildings  of  Quebec  were  burned,
1  1'Yli..  1864,  and  although  13,000  volumes  were
saved,  the  7,000  that  were  lost  comprised  publica-
tions of  the  10th  and  17th  centuries  that  never
could  he  replaced.  His  health  was  injured  by  this
calamity,  and  the  legislature  voted  him  a  pension
of  $2,000.  The  principal  work  of  the  close  of  his
life  was  the  execution  of  the  monument  that  the
French  troops  had  resolved  to  raise  in  1761  to  the
memory  of  Montcalm  in  the  church  of  the  I'ni-
lines  of  Quebec.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Historical  society  of  Quebec.  He  wrote  a
"Catalogue  raisonne  d'ouvrages  sur  l'histoire  de
1'Amerique  "  (1837),  which  is  still  considered  an  in-
dispensable guide  for  the  historian.  His  collection
of  manuscripts  and  old  works,  which  he  left  to
Laval  university,  comprises  about  400  manuscripts,
half  of  which  are  original,  or  copies  collated  of
very  old  documents  (1626,  1636,  and  the  years  fol-
lowing). Among  these  the  most  precious  is  the
"Journal  des  Jesuites"  (1645-'88,  the  only  part
discovered  so  far).  There  are  about  1,000  printed
volumes,  some  of  which  are  very  rare  and  impor-
tant, such  as  "  Lescarbot "  (1609) ;  "  Champlain  "
(1613) ;  "  Lies  voyages  aventureux  de  Jean  Al-
phonse" ;  "  Helations  des  Jesuites" ;  and  an  album
containing  plans,  maps,  views,  and  portraits,  all
relating  to  the  history  of  the  country,  and  several
of  them  of  great  importance.

FARIBAULT,  John  Baptist,  pioneer,  b.  in
Berthier,  Quebec,  about  1769 ;  d.  in  Faribault,
Minn.,  in  1860.  He  received  his  education  in  the
village  school,  and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  entered
a  commercial  house  in  Quebec,  where  he  remained
five  years,  in  1796  he  became  agent  of  the  Ameri-
can company  of  the  northwest,  under  the  presi-
dency of  John  Jacob  Astor.  He  left  Montreal  in
the  spring  for  the  straits  of  Mackinaw  in  a  canoe,
accompanied  by  nineteen  men.  After  remaining
some  days  at  Mackinaw,  he  engaged  a  Pottawatto-
mie  Indian  as  a  guide,  and  set  out  for  the  residence
of  Gen.  Harrison,  governor  of  the  territory  of  In-
diana, at  Port  Vincent  on  the  Wabash,  in  order  to
obtain  permission  to  trade  with  the  Indians  in  the
United  States.  He  nearly  perished  on  the  journey
through  the  treachery  of  nis  guide,  but  reached
Gov.  Harrison,  who  received  him  kindly  and  grant-
ed the  necessary  permission.  He  then  returned  to
the  mouth  of  the  Kankakee,  where  he  passed  the
remainder  of  the  year.  He  afterward  established
himself  at  the  port  of  Des  Moines,  and  engaged  in
a  lucrative  trade  with  the  Sakis,  Foxes,  Iowas.  and
Yankons.  Then  he  proceeded  to  the  Saint  Peter,
and  trailed  with  other  Sioux  tribes,  making  also  an
effort  to  teach  them  agriculture.  He  married  a
half-breed,  by  whom  he  had  eight  children,  and,
having  prevision  of  the  future  greatness  of  the
wild  country  in  which  he  lived,  he  had  them  edu-
cated under  circumstances  of  great  difficulty.  He
remained  ten  years  with  the  Astor  company,  and
then  entered  into  business  for  himself,  realizing  a
large  fortune,  which  he  lost  in  the  war  of  1812.
He  had  embraced  the  American  side  in  this  con-
test, and,  having  to  go  on  business  to  Mackinaw
after  the  siege  of  the  fort  that  the  Americans  had
erected  there,  he  was  made  prisoner  by  the  English
as  a  traitor  to  British  interests.  He  continued  for
several  vears  to  travel  over  the  prairies,  and  al-
though he  was  often  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the
Indians,  frequently  wounded,  and  on  two  or  three
occasions  left  for  dead,  he  always  escaped, lie  was


the  first  to  cultivate  the  soil  west  of  the  Missis-
sippi and  north  of  the  Itc^  Moines,  and  ltought
agricultural  implements  with  the  purpose  of  teach-
ing the  Indians  farming.  His  influence  extended
among  all  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  vast  territory
from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Missouri,  and  as  far  as
Red  river.  He  also  acted  as  a  missionary  among
them,  and  built,  at  his  own  expense,  a  Catholic
church  during  the  years  1840-'3,  the  first  erected
in  Minnesota.  He  spent  the  last  days  of  his  life  in
Faribault,  a  city  founded  by  his  son  Alexander.
A  county  in  Minnesota  is  also  named  in  his  honor.

FARLEY,  Harriet,  editor,  b.  in  Claremonl  N.
H.,  about  1815.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a  Con-
gregational clergyman,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen
began  to  earn  her  own  living,  by  turns  working  at
straw-  and  palm-leaf  plaiting,  binding  shoes,  tailor-
ing, weaving,  and  teaching.  Her  father  then  re-
moved to  Atkinson,  N.  H.,  and  combined  the  duties
of  principal  of  two  academies  with  those  of  his  pas-
torate. Here  she  learned  something  of  French,
drawing,  ornamental  needle-work,  and  the  usual
accomplishments  of  that  day.  These  were  taught
her  because  her  friends  wished  her  to  be  a  teacher,
an  occupation  for  which  she  felt  the  greatest  re-
pugnance. This  feeling  resulted  in  her  leaving
home,  and,  going  to  Lowell,  she  determined  that
if  she  must  support  herself  she  would  do  so  in
her  own  way.  She  would  then,  to  use  her  own
words,  be  at  liberty  to  "  read,  think,  and  write  "
when  she  could,  and  without  restraint  She  made
good  wages  in  the  factories  of  that  city,  and  ex-
pended her  earnings  in  caring  for  her  brothers
and  sisters,  one  of  whom  she  assisted  in  educat-
ing. While  she  was  thus  engaged,  the  publica-
tion of  "  The  New  England  Offering,"  the  writers
on  which  were  exclusively  women  operatives  in
the  mills  of  the  city,  was  begun  (January,  1841).
Harriet  was  at  first  a  contributor  to,  and  after-
ward the  editor  of,  this  novel  literary  venture.
After  a  time  she  also  became  the  proprietor.  "  I  do
all  the  publishing,  editing,  canvassing,"  she  writes
in  a  biographical  letter,  "  and,  as  it  is  bound  in  ray
office,  I  can,  in  a  hurry,  help  fold,  cut  covers,
stitch,  etc.  I  have  a  little  girl  to  assist  me  in  the
folding,  stitching,  etc. ;  the  rest,  after  it  comes
from  the  printer's  hands,  is  all  my  own  work.  1
employ  no  agents,  and  depend  upon  no  one  for
assistance.  My  edition  is  4,000."  Miss  Farley
published  a  volume  containing  extracts  from  "  The
Offering,"  including  some  of  her  own  contribu-
tions, entitled  "  Shells  from  the  Strand  of  the  Sea
of  Genius  "  (Boston,  1847).  In  1849  a  second  col-
lection from  the  monthly  was  made  and  issued  in
London,  with  an  introduction  by  Charles  Knight,
under  the  title  "  Mind  Among  the  Spindles."  An
autobiographical  sketch  of  Miss  Farlev,  not  written
for  publication,  may  be  found  in  Mrs.  Sarah  J.
Hale's  "  Biography  of  Distinguished  Women."

FARLEY,  James  Thompson,  senator,  b.  in
Virginia,  6  Aug.,  1829.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  removed  to  Missouri,  and
subsequently  to  California.  He  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  California  bar  in  1854,  in
which  state  he  has  since  practised.  He  served  for
two  terms  as  member  of  the  assembly  from  Calaveras
county,  and  was  (1855-'6)  chosen  speaker.  He  was
elected  to  I  he  state  senate  in  1860,  and  re-elected
for  the  eight  years  following,  acting  as  president
pro  tempore  during  one  session.  He  was  for  several
vears  the  recognized  leader  of  the  Democratic  party
In  California,  and  in  1874  was  defeated  as  a  candi-
date for  the  U.  S.  senate  by  Gov.  Newton  Booth.
He  was  afterward  elected,  and  served  as  a  senator
from  18  March,  1879,  till  3  March,  1885-


PARLEY


FA  KM  Kit


100


I Vl.'IM. Miih.nl. |mtriot. Ii. in I|*wich,
M»»*..  in  1719;  d.  there,  80  June,  I7*!». II. ■  r<

■  I  his  native  U>wn  for  several  yean  in  tin-  gen-
eral court, iiml ntfikctl among its most active

■embers. In  177  4  in-  ra  chosen of  the  noun-

ail,  i-iii  (i..s.  Gage  negatived  his  election. Tblii

however,  wis  considered  something  of  an  boDOT,
such  men  as  John  Adams,  Bowdain,  Wiuthmp.
ami  Jedidiah  Poster  being  al  the  lime  nndef  a
similiir  ban.  1 1  «*  was  a  delegate  tn  tin-  Provincial
BOngremcf  Massachusetts  m  1771  '*>,  and  \wtsafter-
vard  a  member  of  the  house  of  representatives,
July.  1775.  II<-  subsequently  acted  as  one  <>f  the
supreme  executire  council,  and  s  \eral

rears  major-general  of  the  8d  division  of  militia,
lie  appears  to  have  lieen  ait  ardent  patriot,  ami
rendered  the  popular  oause  essential  service.

I  u:i  l  m.I  K.  Alexander,  land-owner,  b.  in
Dundee,  Huntingdon  <"..  Quebec,  I  June,  1*24.
His  grandfather,  Nicholas,  though  ol  German  de-
i,  was  a  loyalist  during  the  war  of  the  Revolu-
tion, and  emigrated  from  the  Mohawk  valley,  set-
tling in  Cornwall.  Canada.  Cant.  Parlinger  in
early  life  commanded  one  of  the  line  <>f  rtismnri
plying  between  Kingston  and  Montreal,  and  on
raJ  ooossioni  socomplished  the  difficult  Cent  of
safely  nestling  the  Long  Heuli,  Coteau,  Cedar,  and

Casein h'  rapids  at  night. After  sewn  yean  spent

in  the  service  be  retired,  and  engaged  in  bustness
as  a  forwarder  and  general  merehant  at  Prosoott.
He  subsequently  removed  to  Moniaburgh,  where  he
became  the  owner  of  a  large  amount  of  real  estate.
This  he  managed,  also  ■peculating  in  land,  until,
in  1880,  he  found  himself  the  owner  of  19.000
inns  of  improved  farming  property  in  various
parts  of  eastern  Ontario.  Many  years  ago  he  es-
tablished a  system  of  farm-tenantry,  and  now  he
has  more  than  100  tenants,  several  01  whom  have
retained  the  same  holdings  for  twenty-five  years.
Capt.  Parlinger  has  interested  himself  in  railway
enterprises,  and  in  18<k>  projected  the  Ottawa,
Wiuldingtoii.  and  New  York  railway  and  bridge
company,  which  obtained  a  charter  in  1882.  He
is  an  extensive  breeder  of  superior  stock,  and  has
been  prominent  in  militarv  matters.

FARLOW,  William  Wilson,  botanist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  17  Dec.,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1H<>0,  at  the  medical  department  of  that
universitv  in  1870.  and  s|>ent  several  years  in  Ku-
rope,  studying  under  Henri  A.  de  Bary  in  St  rasburg,
ami  also  with  Kduard  Bornet  and  Qustave  Thuret.
in  1M74,  after  his  return  to  the  United  States,  he
was  appointed  adjunct  professor  of  hotanj  at  Har-
vard, and  in  1871)  WIS  elected  to  the  chair  of  crypto-
gamic  botany.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  soci-
iii  Kurope  and  in  the  United  States,  and  U--
■Vdee  being  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  received  in  1879
an  election  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.

Prof.  Karlow's  publications  have  Im-cii  principally
devoted  to  marine  algie,  fungi,  and  diseases  of
plants.  These  have  gained  for  him  a  high  reputa-
tion among  cryptogamic  botanists.  The  accounts
of  the  "  Progress  of  Botany,"  in  the  retiorts  of  the
Smithsonian  institution  from  i*7!»  till  1888,  were
written  bv  him,  ami  he  has  also  contributed  valu-
able articles  on  l» i—  specialties  to  the  reports  of  the

K.  S.  Bah  commission  and  to  the  Massachusetts
board  of  agriculture.  He  has  published  ••  The  Po-
int.. Bot  (Boston,  1876);  u  Diseases  of  Olive  and
'  'range  Trees"  1'he  Qymnosporangia£pr

i -Apples  of  the  United  States "(1880);  "The
Marine  Alms  of  New  England  "(Washington,  18
and  has  m  preparation  iiss7>  "Introduction  to
Oryptogamie  Botany.''


FARM  \  Y  I  lb.  .t  i:||,  lurk*,  bin  M

H  April, lKU. He  wm  .-.bi-
cated  at Lima.  N. V..  mid  at Amherst,
was  graduated  In  1886. He  itttdied  law  m  v.

saw.  R,  V..  and  was  admitted  to  the  bur  in |v
lie  went  abroad  in IhiJo,  and s|ient two  years  in

travel  ami  study. On  returning  honMhawni
pointed  district  ettorneg  "f  Wyoming  ooontj
V..  to  fin  a  vacancy,  and  wm  elected  to  two  terms
thereafter  as  his  own  ■accessor. He  NMi-  appointed

consul-general  at  Cain.,  Kgypt,  in  March.  1878, and

was  designated  b>-  Presidetu'  Hayes  a>  a  member  of

the  International  commission  to  revise  the  inter-
national codes.  He  was  ap|iointed  by  President
(Jarfield  as  judge  of  the  international  comi
Kgypt,  and  by  President  Arthur  as  a  membst  of
the  Internationa]  commission  that  exainiiied  the
claims  of  the  citizens  of Alexandria  for  damages

arising  from  the  bombardment*  burning,  and  pil-
lage of  that  city  in  the  war  of  1881,  Mr.  Kantian
was  ehiaflf  instrumental  in  ■souring  from  Kgvpt
the  granite  obelisk  known  as  "  (  Seonatm*!  medic."
which  stood  so  long  in  front  of  the  temple  of
a  in  Alexandria,  and  is  now  in  Central  Park,
New  York.  On  leaving  Kgypt,  Mr.  Karinan  re-
ceived from  the  khedivc  the  decoration  of  "Orand
Officer  of  the  Imperial  Order  of  the  Medjidich,"  a
distinction  rarely  conferred  open  foreigners.

FARMKR,  Ferdinand,  clergyman,  h.  in  South
Germany  in  1780;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  1'a..  in  1788.
He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  was  sent  to
Maryland  in  1788.  His  real  name  was Stcenmcycr,
but  on  coming  to  America  In-  changed  it  t<>  Parm-
er. He  was  learned  and  zealous,  and  for  many
years  performed  missionary  duty  at  several  places
in  New  Jersey,  and  seems  to  have  been  the  first
Roman  Catholic  priest  to  visit  this  colony  regu-
larly. He  was  afterward  stationed  in  Lancaster
county.  Pa.,  whence  he  frequently  visited  numer-
ous outlying  stations  in  Pennsylvania  and  New
Jersey.  After  six  years'  service  at  Lancaster,  he
was  transferred  to  Philadelphia.

FARMKR,  George  Edgar,  soldier, b.  in  New
York  city  in  1840;  d.  there.  Hi  1-Yb..  1*7(1.  Be
engaged  early  in  life  in  mercantile  pursuits,  but  at
t  lie  beginning  of  the  (  Ml  war  in  1801  was  commis-
sioned 2d  lieutenant  of  the  0th  New  York  cavalry.
He  was  subsequently  appointed  quartermaster,  but
before  leaving  for  the  .seat  of  war  was  promoted
to  captain,  and  led  his  company  in  all  the  battles
in  which  the  regiment  participated.  At  Tnvillian
Station,  during  Gen.  Sheridan's  first  raid.  Capt.
Parmer  was  shot,  but,  continuing  in  the  held,  was
still  more  seriously  wounded  at  Deep  Bottom.  He
rejoined  his  regiment  in  the  autumn  ..1  l^'il.  mid
was  with  Sheridan  throughout  his  campaign  in  the
valley  of  the  Shenandoah.  After  the  luittle  of
Cedar  Creek  he  was  made  major,  and  was  for  S0SJM
time  in  command  of  the  regiment.  Continuing
with  Sheridan's  cavalry  corps  until  the  surrender
of  Lee,  he  was  then  promoted  to  liciitenant-eol<>-
nel  by  brevet.  He  was  honorably  discharged  at
the  close  of  the  war,  returned  to  business,  and  l»e-
catne  a  prominent  and  earnest  mcmlter  of  the
(irand  army  of  the  republic,  at  his  death  being  in
command  of  the  oldest  iHtst  in  the  state.

FARMKR.  Henry  Tudor,  pool,  »>.  in  Kngland
In  17S2:  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  ('.,  in  January,  ||
In  early  life  he  emigrated  to  Charleston,  S.  ('..  where
he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  subse-
quently retired  from  business,  studied  medicine  in
New  York,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  phvsi-
oiansand  ■urgeons  In  1881,  and  returned  to  Charles-
ton, where  he  practised  until  his  death.  He  pub-
lished a  small  volume  entitled  "Imagination,  the


410


PARMKU


FARNHAM


Maniac's  Dream,  and  Other  Poems"  (New  York,
1819).  His  "Essay  on  Taste"  includes  an  appeal
to  "Croaker.'-  Hi>  verses  indicate  considerable
facility  in  composition,  a  poetical  taste,  kindly
feeling,  and  occasionally  sound  the  louder  notes  of
the  lyre.  It  was  the  intention  of  Siinnis.  thcnovi  l-
ist,  lii  publish  a  complete  edition  of  Dr.  Fanner's

iioeins.  the  material  for  which  he had  obtained
nun  the  family. But  his  death  prevented, and  the
poems  have  since  been  scattered  and  1<  >st .

FARMER.  John,  gencalogUt.  1>.  in  Chelmsford,
Mass.,  12  June.  1789  :  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  13  Aug.,
18ML  After  teaching  for  ten  years,  and  subse-
quently engaging  in  business,  he  finally  devoted
himself  to  antiquarian  investigation  with  extraor-
dinary zeal  and  success.  He  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  various  literary  societies,  and  at  his  death
was  corresponding  secretary  of  the  New  Hampshire
historical  society,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  found-
ers. Among  the  more  important  of  the  works  in
which  he  condensed  the  results  of  his  researches,
are  his  edition  of  Belknap's  "History  of  New
Hampshire "  and  the  "  Genealogical  Register  of
the  First  Settlers  of  New  England  "  (1829).  The
latter  is  a  remarkable  example  of  the  author's  in-
dustrv  and  talent  for  historical  investigation.  He
also  published  histories  of  Billerica  (1806)  and  Am-
herst (1820),  and.  with  the  assistance  of  J.  B.  Moore,
a  "  Gazetteer  of  New  Hampshire  "  (1823).  Besides
contributing  to  the  "  Collections  "  of  the  historical
societies  of  Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,
and  to  the  "  American  Quarterly  Register,"  he
compiled  the  "  New  Hampshire  Register."  In  1822,
in  connection  with  Jacob  B.  Moore,  he  began  the
historical,  biographical,  and  topographical  "  Col-
lections of  New  Hampshire  "  (3  vols.).

FARMER,  John,  cartographer,  b.  in  Half  Moon,
Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  24  March,  1859.  He  was  educated  in  the
vicinity  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  taught  a  Lancas-
trian school  in  that  city.  By  invitation  of  Gov.
Cass  and  the  trustees  of  the  (Jniversity  of  Michi-
gan, he  removed  to  that  state  in  1821,  and,  after
teaching  for  a  time,  engaged  in  surveying  and  drew
the  first  published  map  of  Michigan.  In  1825  he
issued  one  on  his  own  account,  and  afterward  pub-
lished twelve  different  maps  of  Michigan,  Wiscon-
sin, Lake  Superior,  and  Detroit,  most  of  which  he
engraved.  In  1831  he  compiled  and  drew  for  the  gov-
ernor and  judges  of  the  state  the  first  and  onlv  map
of  Detroit,  transmitted  by  them  to  congress.  It  was
accepted  by  that  body  as  authoritative,  and  was
reproduced  among  the  American  state  papers.  His
early  maps  are  conceded  to  have  been  largely  in-
fluential in  promoting  the  extensive  emigration  to
Michigan  that  occurred  between  1825  and  1840.
During  his  residence  in  Detroit,  Mr.  Farmer  filled
many  important  city  offices.  Before  leaving  Al-
bany he  published  the  first  "  Gazetteer  of  Michi-
gan "  (1830). — His  son,  Silas,  publisher,  b.  in  De-
troit, Mich.,  6  June,  1839,  was  brought  up  to  his
father's  business,  and  continued  the  publication  of
maps.  In  1882  he  was  chosen  historiographer  of
the  city  of  Detroit.  Mr.  Farmer  claims  to  have
been  the  first  to  suggest  in  print  the  summer
gatherings  that  have  resulted  in  the  Chautauqua,
N.  Y.,  movement,  and  he  is  also  the  founder  of  the
Young  Men's  Christian  association  of  Detroit.  He
has  issued  a  series  of  religious  tracts  under  the
titles  of  the  "  Royal  Railroad  "  and  "  The  Truth-
Teller,"  of  which  several  large  editions  have  been
printed.  He  has  published  a  "  History  of  Detroit
and  Michigan"  (1884;  2d  ed.,  1887).

FARMER,  John  W.,  philanthropist,  b.  in  1819 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  23  Oct.,  1809. Mr.  Far-


mer was  a  generous  and  philanthropic  resident
of  the  city  of  New  Vmk,  who  took  a  deep  and
practical  interest  in  the  condition  of  the  poor
and  laboring  elasses.  He  was  active  for  several
years  in  the  organization  of  co-ojM'iative  societies
in  New  Fork  and  vicinity,  and  was  ever  fertile  in
expedients  to  help  the  poor  to  help  themsel  TBS.  In
this  good  work  he  was  never  sparing  of  his  i.wn
means,  and  in  the  winter  of  distress  that  followed
the  financial  panic  of  1857  he  not  only  gave  out
provisions  with  a  liberal  hand,  but  established  soup-
nouses  for  the  benefit  of  the  needy.  In  thi>  way
those  in  want  were  able  to  procure  nutritious  food
for  less  than  it  would  have  cost  them  to  prepare  it
at  home,  even  had  the  raw  material  been  given
them.  He  pursued  the  same  course  daring  the
winter  of  186l-'2.  The  example  of  opening  soup-
kitchens  was  quickly  followed  in  Philadelphia,
Boston,  and  other  cities.

FARNAM,  Henry,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Scipio,
N.  Y.,  9  Nov.,  1803:  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  4
Oct.,  1883.  His  early  years  were  spent  on  his
father's  farm  and  in  attending  the  district  school.
He  afterward  studied  mathematics  by  himself,  and
became  a  surveyor.  He  was  engaged  on  the  Erie
canal,  west  of  Rochester,  about  1820.  became  assist-
ant engineer  of  the  New  Haven  and  Northampton
canal  in  1825,  and  its  superintendent  in  1827.  He
removed  to  New  Haven  in  1839,  and  in  1846-'8
built  the  railroad  that  took  the  place  of  the  canal.
He  went  to  Illinois  in  1850,  and  with  Joseph  E.
Sheffield  built  the  Chicago  and  Rock  Island  road,
of  which  he  was  president  in  1854-'G3.  He  then
retired  from  active  life,  and,  after  spending  about
five  years  abroad,  returned  in  1808  to  New  Haven,
where  he  remained  till  his  death.  Mr.  Farnam
gave  freely  to  New  Haven  charities,  especially  to
the  state  hospital,  and  built  for  Yale.  Farnam  Hall,
one  of  its  best  dormitories.  He  contributed  largely
for  the  development  of  East  Rock  park,  and  pro-
vided in  his  will  that  his  residence,  one  of  the  finest
in  the  city,  should  be  given,  after  the  death  of  his
immediate  heirs,  to  Yale  college  for  a  "  president's
house."  —  His  son.  Charles  Henry,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  12  Sept.,  1846,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1868,  and  at  Columbia  law-school  in  1871.
He  has  been  for  several  years  assistant  in  archae-
ology in  the  Peabody  museum  of  Yale,  and  has
Eubfished  a  "  History  of  John  Whitman  and  his
•escendants  "  (New  'Haven,  1887).— Another  son,
Henry  Walcott,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  6  Nov.,
1853,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1874,  and  received
the  degree  of  R.  P.  D.  at  Strasburg,  Germany,  in
1878.  He  was  a  tutor  in  Yale  from  1878  till  1880.
when  he  was  appointed  professor  of  political  econ-
omy in  Sheffield  scientific  school.  In  1881  he  be-
came a  member  of  its  governing  board.  Prof.
Farnam  has  contributed  to  periodicals  numerous
articles  on  his  specialty.

FARNHAM,  Horace  Pntnam,  physician,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  7  May,  1822;  d.  in  New  York  city,  9
June,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1843,
studied  law  with  Rufus  Choate.  and,  after  gradua-
tion from  the  Dane  law-school  in  1846,  was  admit-
ted to  practice  in  1847.  After  a  visit  to  Europe
in  1855-'6,  he  began  the  study  of  medicine  and
obtained  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Jefferson  medi-
cal college  in  1860.  He  at  once  settled  in  the  city
of  New  York  as  a  general  practitioner,  bat  paid
especial  attention  to  diseases  of  the  throat  and
nose,  in  which  he  was  deemed  an  expert.  In  1801-'3
he  was  attending  physician  to  the  Northern  dispen-
sary of  New  York.  '  He  was  a  member  of  various
Ssional  bodies,  having  been  president  of  the
iew  York  medical  association  in»1865,  and  treas-


l\i;\n  \M


utvr  and  \  i<  <•  president  «»f  llml  ami  other  -xicties
lit  different  times. He  gave  largely  to  the

Ictny  <>f  medicine,  was  elected  u~  treasurer
in  in:;,  an<l  subsequently  it-  dent lb-

•  I  in  the  friint  rank  <>f  hi><  profession  for ow
ty  years,  t>ut  whs  compelled,  on  account  of
faitin^:  health.  t<>  retire  in  January,  i

I  \i:MI  vM,  Luther, clergyman, b, in  Concord,
N.  II..  .')  I'.i..,  1810.  II.-  was  educated  nt  I  tort  -
nioutli  ami  at  Andover theological  seminary,  when-
In-  eras  graduated  in  1841,  He  has  rinoe  held  jms-
lorates  at  Northfleld,  Marshfield,  Concord,  ami
Unnfield,  Ma-.,  and  at  other  plaoei  .  but

has  made  Boston  liis  permanent  residence,  serving

i f  tin-  editors  of  the M Christian  Alliai

and  also  of  the  M Massaehusette  Ploughman." In

.  til  he  «as  secretary  of  tin-  Southern  aid  so-
ciety, a  missionary  association  having  for  its  i-s|m-
eial  object  the  spreading  of  the  gos|>el  among  the
|K«in-r  olasses,  white  and  colored,  of  the  south  and
southwest.  In  1862  he  was  uhossn  SSI  retary  of
the  General  theological  library  of  Boston  Mr.
Parnhara  has  succeeded  in  raising  for  the  Library

an  endowment of  $.'i2,(MM,  and  funds  with  which

he  has  purchased  for  its  BseoTer  ii.<mm>  volumes.
He  luus  published  "  A  Qlasee  at  Private  Libraries,"

a  pamphlet  (18867,  ,,n,l  hsj  also  prepared  a  "  His-
tory of  the  Massachusetts  Horticultural  Society.'1

FAKNHAM,  Noah  Unc.  soldier,  b.  in  Ran
Haven.  Conn..  4  .lune.  1898;  d.  in  Washington,  1>.
C.  14  Aug.,  1861.  His  ancestor,  Henry  Farnham,
came  from  Kenilworth,  England,  unit  settled  m
Roxburv,  Mass.,  in  1644.  In  1K{:{  Noah's  parents
removed  to  the  city  of  New  York.  He  was  edu-
cated in  New  Haven  and  at  Cheshire,  Conn.,  and
entered  business  in  New  York  at  the  age  of  sixteen.
When  eighteen  years  old  he  joined  the  city  guard,
and  «M  present  with  that  corps  at  the  Ast'or  place
riot.  He  subsequently  joined  the  fin-  department
and  was  soon  chosen  foreman  of  a  "nook  and
ladder"  company,  where  he  introduced  new
methods  of  drill,  and  practised  his  men  in  climb-
ing. Jumping,  and  other  athletic  exercises.  In
ls"»t!  lie  was  electee!  assistant  engineer  of  the  New
York  fire  department,  and  in  1887  joined  the  7th
regiment  soon  attaining  the  rank  of  1st  lieutenant,
lie  l>ecame  acquainted  with  Col.  Ellsworth  on  the
arrival  of  the  latter  from  Chicago  in  April.  1861,
was  persuaded  by  him  to  accept  the  lieutenant-
colonelcy  of  the  New  York  fire  zouaves,  and  suc-
ceeded to  the  command  after  Ellsworth's  death.
When  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  inarch  on
.Manassas.  Col.  Earn  ham  was  confined  to  a  sick-
lied, but  left  it.  and  nxle  into  action  at  the  head  of
his  men.  He  was  wounded  earlv  in  the  engage-
ment ami  removed  to  a  hospital  in  Washington,
when-  he  died  a  few  weeks  afterward.

FAKNHAM.  Ralph,  soldier,  b.  in  Lebanon,
York  co..  Me..  7. Inly,  1756;  d.  in  Acton.  Me.,  2<i
He...  1861.  lie  was  the  hist  survivor  of  the  battle
of  Hunker  Hill.  In  17ho  he  settled  in  Acton,  Im--
ing  the  first  white  inhabitant  of  that  township.
In  1*<M>  lie  was  invited  to  Iioston,  where  a  concert
-i veil  for  his  benefit  in  Tremoni  Temple.

FA  I  Mi  A.M.  Ilosvvell,  governor  of  \  erinont.
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2:1  July,  1*27.  When  he  was
thirteen  years  of  age  his  family  removed  to  Brad-
ford, \'t.  lb-  was  graduated  at  the  Cniversitv
of  Vermont  in  !*«!».  was  admitted  to  tin-  bar  in
1857,  and  was  state  attorney  from  1859  till  1889.
He  then  entered  the  army  as  lieutenant  of  tli

iont regiment,  and  was provost-marshal at
.  Vs, He  afterward  became  lieu-
nt-colonel  of  the  12th  Vermont  during  it-
rioe  in  the  field. He  was  in  the  state  senate  in


SSWnRTH


411


delegate  to  the  Republican  national
rention  in  1876,  and  a  presidential  elector  on  tin
Hayes  ticket  the  same  year.  Be  has  ssrvad  on  the
board  of  education,  and  has  been  one  of  the
trustees  of  the  University  of  Vermont  and  the
State  agricultural college since 1878. He  was

srnor  of  Vermont  from  ikmo  till  is-.
received  the  largest  vote  ever  cant,  and  defeating
Edward  J.  Phelps,  afterward  minister  to  Enc

I  MINI!  VM.  Thomas  Jefferson,  author,  b.  in
Vermont  In  1804;  d.  in  California  in  September,
1H4N.  He  was  a  lawyer,  but  in  1899  organized  and
tiMik  the  command  of  a  small  expedition  iun^  the
continent  to  Oregon,  He  went  to  California  the
same  year,  and  was  instrumental  in  procuring  the
release  of  a  large  numU-r  of  American  and  English
citizens  who  had  Ihi-ii  imprisoned by  the  Mexican

Sivernmeiit.  lb-  is  the  author  of  "Travels  in
regon  Territory  "  (1H42);  "Travels  in  California,
and  S-enes  in  the  Pacific "  (1845) ;  "A  Memoir  of
the  Northwest  lioundary-I.ine  "(lH4o);  and"  Mexi-
co, its  (ieogratihy.  People, and  Institutions"  1 i-
—  His  wife.  KH/a  Woodson,  philanthropist,  |,.  jn
Ibnsselaervillc.  N.  Y..  17  Nov..  1816;  d.  in  New
York  city,  15  Dec.,  1N<>4.  Her  maiden  name  was
Iturhans.  She  removed  to  Illinois  in  1K1T>,  and  was
married  there  in  1KNJ.  but  'returned  to  New  York
in  1M41.  In  1K44  she  accepted  an  appointment  as
matron  of  the  female  department  of  the  State  pris-
on at  Sing  Sing,  that  she  might  prove  the  jm.-^i-
bility  of  governing  such  an  institution  by  kindness
alone.  She  met  with  unqualified  success,  and  re-
tained the  office  till  184*.  when  she  removed  to
Roston,  and  was  for  several  months  connected
with  the  management  of  the  Institution  for  the
blind.  In  1849  she  visited  California,  and  re-
mained there  until  1856,  when  she  returned  to  New
York.  For  the  two  years  following  she  devoted
herself  to  the  study  of  medicine,  and  in  1859  or-
ganized a  society  to  sasist  destitute  women  in  find-
ing homes  in  the  west,  taking  charge  in  j>crson  of
several  companies  of  this  class  of  emigrants.  She
subsequently  returned  to  California.  While  ma-
tron at  Sing  Sing,  she  published  her  "Life  in
Prairie-Land. "  and  edited  Samson's  "Criminal
Jurisprudence."  She  is  also  the  author  of -Cali-
fornia, Indoors  and  Out."  and  "My  Early  Itovs"
(1859)b  Her  most  elaborate  work  ■  contained  in
"  Woman  and  Her  Em"  (2  vols.,  1864).

FARNSWORTH,  Benjamin  Franklin,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Bridgeton,  Mr..  17  Deo*  i?!»:::  <1.  in
Louisville.  Ky..  4  June,  1851.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1818,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and
was  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Edentoti,  N.C..
for  two  years.  Eroin  1891  till  1*2:1  he  was  princi-
pal of  the  Bridgewater,  Mass..  academy,  and  then
took  charge  of  a  girls'  high  school  at  Worcester,

M.iss.  He  next  edited  the  "  Christian  Watchman,"
of  Iioston.  which  he  left,  in  1898,  to  take  the  chair
of  theology  at  the  New  Hampton,  N.  II..  theo-
logical institute.  Hen-  he  remained  until  1899,
when,  after  teaching  school  for  a  time  in  Provi-
dence. |{.  I.,  he  was  sleeted  president  of  George-
town, Ky.,  college,  from  which  he  afterward  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  The  following  year  he
was  chosen  president  of  the  1'niversity  of  Louis-
ville, when-  lie  remained  until  his  death.

FAHNSYYOKTH.  John  Franklin.  legislator,
b.  in  Eiton.  (^uel>ec,  Canada,  27  March,  18991  lb
removed  with  his  parents  to  Michigan  in  1894,  rc-
estvnd  an  academic  education,  studii-d  and  prac-
tised law,  and  afterward  went  to  Chicago,  111.  lb-
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  lb  publican,  and  served
from  1*."">7  till  1861,  when  he  became  colonel  of  the
8th  Illinois  cavalry. He  subsequently  raised  the


412


IWKXSWORTH


FARRAGUT


17th  Illinois  regiment,  by  order  of  the  war  d.-part-
ment,  and  was  commissioned  brigadier-ganoid,  88
Not.,  1868,  but  ma  compelled  to  resign  from  the
army  in  March,  1803,  Owing  to  injuries  received  in
the  field.  He  then  removed  to  St.  Charles,  III.,
and  from  1863  till  1873  was  again  a  member  <>f
otalgias*  Since  1873  he  has  been  engaged  in  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  Washington,  D.  C. —
His  nephew,  Elon  John,  soldier,  1>.  in  Qreon  Oak,
Livingston  <o..  Midi.,  in  1837;  d.  in  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  3  July,  1803,  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  and  spent  a  vear  at  the  University  of
Michigan. Leaving  college  in  1858,  he  served  in

the  quartermas-
ter's department
of  the  army  dur-
ing the  Utah  ex-
pedition of  that
year.  He  then  en-

faged  in  buffalo-
unting,  and  in
carrying  freight
to  the  then
newly  discov-
ered mines  at
Pike's  Peak.  In
1801  he  became
assistant  quar-
termaster of  the
8th  Illinois  cav-
y?  ^f  c^e***^*^***-^1 —  &'ry, which his

jr  uncle  was  then

organizing.  He
was  soon  promoted  to  captain,  and  took  part  in
all  the  battles  of  the  Peninsula,  and  in  those  of
Pope's  campaign.  He  was  appointed  aide  to  Gen.
Pleasonton  in  May,  1803,  promoted  to  brigadier-
general  on  the  29th  of  the  following  month,  and
was  killed  four  days  afterward  while  leading  a
charge  during  the  battle  of  Gettysburg.

FARNSWORTH,  Joseph  Downing,  physician,
b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  about  1780;  d.  in  Fair-
fax, Vt.,  9  Sept.,  1857.  For  more  than  fifty  years
he  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  physicians  in  Ver-
mont. He  was  for  fifteen  years  chief  judge  in
Franklin  county,  and  for  twenty-seven  years  a
member  of  the  legislature.  He  was  especially  act-
ive in  promoting  the  interests  of  the  Baptist  de-
nomination, to  which  he  belonged,  and  vigorously
opposed  an  act  passed  by  the  Vermont  legislature
in  1787  requiring  the  inhabitants  of  each  town  to
support  "the  standing  order,"  unless  they  could
show  that  they  were  connected  with  some  other  re-
ligious organization.  This  act  was  repealed  in  1807.
FARNSWORTH,  Philo  Judson,  physician,  b.
in  Westford,  Chittenden  co.,  Vt.,  9  Jan.,  1832.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont  in
1854,  and  at  its  medical  department  in  1858.  He
practised  at  Phillipsburg,  Canada,  until  1800,  in
which  year  he  received  a  second  medical  degree
from  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
New  York.  He  was  in  Lyons,  Iowa,  in  1802-'0,
then  went  to  Clinton,  Iowa,  and  in  1870  was  elected
to  the  chair  of  materia  medica  and  diseases  of  chil-
dren in  the  University  of  the  State  of  Iowa.  He  is
a  member  of  several  medical  societies,  and  has  con-
tributed frequently  to  professional  journals,  chiefly
to  the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter  "  of  Phila-
delphia. He  has  also  paid  some  attention  to  local
geology  and  archaeology.  He  read  a  paper  on  the
"  Therapeutics  of  Ammonia"  before  tne  American
medical  association  in  1873,  and  one  on  "  Indian
Mounds  "  before  the  Iowa  national  history  societ  J  in
1876.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Synopsis  of  a  Course
of  Lectures  on  Materia  Medica  "  (Chicago,  1884).


FARM'M,  John  Egbert,  soldier,  l>.  in  New
Jersey,  1  April,  1N24;  d.  in  New  York  city.  Hi  May.
into.  Be  was  educated  in  Potteville,  Pa.,  entered
the  army  a-  sergeant-major  of  the  1st  Pennsylva-
nia infantry  in  1846,  and  served  through  the  Mexi-
can war.  Subsequently  he  joined  the  Lopez  expe-
dition to  Cuba  which  left  New  Orleans  in  1*50,  and
also  took  an  active  part  in  Walker's  Nicaraguan
expeditions.  Still  later  he  was  captain  of  the  slave-
yacht  "  Wanderer,"  and  was  indicted  at  Savannah
for  carrying  on  the  slave-trade.  He  i-  .-aid  to  have
regretted  this  episode  in  his  life,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  became  major  in  the  70th
New  York  volunteers,  which  was  raised  and  com-
manded by  Gen.  Sickles.  He  distinguished  him-
self for  gallantry  in  all  the  engagements  in  which
Sickles's  brigade  took  part,  and  was  promoted
colonel  of  his  regiment.  At  the  battle  of  Will-
iamsburg, 5  May,  1862,  he  was  severely  wounded,
but  recovered  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  battles  of
Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg,
and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  gallant
conduct  in  those  engagements.  He  was  then  com-
pelled by  his  wounds  to  abandon  active  service,
and  accepted  the  colonelcy  of  the  11th  regiment  of
the  veteran  reserve  corps,  which  he  retained  till
the  close  of  the  war.  Later  he  was  appointed  in-
spector of  customs  in  the  city  of  New  i  ork,  which
office  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

FARQUHAR,  Norman  von  Heidreich,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Pottsville,  Pa.,  11  April,  1840.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1859,  be-
came a  lieutenant  in  1861,  a  lieutenant-commander
in  1865,  and  a  commander  in  1872.  In  1862-'3  he
was  executive  officer  of  the  steamer  "  Mahaska,"
of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  and  during  that
period  frequently  engaged  the  enemy  both  afloat
and  in  expeditions  on  shore.  As  executive  officer
of  the  "  Santiago  de  Cuba "  he  took  part  in  both
attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  N.  C,  and  led  the  men  of
that  vessel  in  the  successful  assault  on  the  fort  of
15  Jan.,  1865.  He  was  commandant  of  cadets  at
the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1881-6,  and  in  the
latter  year  waspromoted  captain.

FARRAGUT,  David  Glasgow,  naval  officer,
b.  at  Campbell's  Station,  near  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  5
July,  1801 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  14  Aug.,  1870.
His  ancestry  is  traced  to  Don  Pedro  Ferragut.
called  "  El  Conquistador,"  who  served  under  James
I.,  king  of  Aragon,  in  the  campaign  in  which  the
Moors  were  expelled  from  Majorca  and  Valencia
in  the  13th  century.  The  estates  of  the  family
were  in  the  Balearic  islands,  and  among  the  nota-
ble members  were  Agustin,  a  theologian;  Pablo,
an  historian ;  Antonio,  a  distinguished  soldier  of  the
17th  century ;  Gonzalo,  bishop  of  Urgel ;  and  three
magistrates  of  the  kingdom  of  Majorca.  But  the
name  is  now  extinct  in  those  islands.  The  admi-
ral's grandfather  married  Juana  Mesquida,  and  that
surname  appears  to  have  superseded  Ferragut.  The
admiral's  father,  George  Farragut,  b.  in  Minorca,
29  Sept.,  1755 ;  d.  at  Point  Plaquet,  West  Pasca-
goula,  La.,  4  June,  1817,  emigrated  to  this  country
in  1776,  took  part  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  and
was  the  friend  and  companion  of  Gen.  Andrew
Jackson  during  his  Indian  campaigns  of  1813-'14.
The  journal  of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives
for  1797  records  that  William  ('.  ('.  ClaiW>rne  pre-
sented "  the  petition  of  George  Farragut,  praying
that  he  may  be  allowed  the  balance  of  pay  due  to
him  for  services  rendered  the  United  States  as
muster-master  of  the  militia  of  the  district  of
Washington  lEast  Tennessee],  employed  in  actual
service  for  the  protection  of  the  frontiers  of  the
United  States  south  of  the  Ohio,«from  the  1st  of


-^g>


PARR  \«.i  T


PAKM


413


March.  1788,  to  the 96th  of  October,  sorge

igut,  as  sailing-master  of  mi  ••x|M><lit i<>n  t<i  the

ascaaoula  in  I810-*11,  sent  byGov.  Clai-

the  Mississippi  territory,  l">rc  l  principal

111 nettling  frmii  the  Sjianianls  tin-  disputed

t.rrit..r\  on that OOMt Hr. Flood,  tli iiimU-

sr,  wrote  in  Mi  report'  •*  At  the  ■poda]  n"
raeel  of  the  inhabitants  "f  Pesoagoola,  by  whom
h. is  greatly  beloved,  I  prevailed  on  Sailing- Master

•  x'p  Farragut  to  Accept  the  commission  of  magis-
Farragut  married  Elixaheth  Shine.

\>rth  Carolina,  wno  bore him  the  children —
three sons an.l two  daughters— and  dltd  in
Orleans  in  1808,  of  yellow  fever.

The  boyhood  of  David  Glasgow  Parragnl  looked

none  of  tlie  dangers  and  hardships  of  frontier  lite.
In  his  journal  he  says :  "  I  remcmlier  that  OH  OM
OOBMUO,  during  my  father's  alienee,  a  party  of
Indians  came  to  <>nr  lions,.,  which  was  somewhat
isolated:  when  my  mother,  who  was  a  bravo  and
WWrgCtk  woman,  barred  I  he  door  in  the  BJOSt  ef-
fectual manner,  ami  tent  all  of  us  trembling  little
ones  up  into  the  loft  of  the  l»arn  while  she  guarded
the  entrance  with  an  axe.  The  savages  attempted
lo  parley  with  her.  l>nt  she  kept  them  at  I  my  until
finally  they  deported.  My  father  arrived  shortly
afterword  with  his  command  (he  was  a  major  of  cav-
alry), and  immediately  pursued  the  Indians,  whom
I  liclieve  he  succeeded  in  overtaking  and  punish-
ing." At  the  aire  of  eight  the  boy  accompanied  his
father  in  a  small  l»oat  across  I^ake  Pontchartrain.
during  a  gale. "  This  expedition,''  he  says  in  his

^'ournal,  "was  my  first  experience  on  salt  water,  and
fervently  hoped  at  that  time  it  would  be  my  last."
The  father,  who  ap|>ears  to  have  been  afraid  of
nothing  on  lend  or  sea.  and  once  went  from  New
Orleans  to  Havana  in  a  pirogue  (a  sort  of  canoe),
was  in  the  habit  of  taking  his  children  across  tin-
lake  in  all  sorts  of  weather,  saying  "now  was  the
time  to  conquer  their  fears."  At  this  time  Sail-
ing-Master David  Porter,  father  of  Com.  Porter,
of  the  "  Essex,"  being  at  the  New  Orleans  naval
station.  U'caine  ill.  was  taken  careof  at  Farragut's
house,  and  died  there,  his  funeral  being  on  the
same  dav  w  ith  Mrs.  Farragut's.  This  circumstance
led  to  a  warm  friendship  with  Coin.  Porter  when
he  succeeded  his  father  on  that  station,  and  he
offered  to  adopt  one  of  the  boys.  The  eldest  son,
William,  had  already  received  an  appointment  in
the  navy.  The  choice  being  presented  to  the  two
others,  David  promptly  said  that  he  would  go,  and
accompanied  Porter  in  the  bofllb-keteh  "Vesu-
vius" to  Washington.  There  he  was  placed  in
school,  and  there  also  he  was  introduced  to  Paul
Hamilton,  secretary  of  the  navy,  who  promised  to
giro  him  a  midshipman's  warrant  as  soon  as  he
should  complete  his  tenth  year.  Subsequently
Farragut  attended  school  in  cluster.  Pa., where
the  Porter  family  resided.  He  was  but  nine  and  a
half  years  old  when  he  received  the  promised  ap-
pointment in  the  nary,  IT  Dee-  inio.  InJnlyof
the  next  year  he  went  to  Norfolk.  Va..  in  company
with  ("apt.  Porter,  who  there  took  command  OX  the
frigate  "  Essex,"  which  cruised  up  and  down  the
\  her  men by  constant  practice  being  brought

to  the  highest  state  of  efficiency. The  Budahipmen

wen-  s.nt to  school in Newport,  K.  L,  dttfittg  the

greater  part  of  the  winter.

When  war  with  England  was  declared  in  June,
lHl'J,  the  ••  F.ss.-\  "  was  quicklv  made  ready  for
Sea,  and  soon  captured  several  prizes.  On  this
cruise  Farragut  discovered  and  frustrated  a  mutii.v
among  the  prisoners.  In  Octoher  the  "Essex  *
put  to  sea  again,  under  orders  to  join  Bainbrid
squadron  in  the  West Indies;  hut  Porter  failed  to


flml  the  squadron,  and  on  his  sari  asjBonsibility
continued  his  royagS  soiithwanl.  doubled  *'IMN'
Horn,  and  made  a  memorable  cruise  in  the  Pacific.

I'oKMK.  DaTTD.)  Young  Farragut  wa*  I
pn/e  in.isti  r  ,,f  bjm  ..f  the  captured  vessels,  and
Ordsred  tO  take  her  to  Valparaiso,  the  captain  to
navigate  her.  Winn  Farragut.  who  confess*-*  that
he  •'  was  a  little  afraid  of  the  violent -t em |ien-d  old
fellow."  gate  his  tiist  order,  the  captain  flOW  into
a  nge.  declared  be  "had  no  idea  of  trusting  him-
self with  a  d— d  nutshell,"  and  went  betOW  for  his
pistoN.  The  twelve-year-old  prize-master  then-
ii|m m  assuuie<  1  complete  <  oiiiuiand.  had  his  orders
oUvrd.  called  down  to  the  captain  that  if  he  came
mi  deck  with  his  pletok  he  would  be  IhlUWI  o\,r-
board,  and  thenceforth  was  master  of  the  ship.
While  the  ••  Bean  "  was  refitting  in  the  Marquesas
islands,  Farragut  and  the  other  midshipmen  played
with  the  native  boys,  and  liecame  cxjiert  swimmers.
The  first  liattle  in  which  Farragut  participated
that  of  the  "  Essex"  against  the  "  Pmelx-  "and the
"Cherub."  in  the  harl»or  of  Yal|>araiso,  89  March.
1X14 — was  one  of  the  Moodiest  ever  fought  on  the
sea.  He  says  in  his  journal:  "I  |>crformcd  the
duties  of  captain's  aide,  quarter-gunner,  powder-

boy,  and  in  fact  did  everything  that  was  reqnired

of  me.  I  shall  never  forget  the  horrid  impression
made  iijHin  me  at  the  right  of  the  first  man  I  had
ever  seen  killed.  It  staggered  and  sickened  me  at
first,  hut  they  soon  began  to  fall  around  me  so  fast
that  it  all  appeared  like  a  dream,  and  produced  no
effect  on  my  nerves.  After  the  battle  he  was  at
work  for  nearly  a  month  assisting  the  surgeons  in

the  care  of  the  wounded,  when  the  sorvivon  were

sent  to  New  York  in  the  "Essex  Junior."  Far-
ragut  was  sent  to  school  again  at  Chester.  Pa.,
where  be  was  not  only  instructed  in  the  usual
branches,  but  also  drilled  as  a  soldier.

In  April.  1N15,  he  sailed  for  the  Mediterranean
in  the  "Independence."  as  aide  to  (apt.  William
If.  Crane:  but  she  arrived  too  late  to  take  part  in
the  Algerine  war.  and.  after  visiting  Malaga,  Car-
thagena,  and  Gibraltar,  returned  home  and  wintered
at  Boston.  In  1HK»  he  visited  the  Mediterranean
again,  on  board  the  "Macedonian."  which  eon-
reyed  William  Pinkney,  U.  s.  minister  to  Naples;
and  in  1817  the  ship  made  an  extended  cruise  in
that  sea,  stopping  in  almost  every  |>ort.  and  giving
officers  and  crew  abundant  opportunities  to  visjt
the  places  of  interest.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year
the  chaplain.  Charles  Polsoffl  ('/.  <:).  was  appointed
1'.  s.  consul  at  Tunis,  and  at  his  request  Midship-
man Farragut  spent  nine  months  with  him,  study-
ing French,  Italian.  English  literature,  and  mathe-
matics. At  this  tiinr  Richard  B.  Jones,  V.  s.  con-
sul at  Tripoli, wrote  to  Mr.  Pobon  :  "  With  regard
to  my  young  friend.  Farragut.  if  he  will  only  ai»plv
stcadilv  to  useful  pur|»oses  the  talents  with  which
he  is  s,,  bonntifttfiy  enriched,  it  must,  with  his
amiable  disposition  and  obliging  manners,  insure
him  the  res[>cet  and  esteem  of  all  who  know  him,
and  place  him.  at  some  future  |>eriod,  high  in  the
niche  of  fame."  In  a  later  letter  the  MBM  appre-
ciative friend  spoke  of  Farragut  as  "the  young
admiral."  He  attended  the  grand  duke's  Mil  in
Pisa,  and  gi\<-s  a  humorous  account  of  his  misad-
ventures. "  At  one  time  my  shoehucklc  caught  in
the  floaaoa  of  the  archduchess's  dress.  I  kicked
Off  the  offending  shoe  with  great  elegance,  and
then  knelt  down  and  extricated  it,  with  a  suitable
apology.  Sm.u  after  this  I  trod  on  the  grand
dukes  tOO,  and  had  to  make  another  ■pOMST/.
Chagrined  at  my  own  awkwardness,  I  determined
to  retire,  and  looked  around  for  my  OOOksd  hat.
when  1  found  the  Countess  Testa  using  it  for  a


414


KAKKAUl'T


FAKKAGIT


foot-warmer.  I  drew  it  to  me  rather  un<-» mmont
■  ii-lv.  ut  which  she  remarked  that  I  'ought  bo  feel
myself  highly  complimented,  ami  should  not  be
offended.'  To  which  1  replied.  •  Madame,  it  might
be  so  considered  in  your  country,  but  nut  in  mine."  "

In  the  spring  of  1819  Farragut  made  another
cruise  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  was  made  acting
lieutenant  on  the  brig  "Shark."  In  18H  he  was
ordered  homo  for  his  examination,  and  sailed  in  a
merchantman.  On  the  voyage  they  were  sighted
and  eliased  by  a  Colombian  war  vessel,  which  the
frightened  captain  supposed  to  be  a  pirate,  Farra-
gut  therefore  took  eoininand  of  the  ship,  mustered
the  crew,  and  prepared  for  resistance.  When  a
small  boat  from  the  man-of-war  came  alongside,  he
had  a  grindstone  and  a  barrel  of  tar  ready  to  drop
into  it  and  sink  it  if  they  should  prove  to  be  pirates.
He  passed  his  examination,  but  not  well  enough  to
satisfy  himself,  and  went  to  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he
fell  in  love  with  Miss  Susan  C, daughter  of  Jordan
Marchant,  whom  he  married  three  years  later.

In  May,  1822,  he  was  ordered  to  sea  in  the  sloop-
of-war  "John  Adams,"  which  conveyed  the  newly
appointed  U.  S.  representatives  to  Mexico  and
Guatemala.  On  this  cruise  he  met  Gen.  Santa
Aila  (afterward  president  of  Mexico)  at  Vera  Cruz,
and  made  his  first  acquaintance  with  the  Gulf  where
his  fame  was  to  be  won  forty  years  later.  After
his  return  he  obtained  orders  to  sail  in  the  schooner
"  Greyhound,"  of  Com.  Porter's  fleet,  which  was
preparing  for  a  cruise  against  freebooters  of  the
West  Indies.  They  had  numerous  encounters  with
the  pirates,  and  on  one  occasion  Farragut  was  sent
ashore  at  the  Isle  of  Pines,  in  command  of  a  de-
tachment who,  after  making  their  way  through
swamps  and  thick  chaparral,  found  the  caves  and
concealed  houses  of  the  robbers,  drove  them  out,
and  set  fire  to  everything  that  would  burn.  Soon
afterward  Farragut  was  made  executive  officer  of
Porter's  flag-ship,  the  "Seagull,"  which  made  a
cruise  to  examine  the  reefs  and  shoals  of  the  Gulf.
In  a  subsequent  cruise  he  obtained  leave  of  absence
and  went  to  visit  his  friends  in  New  Orleans,  taking
passage  in  a  vessel  that  was  carrying  thither  the
first  load  of  bricks  for  the  construction  of  Fort
Jackson,  with  which  Farragut  fought  his  first  bat-
tle in  the  civil  war.  In  July,  1823,  he  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  "  Ferret,"  which  convoyed
merchantmen  through  the  Gulf,  to  protect  them
from  pirates.  He  had  many  cases  of  yellow  fever
on  board,  and  treated  them  himself,  the  only  death
being  that  of  a  midshipman  who  refused  his  pre-
scription because  he  was  not  a  physician.  He  him-
self took  the  fever  on  his  homeward  voyage,  and
on  his  arrival  was  sent  to  the  hospital  in  Washing-
ton, where  he  remained  until  his  recovery.

In  1825  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  and  or-
dered to  the  frigate  "  Brandy  wine,"  Capt.  Charles
Morris,  which  in  September  carried  Lafayette  home
to  France,  and  after  that  made  a  cruise  in  the
Mediterranean.  On  his  return  home  in  May,  1826,
Farragut  took  his  wife  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  to
be  treated  for  neuralgia,  and  remained  there  four
months,  attending  the  lectures  of  the  Yale  pro-
fessors. Those  of  Prof.  Silliman  especially  in-
terested him.  After  this  he  spent  two  years  at
Norfolk,  Va.  He  was  an  accomplished  cook,  and
prepared  all  the  food  for  his  invalid  wife,  and  per-
sonally took  a  large  part  of  the  care  of  her.  At
the  same  time  he  established  a  successful  school
for  bovs  on  the  receiving-ship  "Alert."  When
Samuel  L.  Southard,  secretary  of  the  navy,  in-
spected this  school,  he  gave  it  what  Farragut  calls
"one  of  the  few,  the  verv  few,  compliments  I  ever
received  from  the  navy  department  or  its  head."


In  October,  1828,  he  was  ordered  to  the  new
sloop-of-war  "  Vamlalia."  which  in  December  sailed
for  the  Brazil  station.  Tin-  squadron  went  to  Boa>
nos  Ayres.  and  was  there  when  Bona  became  dic-
tator. In  the  autumn  of  1829  it  returned  to  EUq
de  Janeiro,  where  Farragut  witnessed  the  marriage
of  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro  I.,  and  was  presented
at  court.  In  December  an  affection  of  the  eyes,
which  had  long  troubled  him,  compelled  him  to
ask  for  leave  of  absence,  and  he  went  home  in  ft
merchantman,  which  on  the  way  was  chased  by  a
pirate.  Farragut  found  four  carronades  and
twenty-four  pounds  of  powder  on  board,  mounted
the  guns,  and  got  everything  ready  for  a  vigorous
defence;  but  the  merchantman  outsailed  her  pur
suer.  In  December,  1832.  he  was  ordered  to  the
"Natchez,"  which  in  January,  1833,  sailed  bf
Charleston  harbor,  where  she  remained  until  the
nullification  troubles  were  over.  The  vessel  was
next  ordered  to  the  Brazil  station.  Of  Farragut's
qualities  as  executive  officer  at  this  time,  one  of
those  that  sailed  with  him  wrote  :  "  Never  was  the
crew  of  a  man-of-war  better  disciplined  or  more
contented  and  happy.  The  moment  all  hands
were  called,  and  Farragut  took  the  trumpet,  every
man  under  him  was  alive  and  eager  for  duty.  I
remember  well  one  occasion  when  he  took  the
'  Natchez '  out  of  the  harbor  of  Rio,  which  at  the
entrance  is  quite  narrow,  against  a  head  wind,  by  a
manoeuvre  termed  '  box-hauling.'  There  were  sev-
eral men-of-war  in  port,  English  and  French,  whose
officers  and  crews  were  watching  us  closely.  Many
declared  that  the  manoeuvre  could  not  be  success-
fully accomplished,  but  it  was  done  splendidly,
without  a  balk  or  failure,  and  I  shall  remember  to
my  dying  day  the  glow  of  pride  and  satisfaction
which  we  all  felt."  In  March,  1834,  he  took  com-
mand of  the  schooner  "  Boxer,"  which  he  thor-
oughly overhauled  and  repaired  in  the  harbor  of
Rio.  The  •'  Boxer  "  was  ordered  home  in  the  sum-
mer, and  for  four  years  the  lieutenant  was  in  Nor-
folk and  Washington,  serving  on  courts-martial,
waiting  for  sailing  orders,  and  taking  care  of  his
wife,  who  died  in  1840.  In  August,  1838,  he  was
given  command  of  the  sloop  "  Erie,"  and  ordered
to  Tampico,  because  of  the  prospect  of  war  between
France  and  Mexico.  There  he  made  minute  obser-
vations of  all  the  military  and  naval  movements,
Sarticularly  the  bombardment  of  the  castle  of  San
uan  de  Ulloa,  and  gave  his  conclusions  in  a  long
letter  to  Com.  Barron,  in  which  he  wrote :  "  If  we
who  wander  about  the  world  do  not  keep  those  at
home  informed  of  the  daily  improvements  in  other
navies,  how  can  we  hope  to  improve,  particularly
when  we  see  men  impressed  with  the  idea  that,  be-
cause they  once  gained  a  victory,  they  can  do  it
again  f  So  they  may  ;  but  I  can  tell  them  it  must
be  with  the  means  of  1838  and  not  those  of  1812."
He  now  spent  two  years  more  at  home,  serv-
ing on  courts-martial  and  learning  the  carpenter's
trade,  till  the  spring  of  1841,  when  he  became  ex-
ecutive officer  of  the  "  Delaware,"  and  in  Septem-
ber he  received  his  commission  as  commander.  He
sailed  once  more  for  South  American  waters,  and
in  June,  1842,  received  command  of  the  "  Decatur."
He  took  every  opportunity  to  travel  in  the  coun-
tries whose  ports  he  visited,  and  became  specially
familiar  with  South  American  affairs.  The  cruise
ended  in  Norfolk  harbor  in  February,  1S43.  There,
in  Deceml>er  of  that  vear,  he  married  Virginia,  eld-
est daughter  of  William  Loyall,  a  woman  of  sups*
rior  character  and  cultivation,  and  no  little  literary
ability,  who  survived  him  fourteen  years.  In  April,
1*41.  he  became  executive  officer  of  the  "  Pennsyl-
vania," and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  in


FA  UK  \


FAKItAOUT


415


1840  applied  for  command  of  a  ship  mi  l  ■

<-. After  much difficulty,  In-  obtained  the
■loop-of-war  "8  in  February. 1*17. He

OOllectod  ■  erew,  and  sailed \\\<i  da\-  after  his  as-

iii.nt,  eager  to  cant  lire  the  oaotlS  of  Sun  .limn
ds  (Jlloa,  which  h<-  beliered  could  !»•  done  with
thrii-  tassels ;  but  when  In-  arrived  at  Vera  (  ru/.
the  iuMIc  ha<l  just  surrendered  to  tin-  lain!  force-.
Farragut  always  thotlghl Com.  Conner  had  lost  a

:  o|i|M>rtnnit>  in  not  attacking  it.  lie  says  in
hi- journal:  "  Of  all  the  service  I  hud  s<-cii  since
entering  the  imw,  this  cruise  was  the  most  morti-
fying. A-  I  had  the  ill-will  of  my  commodore"
[Matthew  ('.  IVrryl.  -1  was  not  permitted  to  par-
ticipate in  any  of  tne  expeditions  and  more  honor-
able duties,  but  was  placed  under  a  reef  of  rookl
otT  Tuxpan,  to  blockade  that  |>ort.  When  I  could
bear  the  imposition  no  longer,  I  reported  the  fact-
to  the  navy  department,  and  asked  to  !«'  relieved
from  under  his  command,  or  from  command  of  the
ship.  Accordingly.  I  was  ordered  home  with  my
vowel. My  letters  were  considered  ImptOMr  by

the  secretary  of  the  navy."  Coin.  Perry  denied
that  he  had  any  prejudice  against  Farragut.

In  February,  1*4*.  Farragut's  vessel  returned
home,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  Norfolk  navy-
yard  for  two  years,  and  in  October,  18501  was  or-
Mfed  to  Washington  to  compile  a  book  of  ordnance
regulations  for  the  navy.  In  collaboration  with  Ootn-
mander  I'.  A.  Domin  and  Lieuts.  Barron.  Har-
woo<l,  and  Fairfax.  This  work  occupied  them  a
year  and  a  half.  When  it  was  completed,  Farra-
gut says:  "  Many  of  the  U-st  features  were  over-
ruled anil  stricken  out,  as  were  also  the  drawings,
which  we  considered  fine  illustrations.  The  lx>ok
was  highly  commended  by  officers  of  other  na vies
than  our  own;  but  where  is  it  nowt  God  only
knows!  For  those  who  had  the  power  called  a
new  board  ten  years  afterward,  and  made  a  few
necessary  changes  to  suit  the  introduction  of  steam
and  heavy  guns,  and  the  names  of  the  original
board  were  obliterated."  During  those  eighteen
months  he  attended  regularly  the  lectures  at  the
Smithsonian  institution.  When  he  returned  to  the
Norfolk  navy-yard  as  ordnance  officer,  he  gave  the
ollicers  a  weekly  lecture  on  gunnery.  Lieut.  Per-
cival  Drayton  was  associated  with  him  at  this  time
in  a  series  of  experiments  at  Fort  Monroe,  to  test
the  various  classes  of  guns  used  in  the  navy,  and
an  intimate  friendship  grew  up  between  the  two
officers  which  lasted  through  their  lives.

When  the  Crimean  war  began, in  18T>4,  Farragut
asked  to  be  sent  thither  as  a  professional  observer.
This  request  was  denied  by  the  navy  department;
but  soon  afterward  he  was  sent  to  establish  a  navy-
vard  on  the  I'acilic  coast,  the  site  chosen  being
Mare  Island,  in  the  bay  of  San  Francisco.  This  ta-k
occupied  him  four  years.  During  this  time  the
affair  of  the  vigilance  committee  took  place,  and
he  was  appealed  to  for  aid  to  the  state  authorities ;
but  he  carefully  refrained  from  all  interference.

In  July.  I860,  he  returned  to  the  Atlantic  coast,
and  was  given  command  of  the  "  Brooklyn,"  a  new
•loop-of-war,  in  which  he  muveved  to  Vera  Cms
Robert  M.  McLane,  the  new  l\  s.  minister  to
co.  The  ship  was  then  placed  at  the  dis|M»al
of  Mr.  McLane  and  took  him  to  various  |M>int-  on
the  coast,  that  he  might  communicate  with  the
American  consuls.  Farragut  was  taunted  with  l>c-
bog  at  the  beck  and  call  of  a  civilian,  and  made  a
characteristic  answer:  "I  can  only  say  that  lam
always  at  the  service  of  the  country  in  doing  my
duty,  and  would  rather  be  subject  to  the  directions
of  an  intelligent  man  appointed  by  the  government
for  a  purpose  00  account  of  his  quaiinoations,  than


to  be  under  some  old  fool  who  has  floated  up  to  his

position  without  the  llr-t  requisites,  the  only  merit
that  he  pOSSSBBes  U'ing  that  he  had  DMA  in  the
navy  all  his  life  without  baring  done  anythii
recommend  him  either  to  the  government  or  to  his
brother  ollicers."  From  Van  Cnu  he  mote:  "I
can't  help  loving  my  profession;  but  it  ha-  n
rially  changed  since  tne  advent  of  -team.  I  took
as  much  pleasure  in  running  into  this  j-,rt  the
other  dav  in  a  gale  of  wind  as  ever  a  boy  did  in  any
feat  of  skill.  The  peopit  seemed  astonished.  M.  -
LaM  -aid  bt  Mould  sooner  have  done  n  than  any-
thing else — except  to  take  a  ship."  Governmental
affair-  in  Mexioo  were  \.ry  much  disturbed  at  thi-
time.  IKiO,  and  Farragut  was  of  great  terries,  in
protecting  American  interests  there,  for  which  be
received  a  letter  of  thanks  from  American  mer-
chants in  Vera  Cruz,  lie  made  another  trip  to
Mexico  in  November,  lad  in  DecemUr  psssjM  up
the  Mis>is-ippi  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  arrivi-d
just  in  time  to  attend  the  funeral  of  hi- brother
William,  who  was  retired  M  a  lieutenant.  The  in-
timate acquaintance  with  the  (Julf  of  Mexico  and
the  lower  Mississippi,  which  Farragut  gained  by
these  fre«|iient  visits,  was  found  to  be  of  inestima-
ble value  to  him  two  years  later.

In  the  winter  of  IHGO-'l  Farragut  was  on  waiting
orders  in  Norfolk.  Va.  The  one  topic  of  <li-cu—ion
there,  as  elsewhere  throughout  the  country,  was
the  impending  secession  of  the  south  and  the
proliahility  of  civil  war.  If  an  amicable  separation
of  the  country  should  take  jilace.  he  would  remain
with  the  south,  because  his  relative-  were  there
and  his  home,  so  far  as  he  had  a  home  on  shore.
Hut  he  did  not  see  how  secession  could  Im>  attempt-
ed without  war,  and  in  that  event  he  held  that  bis
allegiance  was  due  to  the  National  government,  to
which  he  was  indebted  for  his  naval  education.
rank,  and  employment.  He  watched  with  intense
interest  the  efforts  to  carry  Virginia  into  the  Con-
federacy, and  when  it  was  accomplished  he  de-
clared that  "the  state  had  been  dragoouedout  of
the  Union."  As  he  expressed  his  opinions  freely.
and  boldlv  said  that  President  Lincoln  was  ju.-ti-
fled  in  calling  for  troops,  he  was  told  that  a  jhtsoii
with  such  sentiments  "could  not  live  in  Norfolk."
"  Well,  then,"  said  he."  1  can  live  somewhere  else,"
and  that  very  evening  (18  April.  lK(il)  he  departed
with  his  wife  and  son.  going  first  to  Baltimore,  and
finally  taking  a  cottage  at  I  hist  ings-on-t  he-Hudson.
He  was  a  memlier  of  a  naval  retiring-board  in
Brooklyn,  but  had  little  else  to  do  for  nearly  a
year.  One  privateer,  the  "Sumter."  had  already
been  sent  out  by  the  Confederates,  Farragut,  who
had  a  theory  as  to  her  probable  mOTamcnta,  ashed
the  government  to  let  him  go  in  chase  of  her  with
a  swift  vessel,  but  the  suggest  ion  was  nut  approved.

In  December,  lNtil,  he  was  summoned  to  Wash-
ington, whence  he  wrote  a  hurried  note  to  his
wife:  "  Keep  vourlips  closed,  and  burn  my  letters,
for  perfect  silence  is  to  be  observed — the  first  in-
junction of  the  secretary.  I  am  to  have  a  flag  in
the  (iulf.  and  the  rest  depends  u|k>h  myself.  Keep
calm  and  silent.  I  shall  sail  in  three  week-."  For
some  time  a  formidable  ex|>cdition  had  btSBJ  in
preparation,  intended  to  reduce  the  defences  of
New  Orleans  and  capture  that  place,  which  \\a-  b]
far  the  largest  city  in  the  SOUm  The  ex|x«lition
included  twenty-one  schooners,  each  carrying  a
large  mortar,  under  command  of  Commander  (now
Admiral)  David  D.  Porter.  Farragut  had  n<>  faith
in  the  efficacy  of  these  mortars,  but.  as  a  grsaj  deal
of  time  and  money  had  bsSBJ  spsse]  in  their  pr-
ration,  he  accepted  the  last  as  hs  found  it.  He
sailed from Hampton Roads.  | |Yb.,  L80S,  U the


416


FAKKAGIT


FAKHAGl'T


steam  sloop-of-war  ••  Hartford."  1.900  tons,  which
from  tliat  time  till  the  close  of  the  war  was  his
flag-ship.  She  had  a  speed,  under  steam  alms,  of
eight  knots,  or  with  steam  and  sail  combined,  of
«■!<■% tii  knots.  She  carried  twenty-two  nine-inch
Dahlgren  guns,  two  twenty-pounder  Parrot-,  .mil
a  rifled  Sawyer  gun  on  the  forecastle;  and  Farra-
gut  had  her  fore-  and  main-tops  protected  with
Boiler  iron  and  armed  with  howitzers.  His  orders
instructed  him  to  "collect  such  vessels  as  can  lie
spared  from  the  blockade,  and  proceed  up  the
.Mississippi  river  and  reduce  the  defences  which
guard  the  approaches  to  New  Orleans,  when  you
will  appear  off  that  city  and  take  possession  of  it
under  the  guns  of  your  squadron.  ...  As  you
have  expressed  yourself  perfectly  satisfied  with  the
force  given  to  you,  and  as  many  more  powerful
vessels  will  be  added  before  you  can  commence
operations,  the  department  and  the  country  re-
quire of  you  success."  A  military  force  of  15,000
men,  designed  to  co-operate  with  the  fleet  in  cap-
turing New  Orleans,  and  to  garrison  the  place  after
it  should  be  taken,  sailed  in  transports  from  Fort
Monroe,  on  20  Feb.,  commanded  by  Gen.  Benjamin
F.  Butler.  The  place  of  rendezvous  was  Ship  Isl-
and, which  is  about  one  hundred  miles  northeast
of  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi.

At  the  last  great  bend  in  the  river,  about  thirty
miles  above  the  mouth,  stood  Fort  Jackson  on  the
right  bank  and  Fort  St.  Philip  on  the  left.  A
single  fort  at  this  point  had  held  the  British  forces
in  check  for  nine  days  in  1814-'15,  though  they
threw  a  thousand  shells  into  it.  Fort  Jackson  was
a  bastioned  fortification,  built  of  brick,  with  case-
mates and  glacis,  rising  twenty-five  feet  above  the
water.  Fort  St.  Philip  was  smaller,  and  rose  nine-
teen feet.  The  whole  number  of  guns  in  the  two
works  was  about  115,  which  were  of  various  kinds
and  sizes,  but  mostly  smooth-bore  thirty-two-
pounders.  Above  the  forts  lay  a  Confederate  fleet
of  fifteen  vessels,  including  an  iron-clad  ram  and
a  large,  unfinished  floating  battery  covered  with
railroad  iron.  Below  the  forts  two  iron  chains
were  stretched  across  the  river,  supported  on  eight
hulks  anchored  abreast.  Two  hundred  Confeder-
ate sharp-shooters  kept  constant  watch  along  the
banks,  and  several  flre-rafts  were  ready  to  be
lighted  and  sent  down  against  the  fleet.  To  pass
these  obstructions  and  fight  his  way  to  the  city,
Farragut  had  six  sloops-of-war,  sixteen  gun-boats,
twenty-one  mortar  schooners,  and  five  other  vessels,
carrying  in  all  over  200  guns.  This  was  the  largest
expedition  that  had  ever  sailed  under  the  United
States  flag,  but  it  did  not  include  a  single  iron-clad,
and  while  it  was  mainly  built  for  sea-service,  its  task
now  was  to  operate  in  a  river  with  many  shoals
and  a  shifting  channel.  To  get  the  larger  vessels
over  the  bar  at  Southwest  pass,  it  was  necessary  to
lighten  them  as  much  as  possible,  and  then  drag
them  over  through  a  foot  of  mud.  With  the  "  Pen-
sacola"  alone,  this  process  occupied  two  weeks.
The  "  Colorado  "  could  not  be  taken  over  at  all.

The  mortar  schooners  were  towed  up  the  stream
to  a  point  within  reach  of  the  forts,  and  began  to
take  their  places  and  open  fire  on  18  April.  There
was  a  stretch  of  woods  between  them  and  the  forts,
and  their  masts  were  trimmed  with  bushes  to  pre-
vent them  from  being  distinguished.  The  gunners
could  not  see  the  forts,  but  flred  with  a  computed
aim,  the  result  of  careful  observation  and  triangu-
lation  by  a  coast-survey  officer.  They  used  shells
weighing  285  pounds,  and  kept  up  a  constant  fire
for  six  days  and  nights,  throwing  nearly  (i.OOO
shells.  This  resulted  in  disabling  fifty-three  of
the  garrison  and  destroying  some  of  the  build-


in:;-,  but  noi  in  materially  damaging  the  forts.
FarmgUl  was  impatient  with  this  operation,  as
it  only  served  to  give  the  enemy  warning,  and
he  found  the  greatest  difficulty  in  preventi]
lisions  in  his  Beet,  Half  a  dozen  fire-raft>  \\<  r.
sent  down,  but  l)oats' -crews  tackled  them,  and
either  towed  them  ashore  nr  sent  them  out
Perhaps  no  commander  was  ever  so  completely
master  of  every  detail  as  FarragUt  1  !«•  could  have
taken  the  place  and  performed  the  duties  of  any
man  in  the  fleet.  lie  issued  orders  in  which
minute  directions  were  given  for  every  contin-
gency that  he  could  anticipate,  and  in  addition  to
this  he  bade  his  officers  use  their  own  ingenuity.
They  whitewashed  the  decks  (for  the  attack  WM
to  be  in  the  night)  and  took  other  precautions,  the
most  important  of  which  were  those  intended  to
protect  the  boilers  and  machinery.  Not  only  was
the  coal  so  placed  as  to  guard  these,  but  all  the
spare  chains  were  u  stoppered "  up  and  down  the
side  amidships.  In  the  night  of  20  April,  Capt.
Henry  H.  Bell  went  silently  up  the  river  with  a
boat's-crew  and  unfastened  the  chains  to  make  an
opening  for  the  fleet  to  pass  through.  In  the  night
of  the  23d,  Lieut-Corn.  C.  II.  B.  Caldwell  was  sent
up  to  see  if  the  way  was  still  clear,  and  signaled
that  it  was;  but  the  enemy  discovered  him  and
opened  fire,  at  the  same  time  sending  down  fire-
rafts  and  lighting  two  large  piles  of  wood  near  the
ends  of  the  chain,  so  that  the  whole  scene  was
made  as  bright  as  day.  But  the  fleet  was  now
ready  for  the  attack,  and  at  half  past  three  o'clock
in  the  morning  it  was  under  way.  The  first  di-
vision, consisting  of  eight  vessels,  was  commanded
by  Capt.  Theodorus  Bailey ;  the  second,  three  ves-
sels, was  led  by  Farragut's  flag-ship ;  the  third,  six
vessels,  commanded  by  Capt.  Bell.  As  the  line  of
battle  passed  through  the  opening  in  the  chain,  it
came  within  reach  of  the  guns  of  the  forts,  and
each  vessel  in  succession  was  subjected  to  a  raking
fire.  One  became  entangled  among  the  rafts  and
did  not  get  free  in  time  to  make  the  passage,  another
received  a  shot  in  her  boiler  and  was  compelled  to
drop  down-stream  again,  while  a  third,  being  de-
layed till  daylight,  attempted  to  pass  up  alone  and
was  driven  back  by  a  destructive  Are.  With  these
exceptions,  the  whole  line  moved  steadily  up  the
river,  sailing  close  to  the  forts  and  pouring  in
broadsides  of  shell  and  grape-shot  that  at  times
swept  the  bastions  clear  of  the  enemy  and  silenced
the  guns.  After  passing  by  the  forts,  the  fleet  was
subjected  to  a  raking  fire  similar  to  that  which  it
had  encountered  in  the  approach,  and  no  sooner
had  it  gone  beyond  the  range  of  this  than  it  en-
countered the  Confederate  fleet.  But  of  this  it
made  short  work ;  some  of  the  enemy's  vessels  were
driven  ashore,  some  were  run  down,  and  others
were  riddled  with  shot.  The  flag-ship  "  Hartford  "
grounded  on  a  shoal,  and  at  the  same  time  the  ram
"  Manassas "  pushed  a  fire-raft  against  her.  But
the  flames  were  promptly  extinguished  and  the
vessel  gotten  off  into  deep  water,  when  she  was  ap-
proached in  the  smoke  and  darkness  by  a  steamer
crowded  with  men,  evidently  intending  to  board
her.  She  at  once  planted  a  heavy  shell  in  the
stranger,  which  exploded,  and  the  vessel diwp»

Seared.  The  "  Hartford  "  then  passed  on  up-stream,
ring  right  and  left  into  the  enemy's  gun-boats.
The  "  Brooklyn"  encountered  several  of  these,  into
one  of  which  she  sent  eleven  shells  at  a  single  dis-
charge, all  of  which  exploded,  and  the  gun-boat
ran  ashore  in  flames.  The  "  Mississippi."  a  ride-
wheel  steamer,  encountered  the  ram  "  Manassas,"
and  received  a  blow  that  disabled  her  machinery  :
but  she  sent  a  broadside  through,  the  ram,  and


i\i;i:  \»,i  r


KARH


417


promptly  boarded  H  ami  Ml  it  00  fin".  so  that  it
drifted  down  the  riTer  and  exploded.  Tbi  gon-
na," of  Farragut'-  fleet,  was  rammed
by  t  wo  Confi-derate  gun-Unit-  and  sank  in  IftMB
minutes.  At  daylight  the  fleet  OOtttfamd  OB  iti
way  up  tin-  ri\ir.  an<l  (apt.  Bailey,  leading  in  the
captured  a  Confederate  regiment  en-
camped .m  tin-  bank.  <>n  the  morning  "f  t
the  <  hairnet  te  batteries,  three  miles  Mow  tin-  city.
weir  attacked  ami  silenced,  and  an  hour  Inter  New
Orleans  it-elf  was  at  the  niercv  of  Farragut's
guns.  This  exploit  had  cost  the  National  fleet  :t7
men  killed  and  147  wounded,  and  OM  vessel  -unk

Ollt Of the seventeen. Tile Confederate fleet was

completelv  destroyed. At noon the  surrender  of

tl ity  was  demanded  of  the  mayor,  and ('apt.

Bailey  WM  teal  OOhon  t"  ban!  doWB  the  Louisiana
flai:  and  raise  the  stars  and  stripes  over  the  public
buildings.  A  troableeome  oorreepondenoe  with  the
mayor  ensued,  and  Farragut  was  glad  to  turn  over
the  city  to  (ieu.  Hutler  as  soon  as  the  troOM  could
Ih>  brought  up. on  the  OTonlngof  1  Mav.  The  forts
had  surrendered  to  Com.  Porter  on  the  28th.  It
aii|M-ars  that  this  timelv  capture  of  New  Orleans
changed  the  purpose  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,
who  was  about  to  recognize  the  Confederacy  ami
take  measures  to  raise  the  blockade.

Farragut  wanted  to  take  his  fleet  at  once  to
Mobile,  capture  that  place,  and  close  the  port  to
blockade-runners ;  but  the  government  was  anxious
to  open  the  Mississippi  through  its  whole  length,
and  the  ships  were  therefore  Kept  in  the  river  for
s<nne  months.  Before  daylight,  on  28  June,  1862,
he  ran  by  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  with  eight
vessels,  joining  Com.  Charles  II.  Davis's  fleet  of
iron-chufs  above  the  citv.  In  this  passage  Far-
ragut's  fleet  was  under  fire  about  two  hours,  and
lost  fifteen  men  killed  and  thirty  wounded.  On  15
July,  finding  that  nothing  could  be  effected  at
Vicksburg  by  the  fleet  alone,  he  ran  the  batteries
again,  descending  the  river  to  New  Orleans.  The
mxt  dav  he  was  commissioned  rear-admiral.

On  14  March,  1803,  to  assist  Gen.  N.  P.  Hanks  in
his  siege  of  Port  Hudson,  Farragut  attempted  to
run  by  the  batteries  at  that  place  with  seven  vessels
— three  sloops-of-war,  each  with  a  gun-boat  lashed
to  the  port-side,  and  the  side-wheel  steamer  "  Mis-
sissippi." By  this  arrangement,  if  a  vessel  were
disabled,  the  gun-boat  could  take  her  out  of  the
fight.  But  they  met  so  destructive  a  fire  that  only
the  ••  Mart  ford  *'  and  her  attendant  gun-ltont  suc-
ceeded in  getting  by.  The  "Mississippi"  ran
aground  and  was  burned,  and  the  others  were  com-
pelled to  drop  down  stream.  With  the  "  Hart-
ford "and  the  ••  Allmtross"  Farragut  proceeded  up
stream  and  blockaded  the  mouth  of  Red  river,  thus
preventing  Confederate  supplies  from  coming  down.
or  re-enforcements  from  going  up  to  the  army  of
<ii  ii.  Richard  Taylor.  Coal  and  provisions  were
sent  down  to  him  by  (Jen.  (Jrant  ami  Admiral
Porter,  on  barges  that  drifted  past  the  Vicksburg
tiatteries  in  the  night.  Subsequently  he  assisted
(ten.  Hanks  in  the  investment  01  Port  Hudson,  till
-urretidered.  N  July.

The  Mississippi  was  now  open  to  navigation
through  its  entire  length.  Admiral  Porter  took
Farragut 's  place  at  New  <  Menus,  while  Farragut
sailed  for  New  York  in  the  '•  Hartford."  attiring  in

Ugust.  When  the  flajohlp  was  examined  at  the
-yard,  it  was  found  that  she  had  lieen  struck
times  by  stmt  and  shell  during  her  nini

•mtlis  of  aW'Tioa, Farragut  was  given  public  wel-

ine  home  and  receptions  by  the  New  \  ork  cliam-
0f  commerce  ami  committees  of  citizens,  and
li\e  months  while  the  ship  was  refitted.
vol.  ii. — 27


In  January.  1864,  |„.  r,.tlir \  ,,,  , |„.  ( ;„|ft  visited

Ship  Island  and Pensacnla,  establishing  depots  •  >f

supplies,  and  prepared  for  In*  long-meditaud  at-
tack on  the  defences  of  Mobile.  Ii  mti-
ful  sword,  with  a  gold  and  silvi  I  and  the
hilt  set  in  brilliants,  was  »mt  to  him  by  the  Union
League  club  of  New  York.  AboOt  this  time  he
wrote  :  ••  If  any  one  asks  what  1  am  doing;  em
Nothing  but  wailing  for  the  World  to  turn  round
till it i •nines  my  turn  to  do  something." M<

OM it  red  the  forts,  and declared that an  attack

would  be  useless  .till  he  had  some  iron-dads.  These
came  at  last.it>-  did  alOO  the  troops  under  Oen.
Qordon  Qnnger  for  the  land  attack.

The  defences  of  the  bay  consisted  mainly  of  two
forts — Morgan  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  entrance,
and  (mines  at  the  west, .  ,n  —  three  miles  apart.
From  Fort  (iaines  eastward  to  a  point  near  Fort
Morgan  stretched  a  line  of  piles  and  a  double  line
of  torpedoes.  The  point  where  they  terminated
was  indicated  by  a  red  buoy,  and  the  blockade-
runners  were  accustomed  to  pass  m  bv  the  narrow
channel  between  this  buoy  and  Fort  .Morgan.  In-
side of  these  defences  lay  the  Confederate  iron-clad
rain  "  Tennessee  "  and  three  wooden  gun- 1 -oats.  As
at  New  Orleans.  Farragut  issued  general  orders
containing  the  most  minute  instructions  f,.r  every
contingency.  1 1  is  seven  sloops-of-war — the"  Brook-
lyn "  leading  and  the  ••  Hartford  "  coming  second
— were  to  form  one  line,  each  sloop  having  a  gun-
boat lashed  on  the  --ort  side.  t<>  take  her  through
if  her  machinery  should  In-  disabled.  The  "  Brook-
lyn" was  given  the  lead  because  she  had  four
chase  guns  and  a  contrivance  for  picking  up  tor-
pedoes. The  four  iron-clad  monitors,  "Tecumsdi."
"Manhattan."  "  Winnebago,"  and  "Chickasaw,"
formed  another  line  to  the  right  of  the  line  of
wooden  ships,  lietween  them  and  Fort  Morgan.
Six  steamers  were  placed  south  and  east  of  that
work,  to  keep  up  a  flank  fin-  u|»on  it.  Before  day-
light on  5  Aug.  aver/body  in  the  fleet  was  asti'r,
and  at  half-jmst  five  the  signal  was  given  for  the
advance.  An  hour  later  the  comlmtants  were  with-
in range,  and  the  firing  began  Immediately,  and
was  heavy  and  destructive  on  l»>th  sides.  The
admiral  mounted  into  the  i>ort  main  rigging,  in
order  to  see  over
the  smoke,  and  as
this  increased  he
gradually  mount-
ed higher,  ('apt.
Drayton,  to  pre-
vent his  falling  to
the  deck  in  case
of  being  wounded,

sent  up  a  naaTtor

master  wit  ha  piece
of  lead-line,  which
was  made  fast  t..
OhO Of  the  shrouds
and  passed  around
theadmiral.topre-
vent  such  an  acci-
dent. The  com-
manders had  all
been  instructed  to
keep  to  the  east  of
the  red  buoy  ;  but
the  leading  moni-
tor, in  her  eagerness  to  engage  the  Confederate
ram.  passed  west  of  it.  struck  a  torjtedo,  and
suddenly  went down. (Sec  Ckavin.  Ti  \is  A.  M.I

A  little  later  the  "Brooklyn"  atonped,  and  this

seemed likelv to throw the whole line in:
fusion. "What is the trouble!" was shouted


418


PARRAGUT


PARBAGUT


through  a  trumpet  from  tin-  '■  Ilarl  ford."  «'Tor-
pedoea  I "  was  tin-  answer.  "  Damn  the  torpedoes  I  "
sxclaimed  Farragut.  *  Four  bells!  Cant.  Dray-
ton, go  ahead!  Jooett,  full  roeed!"  Thus  the
•'  Hartford  *'  passed  the  "  Brooklyn,"  took  her  place
at  the  head  of  the  line,  and  led  the  fleet  into  the
hay.  Kvery  vessel  suffered  from  the  enemy's  fire
as  it  approached  the  fort,  poured  in  rapid  broad-
sides that  silenced  the  Confederate  guns  when  it
was  abreast  of  the  work,  and  suffered  again  from
raking  fire  after  it  had  passed.  Inside  of  the  bay,
the  signal  "Chase  enemy's  gun-boats"  was  given,
and  the  lashings  that  held  the  gun-boats  to  the
sloops  were  cut  with  axes  and  the  former  made  off
for  their  prey,  and  one  Confederate  gun-boat  was
captured,  one  was  sunk,  and  another  driven  under
the  guns  of  the  fort.  There  was  a  brush  with  the
iron-clad  ram,  but  it  was  not  serious,  and  the  fleet

ea to  anchor  three- miles  up  the  bay. Farragut

was  planning  to  attack  the  ram  as  soon  as  it  should
be  dark  enough  to  prevent  the  garrison  of  the  fort
from  seeing  which  whs  friend  and  which  foe;  but
the  ram  anticipated  him.  steaming  directly  for  the
flag-ship  in  the  midst  of  the  fleet.  The  admiral  at
once  gave  orders  for  every  ship  to  attack  her,  not
only  with  shot  but  by  ramming,  and  a  desperate
contest  ensued.  The  ram  had  the  advantage  in  that
she  was  sure  of  striking  an  enemy  with  every  blow,
while  the  fleet  had  to  avoid  running  and  firing
into  one  another.  Their  shot  had  no  effect  on  the
sloping  iron  sides  of  the  monster,  and  when  the
wooden  vessels  rammed  her  they  splintered  their
own  Ixjws  and  only  heeled  her  over.  But  the
monitors,  with  their  enormous  guns,  shot  away  her
smoke-stack  and  steering-apparatus  and  jammed
her  shutters,  while  one  fifteen-inch  shot  actually
penetrated  her  armor.  Her  commander  was  wound-
ed, her  crew  could  do  nothing  in  the  smoke  that
filled  theii  vessel,  and  she  displayed  a  white  flag
and  surrendered.  In  the  fight  the  "  Lackawanna
had  accidentally  run  into  the  flag-ship  and  cut  her
down  nearly  to  the  water's  edge.  The  victory  cost
the  National  fleet  335  men,  including  52  killed  by
shot  and  113  drowned  in  the  "  Tecumseh."  The
Confederate  fleet  lost  10  killed,  16  wounded,  and
280  prisoners.  The  loss  in  the  forts  is  unknown.
A  few  davs  later  they  were  surrendered.  Farragut
in  his  official  report  awarded  the  most  generous
praise  to  all  that  had  assisted  in  winning  the  vic-
tory. He  said :  "  The  commanding  officers  of  all
the  vessels  that  took  part  in  the  action  deserve  my
warmest  commendations,  not  only  for  the  untiring
zeal  with  which  they  had  prepared  their  ships  for
the  contest,  but  for  their  skill  and  daring  in  carry-
ing out  my  orders  during  the  engagement,"  and
he  mentioned  every  one  of  them  specially.  He
also  wrote  :  "  1  witnessed  the  terrible  effects  of  the
enemy's  shot,  and  the  good  conduct  of  the  men  at
their  gifns;  and  although  no  doubt  their  hearts
sickened,  as  mine  did,  when  their  shipmates  were
struck  down  beside  them,  yet  there  was  not  a  mo-
ment's hesitation  to  lay  their  comrades  aside  and
spring  again  to  their  deadly  work."  The  quarter-
master that  tied  him  in  the  rigging  says  he  saw
the  admiral  come  on  deck  just  as  the  killed  of  the
"  Hartford  "  were  being  laid  out,  and  "  it  was  the
only  time  I  ever  saw  the  old  gentleman  cry,  but
tears  came  in  his  eyes  like  a  little  child."  Henry
Howard  Brownell  was  on  board  the  flag-ship  as  an
acting  ensign,  and  described  the  battle  in  one  of
his  finest  poems,  "The  Bay  Fight."  The  city  of
Mobile  could  not  be  captured  by  the  fleet  as  New
Orleans  had  been,  because  of  shoal  water  and  ob-
structions in  the  channel.  But  the  purpose  of  the
operation,  to  stop  the  passage  of  blockade-runners


and  90  close  another  main  avenue  of  supply  to
the  Confederacy,  was  accomplished. The  a
panylng  view  of  the  "Hartford"  shows  the  -hip

m  ine  appeared  In  Mobile  bay  after  the  battle.
The  stunted  appearance  of  her  masts  is  due  to
the  fact  that  her  ton-gallants  were  housed.  Her
hull  was  painted  lead-color.


In  November,  as  Farragut's  health  was  failing,
the  department  ordered  him  home,  and  on  12  Dec.
he  reached  New  York,  where  he  was  given  a  public
reception,  and  a  purse  of  $50,000  was  presented  to
him  for  the  purchase  of  a  home  in  the  city.  A
bill  creating  the  grade  of  vice-admiral  was  passed
by  congress  on  22  Dec.,  and  the  next  day  President
Lincoln  signed  it,  and  nominated  Farragut  for  the
office,  which  nomination  the  senate  at  once  con-
firmed. When  Richmond  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
National  forces,  Farragut,  who  was  on  the  James,
with  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon,  procured  horses,
and  rode  thither  post  haste,  entering  the  city  a
short  time  before  the  president  got  there.  A  few
days  later  he  visited  his  old  home,  Norfolk,  and
was  given  a  public  reception  by  the  naval  and
military  officers  there  and  those  of  the  citizens  who
had  remained  true  to  the  Union.  In  the  course  of
his  speech  he  said :  "  This  meeting  recalls  to  me
the  most  momentous  events  of  my  life,  when  I
listened  in  this  place  till  the  small  hours  of  the
morning,  and  returned  home  with  the  feeling  that
Virginia  was  safe  and  firm  in  her  place  in  the
Union.  Our  Union  members  of  the  convention
were  elected  by  an  overwhelming  majority,  and  we
believed  that  everything  was  right.  Judge,  then,
of  our  astonishment  in  finding,  a  few  days  later,
that  the  state  had  been  voted  out  by  a  miserable
minority,  for  want  of  firmness  and  resolution  on
the  part  of  those  whom  we  trusted  to  represent  us
there,  and  that  Virginia  had  been  dragooned  out
of  the  Union.  ...  I  was  told  by  a  brother  officer
that  the  state  had  seceded,  and  that  I  must  either
resign  and  turn  traitor  to  the  government  which
had  supported  me  from  childhood,  or  I  must  leave
this  place.  Thank  God,  I  was  not  long  in  making
my  decision  !  I  have  spent  half  of  my  life  in  revo-
lutionary countries,  ana  I  know  the  horrors  of  civil
war,  and  I  told  the  people  what  I  had  seen  and
what  they  would  experience.  They  laughed  at  me,
and  called  me  '  granny '  and  '  croaker ' ;  and  I  said,
1 1  can  not  live  here,  and  will  seek  some  other
place  where  I  can  live.'  I  suppose  they  said  I  left
my  country  for  my  country's  good,  and,  thank
God.  I  did!"

On  6  July,  1865,  the  Union  club  of  Boston  gave
a  dinner  to  the  admiral,  at  which  Oliver  Wendell
Holmes  read  one  of  his  happiest  occasional  poems,
a  few  lines  of  which  may  be  quoted  here :
"  Fast,  fast  are  lessening  in  the  light

The  names  of  high  renown —
Van  Tromp's  proud  besom  pales  from  sight.

Old  Benbow's  half  hull  down.


PARR  \«.l P


PARRAR


419


Scarce  nil.'  tall fri.'ill.' W.ilks  tin-  S.-H.

<  »r  skirt*  the  safer  shores.
»>f  all  that  Inih-  to  virion

Our  -tout  old  <-. .mm' n lore*.
Hull.  Bainbridfe,  Potter— where  are  1 1 »•

The  aiarwartng  billows  mil,
Still  bright  in  memory's  -uiimI  ray,

1  rest  each  gallant  soul  !
A  brighter  mum  most  dim  their  light,

With  iimn-  t  hn.ii  noontide  my —
The  Viking  of  the  EUver  Plight,

The  Commerce  of  the  Be

I  give  tin'  MUM  that  fits  liiiu  beet —

Av.  better  than  his  own —
The  Sca-King  of  the  sovereign  West,

Whd  mads  bis  mast  s  throne."
On  M  July,  1886,  conjrrees  created  the  grade  of
tdmirali  In-fore  unknown  in  the  l'.  S.  navy,  ami  the
rank  wee  given  to  Perragnt.  The  nam  year  he
wee  assigned  to  the  Eoropeen  squadron,  bomted
hi-  Beg  on  the  "  Franklin.'  and  made  u  long  orniea
in  European  waters. By  s[>ecial  permission  of  the

Incident,  Mrs.  Farragut  ami  her  cousin.  Mrs.
'eninH-k,  wife  of  his  fleet  captain,  Alexander  M.
Peonook,  accompanied  them.  They  visited  the
principal  European  capitals,  and  were  everywhere
received with the highest honors. One of the

most  interesting  incidents  of  the  cruise  wee  a  visit
to  the  island  <>f  Minorca,  the  home  of  Farragut's
ancestors,  where  the  whole  population  turned  out
to  welcome  him.  In  the  summer  of  1869  the  ad-
miral and  Mrs  Farragut  visited  Vallejo,  Cal.  His
bust  official  duty  was  to  take  charge  of  the  naval
obsequies  of  George  Pcabody,  when  the  remains  ar-
rived at  Portland.  Me.,  in  January,  1870.  The  next
slimmer  he  spent  in  Portsmouth,  X.  EL,  the  guest
of  Bear-Admiral  Pennock.  An  old  sailor,  who  had
charge  of  the  dismantled  sloop-of-war  "  Dale,"
lying  in  the  harbor,  says  that  one  day  the  admiral
wandered  on  board,  and  on  stepping  ashore  again
remarked :  "  That  is  the  last  time  I  shall  ever  tread
k  of  a  man-of-war."  The  foreboding  proved
true,  and  not  long  afterward  he  quietly  passed
away.  The  remains  were  conveyed  to  New  York,
and.  after  a  public  funeral,  were  finally  deposited
in  Woodlawn  cemetery.

Admiral  Perragnt  had  a  strongly  religious  na-
ture, believing  in  the  constant  guidance  of  Divine
Providence.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  a
communicant  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  is  one  of  the  few  great  heroes  of  the  world
whose  character  has  never  been  clouded  by  the
slightest  suspicion  of  a  want  of  honesty  or  personal

[mrity. Many  entertaining  anecdotes  are  to}d  of
lim. When  we  consider  the  novel  and  compli-
cated problems  that  confronted  him  in  naval  war-
fere,  and the providential manner  in  which he
Mined  to  have  been  schooled  for  them  through  a
long life — when we  remember how  other  com-
manders merely  fought  line  against  line  in  simple
jhongh courageous fashion,  while he contended
with  oasemated  forts,  fire-rafts,  fleets,  and  hidden
torpedoes,  all  at  once,  and  conquered  them  all,  we
can  hardly  refuse  to  pronounce  him  the  greatest
naval  commander  the  world  has  ever  seen.
There  is  a  colossal  bronze  statue  of  the  admiral
kiregut  square, Washington, executed by
Beam,  and  paid  for  by  a  I •■mgressional  ai»-
ition. There  i^  one  of  heroic  size  in  Madi-
son square.  New  Fork,  executed  by  Augustus  >t.
(Jaiuien,  paid  for  by  a  nbscription  raised  among
the  ( iti/.  us. in  the  chancel  of  the  Church  of  the
Incarnation.  New  York,  is  a  mural  tabid  eontain-
likeness by haunt Thompson.
William Page's  original picture  of  "Farragut's


Fntrv  into  Mol.ile  Bav  "  is  now  in  the  possession  of

the  emperor  of  Etueeia ;  »  repUea  i*  still  owned  by
Mr.  Page's  family. (See  illustration  on  ;
The  authorised  Ufa  of  the  admiral  is  that  bj

son.  I... Mill  Farragut,  which  includes  his  journals
and  many  of  his  letters  (New  York.  also

.lames  K.  Mom.  'Cruise  of  the  Franklin"

(New  York.  18mA  and  "The  Battle  of  Mobile  Bay,"
by  Com.  Poxhall  A.  Parker  (Boston,  I*

I \  1 1  V  It.  John,  educator,  l>.  in  Lincoln,  Mass.,
l  July.  177!':  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  h  May,  It
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  iii  1800,  studied  the-
ology at  Andoeer,  and  in  1805  wessppointedOreek

tutor  at  Harvard.  Be  WM ohosen  Mollis  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  same
institution  in  1807. and  retained  the  chair  till  1
when  he  resigned  in  0O|SVM|nenOS  of  a  painful  ill-
ness that  Anally  caused  his  death.  He  published
for  the  use  of  his  pupils  a  translation  of  I  jut-

M  Elements  of  Algebra'1  (1818)1  whioh  be  followed

by  selections  from  L-gcndre,  Biot,  Bezant,  and
oihers.  These  works  were  at  0B0S  adopt. d  as  t.\t-
bookl  by  Harvard,  the  I'.  S.  military  academy,  and
other  institutions.  He  was  a  contributor  to  scien-
tific journals,  to  the  "North  American  EtOVioW*
and  to  the  ••  Memoirs  "  of  the  American  academy.

—  His  wife.  Eliza  Ware,  author,  b.  in  Flanders..
Eterope,  in  17!»1  ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass..  22  April,
1870,  was  the  daughter  of  Benjamin  Botch,  of  New
Bedford,  Mass.  She  was  educated  in  Fngland,
lived  then-  until  1819,  and  in  1H28  Urmni'  the  sec-
ond wife  of  Prof.  Farrar.  She  wrote  "  Children's
Etobineon  Crusoe";  "The  story  of  Lafayette**;
"The  Life  of  Howard";  "Youth's  Love-Letters";
"Young  Lady's  Friend  "  (1X17) :  "Congo  in  S-arch
of  his  Master"  (New  York,  1854);  and  "Recollec-
tions of  Seventy  Years"  (Boston,  1865).

FARRAR,  Samuel,  lawver,  b.  in  Lincoln.  Mass..
in  1784;  d.  in  Andover.  Mam,  18  May.  ls«U.  He
was  graduate<l  at  Harvard  in  1 71*7,  and  was  tutor
there  in  1800.  He  then  studied  law,  and  soon  af-
terward began  practice  in  Andover.  He  was  one
of  the  chief  founders  of  the  Andover  theological
seminary,  and  for  thirty-eight  vears  was  treasurer
of  that  institution  and  of  Phillips  academy,  devot-
ing a  large  share  of  his  salary  to  their  support.
He  was  the  first  president  of  "the  Andover  bank,
and  held  the  office  thirty  veare.

FARRAR,  Thomas  ( 'baric*,  artist,  b.  in  Lon-
don, 16  Dec.  1888.  learned  drawing  in  a  free
school  established  in  London  by  Buskin.  He
came  to  New  York  in  1858,  attained  success  as  an
instructor  in  his  art.  served  in  the  Union  army
during  the  civil  war.  and  in  WW  returned  to  Ijon-
don.  where  he  has  since  resided.  Anions  his  works
exhibited  at  the  National  academy  in  New  York
were  "  Field-Lily  "  and  M  Twilight  on  the  Hudson"
(1867);  "  Beach  "at  Hastings"  and  "  Ehajllstl  Farm  "
(1871);  "Caernarvon  Castle.  Wales"  and  "  Interior
of  St.  Mark's.  Yenice"  (1H72): "Sunset"  (187*A|

-  Yorkshire  Trout  Stream,"  "Coming  through  the
L.Hk."  an<l  u Rochester  Castle"  (1878).  He  has
also  contributed  paintings  t<>  the  exhibitions  of  the
Boyal  academy  in  Lmdoii.—  His  brother.  Henry,
artist,  b.  in  London.  Kngland,  2J1  March,  1H4:{.  In
IHOit  he  came  to  New  \ork,  where  he  first  pained
distinction  for  his  water-colors, and  afterward  took
high  rank  as  a  landscape  jminter.  He  is  a  memU'r
of  the  New  York  etching  dub  and  of  the  American
society  of  [Miinters  in  water-colors.  His  principal
works  are  "On  the  Fast  Biver";  "A Hot Hay";

\  Calm  Afternoon'*;  "SnneeVOoeel  of  Man

"The  Silent  Tongue";  "The  Old  Homestead  at
Twilight  ";  ami  a  "  November  Day."  He  eOBtrJb-
uted  to  the  Centennial  exhibition  at Philadelphia


420


FARRAR


FARWELL


••  a  Windy  Day  "and  "The Old  Homeoa  the  Hill."
and  to  the  Paris  exhibit  ion  of  l878MAQoiet  PooL"

FARRAR,  Timothy,  jurist,  l>.  in  Concord.  Ma—..
11. Inly.  1717;  d.  in  Hollis,  X.  II..21  Feb.,  ls.p.i.  Be
WW  graduated  at  Harvard  ill  1 707,  taught  school
and  settled  in  New  Ipswieh,  N.  II..  in  1770.  lie
was  a  major  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  after
the  war  became  a  justice  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  of  New  Hampshire.  He  was  appointed  chief-
justice  in  February,  1802,  and  altogether  filled  the
office  of  judge  for  more  than  forty  years. — His
son.  Timothy,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Ipswich.  N.  11..
17  March,  1788;  d.  in  1874.  He  was  a  law  part-
ner of  Daniel  Webster  from  1818  to  1816,  and
from  1824  to  1833  was  judge  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire court  of  common  pleas.  He  was  vice-presi-
dent of  the  New  England  historic  genealogical  so-
ciety from  1888  to  loSjB.  He  published  "  Report  of
the  Dartmouth  College  Case  (Portsmouth,  1819);
"  Review  of  the  Dred  Scott  Decision  "  (1857) ;  "  Man-
ual of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  "  (Bos-
ton, 1867) ;  and  also  wrote  articles  for  the  "  North
American  Review  "  and  the  "  New  Englander."

FARRELL,  John  P.,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Kingston,  Ontario;  d.  in  Hamilton,  Ontario,  26
Sept..  1873.  He  studied  theology  in  the  seminary
of  Montreal,  and  after  completing  the  course  was
ordained  priest  and  stationed  at  L'Original,  Ot-
tawa. In  1856  the  diocese  of  Hamilton  was  cre-
ated, and  Dr.  Farrell  was  appointed  its  bishop.

FARRELL,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland ;
d.  in  New  York,  19  July,  1880.  He  came  to  the
United  States  when  a  boy,  studied  for  the  priesthood
at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,
and  was  ordained  by  Archbishop  Hughes.  He  was
a  staunch  supporter  of  the  Union  during  the  war
of  secession,  took  great  interest  in  the  welfare  of
the  colored  people,  and  bequeathed  $5,000  to  form
the  nucleus  of  a  fund  to  establish  a  church  for
their  benefit  in  New  York.  In  accordance  with
his  wishes,  the  church  of  St.  Benedict  the  Moor,
on  Bleecker  street,  was  organized  after  his  death.

FARRER,  Edward,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Castlebar,  County  Mayo,  Ireland,  8  Oct.,  1850.  He
was  educated  by  private  tutors  at  Stonyhurst  col-
lege, England,  and  at  the  Jesuit  college  in  Rome.
On  completing  his  course  of  study,  he  declined  the
places  of  assistant  teacher  of  Greek  and  Latin  and
teacher  of  English  in  the  University  of  Milan.  In
1870  he  arrived  in  Canada  and  connected  himself
with  the  "  Daily  Telegraph  "  in  Toronto,  but  upon
the  establishment  of  the  Toronto  •*  Mail "  in  1872
he  joined  its  editorial  staff,  and  remained  there  till
1881,  when  he  became  foreign  editor  of  the  New
York  "  World."  After  about  a  year's  service  on  this
paper  he  went  to  Winnipeg,  Manitoba,  and  was  for
two  years  editor  of  the  Winnipeg  "  Times."  In  the
autumn  of  1884  he  became  editor-in-chief  of  the
Toronto  "  Mail,"  a  place  which  he  now  (1887)  holds.
Mr.  Farrer  has  made  a  special  study  of  the  Indian
languages,  and  is  preparing  for  the  press  a  work
on  "The  Algonkin  Religion."

FARRINGTON,  William  George,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  York  city,  15  Dec.,  1832.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1853,  and  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York,  in  1856,  was  ordained
deacon  and  priest  the  same  year,  and  was  rector  at
Huntington,  L.  I.,  till  1858,  and  then  assistant  in
Trinity  parish,  New  York  city,  till  1862.  In  1863
he  organized  Christ  church  in  Hackensack,  N.  J.,
of  which  he  was  rector  till  1870.  He  subsequently
had  charge  of  churches  at  Newark  and  Orange,
N.  J.,  and  at  Bloomfield  from  1877.  He  published
a  tract  on  '•  The  Historical  Church  "  in  1861,  and
has  edited  the  "Church  Almanac"  since  1867.


FARROW.  Samuel,  lawver.  1p.  in  Virginia alxmt
1759;  d.  in  Columbia.  S.  ('..  18  Nov..  ls-Jl.  Qk
father  settled  near  MJUgTC/Wtfu  Mills,  In  Spartan-
burgh  district.  South  Carolina,  about  17<i.">.  The
son  was  a  member  of  a  company  of  scouts  in  the
Revolutionary  war.  was  wounded  in  one  of  t4ie
numerous  skirmishes  in  which  he  was  en
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Musgrove's  Mills.
When  he  was  made  a  prisoner,  together  with  his
two  brothers,  his  mother,  a  daughter  of  OoL  Phile-
mon Waters,  obtained  their  release  by  delivering
up  six  British  prisoners,  and  boasted  that  she  had
made  a  good  bargain,  because  she  could  beat  the
British  four  to  one.  After  the  war  he  studied  law.
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Charleston  in  1798, and
settled  at  Spartanburgh.  In  1810  he  was  elected
lieutenant-governor,  and  in  1812  as  a  Democrat  to
congress  from  the  Pinckney  district,  serving  from
24  May,  1813.  till  4  March,  1815.  He  «
elected,  but  resigned,  preferring  to  serve  in  the
state  house  of  representatives,  of  which  he  was  a
member  from  1816  till  1821,  when  he  retired  from

Jmblic  life.  The  organization  of  the  South  Caro-
ina  lunatic  asylum  and  deaf  and  dumb  asylum
was  chiefly  due  to  his  efforts.

FAR  WELL,  Charles  Benjamin,  senator,  b.  in
Painted  Post,  N.  Y.,  1  July,  1823.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Elmira  academy,  removed  to  Illinois  in
1838,  and  was  employed  in  government  surveying
and  farming  until  1844,  when  he  engaged  in  the
real  estate  business  and  banking  in  Chicago.  !!.•
was  elected  county  clerk  in  1853,  and  re-elected  to
this  office  in  1857.  Subsequently  he  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits,  and  became  a  member  of  the
firm  of  John  V.  Farwell  and  Company.  He  was
appointed  a  member  of  the  state  board  of  equaliza-
tion in  1867,  chairman  of  the  board  of  supervisors
in  1868,  and  National  bank  examiner  in  1869.  In
1871  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
and  served  on  the  committee  on  banking  and  cur-
rency, and  as  chairman  of  that  on  manufactures.
He  remained  in  congress  till  1876,  when  the  house
decided  that  J.  V.  Le  Moyne  was  entitled  to  his
seat.  On  the  death  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan  he  was
in  1887  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Illinois. — His
brother,  John  Yilliers,  merchant,  b.  in  Meads
Creek,  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y.,  29  July,  1825,  was
graduated  at  Mount  Morris  seminary,  111.,  in  1844.
In  1860  he  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Re-
publican ticket,  and  he  held  the  office  of  Indian
commissioner  during  President  Grant's  first  term,
and  travelled  10,000  miles  in  this  service.  In  con-
nection with  his  brother,  he  is  now  (1887)  building
the  state  house  of  Texas  for  3,000,000  acres  of  land.

FARWELL,  Nathan  Allen,  senator,  b.  in
Unity.  Me.,  24  Feb.,  1812.  He  received  a  public-
school  education,  graduating  in  1831,  studied  law.
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  in
Rockland,  Me.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1853,  1854,  1861,  and  1862,  serving  as
president  in  1861,  and  of  the  lower  branch  of  the
legislature  in  1860, 1863,  and  1864.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Baltimore  National  Republican  con-
vention in  1864,  and  in  that  year  was  appointed  to
the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  for  the  unexpired
term  of  William  Pitt  Fessenden.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Philadelphia  "  Loyalists'  Convention"
of  1866.  He  travelled  in  Europe  from  1848  till
1847.  He  has  been  master  mariner,  trader,  and
twentv-flve  vears  president  of  marine  insurance.

FARWELL,  Samuel,  contractor, b.abou
d.  in  ^aginaw,  Mich.,  17  Nov..  1875. He  was  a
resident  of  Utica.  N.  V..  and  was  known  through-
out the  United  States  for  fifty  years  as  a  contrac-
tor for  the  building  of  public ^orks. He  began


i


\<  ii  r


I"  MI


srork  on  ili<  Erie  canal  in  I H25,  completed  eon1  i

.iter  navigation  in  Lehigh nviT  in

tin-  Croton  aqueduct  m  1h.*{h,  and  afterward

constructed  the  Boston  water-worka. Se^heequont*

ly  be  engaged  in  railroad  building,  and  executed

usive  contracts  f-r  tin  Sew  York  and  Brie  rail-

itern  railwai ..f  Canada,  the

t  and  Black  river  railroad,  and  the  Flint  and

Marquette  railway.  <>f  which  last  he

Eidenl  and  the  principal  share-holder.  Mr  aim
uilt  the  Brooklyn  water-works.
I  \ss\i  IIT/Charle*  H«  soldier,  b.  in  Leneas-
mntj,  I' i.  87  March,  1848.  He  tmhMtd  in
1881  in  the  99th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  ami  miiv
tcn«l  out  of  Barrios  In  July,  1885,  as  1st  lieutenant.
On  IS  May.  1864, jusl  after  the  taking  of  the  salient
at  Stoottsylvania,  he  captured  the  fiag  of  the  2d
Louisiana  regiment,  taking  the  oolor- bearer  and
color-guard  prisoners,  bnt  WIS  shortly  afterward
wounded,  and  fell  into  the  enemy's  hand-.  With
over  one  hundred  others  he  lay  00  the  liattle-ficld
several  days,  waiting  to  be  taken  to  Richmond,  and
was  flnallv  rescued  by  National  troojw.  During
this  time  he  had  the  flag  concealed  in  the  Using
of  his  blouse.  For  his  gallantly  he  received  the
United  States  medal  of  honor,  a  silver  medal  from

the  directors  of  the  sanitary  fair  at  Philadelphia,

and  the  bronze  "  Kearnv  badge."

FAStJl  ELLE.  Jean  Leila,  educator,  b.  in
France  in  1N0N;  d.  in  Michigan  in  lS(i'2.  lie  OHM
to  the  United  States  in  1H34,  and  became  a  teacher
of  languages.  From  184(5  till  his  death  he  filled
the  professorship  of  modern  languages  and  litera-
ture in  the  University  of  Michigan,  and  was  also
librarian  for  two  years.  In  1854  he  published  in
New  York  "  French  Course,  or  a  New  Method  for
learning  to  Head.  Write,  and  Speak  the  French
Language,"  which  was  extensively  used  in  the
United  States,  and  of  which  80,000  copies  were
sold  in  England.  He  also  published,  besides  other
books,  "Tcleinaque,  with  Notes  and  (iram-
inatical  References."  a"  Colloquial  French  Reader,"
and  a  "General  and  Idiomatical  Dictionary  of  the
French  and  English  languages."

FASSETT,  Cornelia  AdMe  (Stkoxo),  artist,  b.
in  Owasco,  Cayuga  CO..  N.  Y.,  9  Nov.,  1H81.  She
studied  watepcolor  painting  in  New  York  city,
and then spent  two  years in Paris  and Koine.

g aiming  in  oil  under  Matthieu  and  other  artists,
he  returned  to  the  United  states  about  1886,  es-
tablished herself  as  a  portrait-painter  in  Chicago,
111.,  and  in  1H75  became  a  resident  of  Washington.
I>.  C.  She  has  executed  p>rtraits  of  Vice-Presi-
dent Henry  Wilson,  .lust ices  Miller  and  Field,
Chief-Justice  Waits,  President  Garfield.  John  A.
ui,  Clara  Barton,  and  others,  and  in  1N?7-'H0
painted" The  Electoral  Commission  in  Open  Ses-
sion," containing  portraits  of  about  '2(H)  persons.
She  became  a  member  of  the  Chicago  academy
of  design  in  1M?:{.

PAUCHEB  DE  SAINT  MAURICE,  Narcisse
Henri  Edoiiard,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Quebec,  18
April,  1*44.  His  father  was  seigneur  of  Iieau-
mont,  Vincennes,  and  Mont-a-jieine.  He  was  edu-
Bnted  at  the  seminary  of  Ouebec  and  at  the  eoUegS
of  Ste.-Anne  de  la  Poeaticrc.  He  went  to  MezioO
in  1HIJ4.  and  became  a  captain  in  the  4th  Mexican
sharpshooters,  and  afterward  WSJ* aide-de-camp  to

Sen.  the  Viseouni  Courtois  Bonsael d'Hnrbal He

ed  through  the  war, being  in  eleven  battles,
thirty-two  minor  engagements,  and  at  the  sieges

i and Satillo.  at the latter  of  which hs

was  made  prisoner  and  sentenced  to  be  -hot.  but
was  afterward  exchanged.  He  returned  to  <  ana-
da  in  1868,  and  was  for  the  next  fourteen  \earsa


clerk  of  the  legislative  council  of  the  BfSJfffJ
Quebec In  i*si  he  eras  elected  a  representative

for  Pel  lee  basse  to  the  Quela<c  legislative  assembly,
lie  was  a  commissioner  in  1**!  from  the  pro \
of  yiirUv  ui  the  Internal ional  expoaHJoa  <>f  geog-
raphy in  Venice,  and  while  in  BuropS  Wasores
a  chevalier  of  the  legion  of  honor  t
HTvioei  rendered  to  France  in  the  Canadian  press.
He  also  had  l>ecn  created  a  knight  of  the  Irn|«rial
order  of  Guadalou|H<  by  Maximilian,  and  RMI

the  medal  of  the  Mexican  oaeopalgn  from  Narjoieon
III.  He  beoaaae  editor  of  "  Ls  journal  dc  <^uci
in  Inxi.  retaining  his  connection  with  it  for  a
and  a  half,  and  is  BOW  (1887)  alitor  of  "  Lo  < 'ana-
dii-n." He has  contributed largely to  the  Bj
|W|M-r  preai  in France.  Canada,  and the United
States. He  is  a  member  of  various  societies,  and
is  the  author  of  "He  QnebSfl  a  Mexico";  -A  la
Hrunante";  M0hasei  M autres";  "He  TriU.rd  a
Babord";  "  Promenades  dans  le  Uolf  de  St.  \mu-

rent" j  "  Procedures  parieenentairea'']  "Com  de

tacti<pie":  "Relations  de  ee  qui  s'est  passe  aux

fouilles  faites  h.rs  de  la  demolition  de-  oassrnei
des  .lesilites,  a  C^ueltec":  ••  \  hi  Veillec";  "l»ru\
ans  an  Mexiipie  "  ;  and  "I/abbs'  Iwivi-rdn  re."

FAl'CHET,  Jean Antolne  Joseph. Baron,

diplomatist,  b.  in  St.t^uentin.  France,  in  1  ?*'.:{.  lie
am  a  law  student  at  Paris  when  the  Revolution
began,  and  published  a  |iamphlet  in  defence  of  its

principles. He  was  appointed  secretary  of  the

executive  council,  and  was  amlMissador  to  the
United  States  in  171>4-'(i.  He  produced  a  work  on
the  United  States  and  their  relations  with  Fraix  e
(translation  by  W.  Inianc.  Philadelphia,  1"
The  directory  nominated  him  a  commissioner  to
Santo DomingO,  but  he  declined. Under BobbV

parte  be  was  prefect  <>f  the  Var,  and  in  1WW  of  the

Arno.  and  was  made  a  baron.  On  Napoleon's  re-
turn he  was  made  prefect  of  the  Qironoe.

FA  I  LKNER.  Charles  James,  lawver.  b.  in
Martinsburg.  Va..  in  lHtMi;  d.  in  Roydville.  W.  Ya..
1  Nov..  1W4.  He  was  graduated  at  Georgetown
universitv,  I>.  ('..  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to
the  l»ar  in  lH-»t.  Three  years  later  he  U-came  a
member  of  the  Yir-


ginia  house  of  dele-
gates, where  he  in-
troduced a  measure
for  the  gradual  abo-
lition of  slavery  in
Virginia,  declaring
that  all  children  Ixirn

of  slave  parenta  after
1  July,  1K40,  should
be  free,  but  the  prop-
osition was  defeas-
ed, Mr.  Faulkner
after  this  devoted
himself  with  success
to  his  profession.  He
served  as  a  commis-
sioner on  the  de-
puted boimdarv-line

between  Virginia  and  Maryland.  He  eras  sleeted
a  state  senator  in  1841,  ben  resigned  in  the  fol-
lowing year.  In  1848  be  was  elected  to  the  house
of  delegates,  and  introduced  a  bill  that  was  passed
and  sent  to  congress,  which  U-came  the  famous
fugitive-slave  law  of  ISfJO. He  was  a  member  of

the  convention  f"r  the  revision  of  the  State  eoa>
st  it 'it  ion  in  1880. The  next  year  he  was  sleeted

to  the  U.  S.  hones  "f  representatives,  and  VM

sleeted  by  the  Democrat*  vote  for  four  successive

terms,  serving  from  1  DUO,  1881,  tOl  I  Manh,  1869.
\\ 'hen  .lam.  -  Buchanan  became  president  in  It:


*4*%


1-2-2


FAUNCE


PAWCETT


he  offend  .Mr.  Faulkner  the  mission  to  France,
which  be  at  first  declined,  hut  accepted  in  1859.
Louis  Napoleon  was  encouraged  by  him  to  sympa-
thize with  the  south  in  the  approaching  contest,
rat  her  than  with  the  nation,  and  accordingly  Presi-
dent Lincoln  recalled  Mr.  Faulkner,  who,  on  his
return  to  the  United  States,  was  arrested  ami  son*
lined  in  Fort  Warren  as  a  disloval  citizen.  When
released  in  exchange  for  Alfred  Fly,  a  member  of
congress  who  was  imprisoned  in  Richmond,  he
joined  the  Confederate  army,  and  served  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  "  Stonewall  "  Jackson  until  the  death
of  that  officer.  For  some  years  he  was  debarred
the  rights  of  citizenship  on  account  of  having
borne  arms  against  the  government,  but  in  1872
his  political  disabilities  were  removed.  He  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
West  Virginia  in  1872,  and  in  1874  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives  for  the  term
that  expired  on  3  March,  1877.  He  was  an  un-
successful candidate  subsequently  for  the  U.  S.
senate  and  for  the  governorship  of  West  Virginia,
after  which  he  retired  to  private  life. — His  son,
Charles  James,  senator,  b.  in  Martinsburg,  W.
Va.,  about  1840,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  served  as  a  private  in  the  Confederate
army  during  the  civil  war,  and  after  its  close  stud-
ied law,  and  rose  rapidly  in  the  profession.  In
1880  he  was  appointed  a  circuit  judge,  to  fill  an
unexpired  term,  and  in  1882  was  elected  to  the
same  office.  On  5  May,  1887,  he  was  elected  as  a
Democrat  to  the  U.  S.  senate  from  West  Virginia.

FAUNCE,  Daniel  Worcester,  clergyman,  b.  in
Plymouth,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1829.  He  is  a  direct  de-
scendant of  Thomas  Faunce,  who  was  for  forty
years  ruling  elder  of  the  1st  church  at  Plymouth,
Maes.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1850,  and
received  his  theological  education  at  Newton  theo-
logical institution.  He  was  ordained  as  pastor  of
the  Baptist  church  in  Somerville,  Mass.,  in  1853,
and  has  been  pastor  in  Worcester,  Maiden,  and
Lynn,  Mass.,  and  also  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  and  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  He  has  travelled  in  Europe,  Egypt,
and  Palestine.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Amherst  in  1880.  Dr.  Faunce  is  the
author  of  "The  Christian  in  the  World,"  an  essay
that  received  the  Fletcher  prize  offered  by  Dart-
mouth college ;  "  A  Young  Man's  Difficulties  with
his  Bible " ;  "  The  Christian  Experience  " ;  and
"  The  Resurrection  in  Nature  and  in  Revelation."

FAUNTLEROY,  Thomas  Turner,  soldier,  b.
in  Richmond  county,  Va.,  6  Oct.,  1796 ;  d.  in
Leesburg,  Va.,  12  Sept.,  1883.  He  was  commis-
sioned a  lieutenant  in  the  war  of  1812— '15  when
but  seventeen  years  old.  He  studied  law  in  Win-
chester, practised  in  Warrenton,  and  in  1823  was
elected  to  the  legislature.  In  1836  he  was  commis-
sioned a  major  of  dragoons  in  the  regular  army,
and  served  in  the  Seminole  war.  In  September,
1845,  he  was  detached  from  Gen.  Taylor's  army  to
hold  in  check  the  Indians  on  the  frontier  of  Texas.
From  this  duty  he  was  ordered  to  join  Gen.  Taylor,
and  subsequently,  in  Mexico,  he  commanded  the
cavalry  of  Gen.  Scott's  army.  In  1849  he  was  pro-
moted to  the  lieutenant-colonelcy  of  the  1st  dra-
goons, and  commanded  the  troops  on  frontier  duty
in  Texas.  In  1850  he  was  promoted  colonel.  In
the  winter  of  1854-'5  he  conducted  a  campaign
against  the  hostile  Indian  tribes  of  the  Rocky
mountains,  and  in  1858  he  made  another  mid-
winter campaign  against  the  Indians  in  New  Mexi-
co. In  May,  1861,  ne  entered  the  Confederate  ser-
vice. He  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general  by
the  convention  of  Virginia, and  placed  in  command
of  Richmond  and  its  defences. But,  after  the  or-


ganization of  the  Confederate  government,  it  re-

nued  to  confirm  his  commission,  although  he
ranked  all  the  officers  but  one  that  bad  resigned
bom  the  l.S.armvto  serve  the  Confederacy. —  His
son,  Archibald  Magill,  phvsician,  b.  in  Warren-
ton, Va.,  8  July,  1837 ;  d.  'in  Staunton.  Va..  H)
June,  1886,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  l" Di-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1856,  and  in  186
tered  the  U.  S.  army  as  assistant  surgeon ;  but  he
and  his  brother,  a  lieutenant  in  the  na\
signed  at  the  same  time  with  their  father.  He  be-
came a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was
president  of  the  board  for  the  admission  of  sur-
geons, and  chief  officer  on  the  medical  staff  of  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston,  and  served  with  him  until  the
battle  of  Seven  Pines.  He  was  then  ordered  to
build  and  organize  the  hospitals  at  Danville,  Va.,
and  afterward  had  charge  of  the  military  hospital
at  Staunton,  Va.,  until  the  war  ended.  He  re-
mained and  practised  at  Staunton  after  the  war,
and  was  for  several  years  superintendent  of  the
lunatic  asylum  at  that  place.  His  contributions  to
medical  literature  include  papers  on  bromide  of
potassium,  chloral  hydrate,  the  use  of  chloroform
in  obstetrical  practice,  and  a  "Report  upon  Ad-
vance in  Therapeutics,"  which  was  printed  in  the
"  Transactions  of  the  Virginia  medical  society. —
Another  son,  Thomas  T.,  became  judge  of  the
Virginia  supreme  court  of  appeals. — Their  sister,
Mary  Thurston,  married  Surgeon-General  Barnes,
of  the  U.  S.  army.

FAUQUIER,  Francis,  colonial  governor  of
Virginia,  b.  about  1720;  d.  in  Virginia,  3  March,
1768.  He  was  a  man  of  a  cultivated  mind  and
liberal  religious  views,  who  counted  Thomas  Jeff-
erson among  his  friends,  and  was  greatly  respected
in  the  colony  for  his  private  worth.  He  succeeded
Dinwiddie  in  1758,  and  was  lieutenant-governor
until  his  death.  He  dissolved  the  assembly  in  1764
after  it  had  adopted  Patrick  Henry's  resolutions
declaring  that  the  sole  right  of  taxation  resided  in
the  colonial  legislature;  and  when  Massachusetts
invited  the  other  colonies  to  join  in  a  general  con-
gress, in  1765,  he  refused  to  summon  the  newly
elected  house  of  burgesses  in  order  that  it  might
appoint  delegates.  Except  in  combating  disloy-
alty, he  sympathized  with  the  colonists,  and  was
one  of  the  ablest  and  most  popular  of  the  royal
governors.  He  published  several  financial  essays,
among  them  one  on  "Raising  Money  for  Support
of  the  War"  (London,  1757).

FAVILLE,  Oran,  educator,  b.  in  Manheim,
Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  13  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  Wa-
verly,  Iowa,  3  Oct.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1844,
and  after  teaching  in  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  and  West
Poultney,  Vt.,  became,  in  1852,  professor  of  an-
cient languages  in  McKendree  college,  Lebanon,
111.  He  was  president  of  Ohio  Wesleyan  female
college,  Delaware,  Ohio,  in  1853-'5.  but  retired  to
a  farm  in  Mitchell  county,  Iowa,  on  account  of  his
health,  and  was  subsequently  county  judge,  lieu-
tenant-governor of  Iowa,  and  president,  and  after-
ward secretary,  of  the  State  board  of  education.
In  1863  he  was  one  of  the  board  of  visitors  to  the
U.  S.  military  academy.  He  edited  the  "  Iowa
School  Journal  "  in  1863-7,  was  state  superintend-
ent of  public  instruction  in  1864-'6,  and  also  presi-
dent of  the  State  teachers'  association.  He  re-
signed these  offices  on  account  of  failing  health,
and  lived  in  retirement  from  1867  until  his  death.

FAWCETT,  Edgar,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  26  May.  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia" ;n  ist'.i".  and  has  since  devoted  himself,  to
literature. His  books  include  "SJiort  Poems  for


FAXON


m


•pic"  (New V..rk.  P  irj.l.-  nn.l

Pine  Linen,"  11 11. .v.  I  (1878);  "  KllenSton H-
*  Poems  of  Fantasy  tad  raeeion  "  ( Ifcmton,  1h?n);
MA  Hopeless  Cam"  <l**ii: "A Gentleman >>f
:  ••  An  Ambitious  Woman "(1888);
"Snic  ana  Story."  poem*,  "Tinkling  Cymbs
tale,  nml  "The  Adventun  -  ..f  a  Widow  n  (1884);

itberford"  (1884);  "The  Bantling  Ball."  mi
anonymous  satin-  in  verse,  ami  "Tha  Kan  King
Arthur,"  an  opera-libretto  (New  York,  inxi

ml Silhouettes" (Boston. iHHo); "  IC< •rii:itu-<-
an.l  8);  ami  "The House  at High

Bridge"  (1887). He  has  alao  vrittan  successful
plavs,  including  "  A  Palse  Friend"  <1N80).

I  WON.  Henrj  ».,  journalist,  b,  in  Buffalo.
n  v..  about  1880;  d.  in  Washington.  !».('.,  11
S|it..  lstU.  Be  entered  tin*  navy  as  an  appren-
tice. Mt  left  it  after  two  or  three  years,  ana  after
serving  as  a  telegraph  clerk  in  Troy,  N.  V.,  ami
then  a>  clerk  iii  a  candle  factory.  **—**■—  an  aditor
of  the  Buffalo  "  lb-public"  in  1886.  He  was  after-
ward on  the  staff  of  the  Buffalo  "Times,"  and  in
1861  became  an  army  oorwcuondonl  for  New  York
I»a|HTs.  Aiming  his  most  noted  efforts  were  the
"Silver  liake  Snake  Story  "  and  the  "A.  P.  L.
Parin  Papers."  The  snake  story,  which  was  the
original  of  the  sea-serpent  tales  that have  since

BM familiar, was  published in the Buffalo

public."  and  professed  to  be  a  description  of  a
monster  teen  in  Silver  I>ake,  Wyoming  MX,  N.  Y.

FAY.  Francis  Ball,  merchant,  b.  in  Smth-
borough.  Ma—..  12  .lune,  1793;  d.  in  Siuth  Lancas-
ter. Mass.,  6  Oct..  1876.  His  parents  were  poor,  and
he  had  little  education.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he
"bought  his  time"  of  his  father  for  880  a  year,
lie  attended  the  public  scales  in  Dock-square.
Boston,  in  1811— '12,  then  served  as  market-man
and  butcher,  and  in  1817  became  a  merchant  in
Southborough.  He  was  postmaster  and  town  treas-
urer there  in  1817-'21.  deputy  sheriff  of  Worcester
count v  in  ls24-':5l).  a  !iieml>er  of  the  legislature  in
1830-M.  1834-'«.  and  1840,  and  of  the  state  senate
in  1843-'5  and  1868.  He  removed  to  Chelsea  in
1831,  built  one  of  the  first  houses  there,  bought
the  first  ferry-boats  running  to  Boston  from  that
place,  and  was  first  president  of  the  Chelsea  miv-
Engs  bank.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
to  fill  a  vacancy,  serving  in  1852-'3,  and  in  1857
was  first  mayor  of  Chelsea,  but  declined  a  re-elei-
tion.  In  1816-'24  he  was  an  active  member  of  the
state  militia,  reaching  the  rank  of  colonel.  He  en-
dowed the  Fay  free  library  at  Smthliorough  in
1881,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  State  indus-
trial school  for  girls,  and  was  connected  with  it  as
commissioner,  trustee,  and  treasurer  in  1854-'64.
In  1S.X  he  removed  to  Smth  Lancaster,  that  he
might  Ik*  near  the  institution.

FAY,  Jonas,  patriot,  1>.  in  Hardwiek.  Mass.,  17
Jan.,  1737:  d.  in  Bennington.  Vt..  6  March,  1S1S.
He  received  a  good  education,  and  liecame  a  phy-
sician. He  was  clerk  of  a  Massachusetts  company
at  Fort  Edward  in  17."><i.  removed  to  Bennington
in  1 788, and  biwmfl  prominent  among  the  settlers
on  the  New  Hampshire  grants,  going  as  their
agent  to  New  York  in  1778,  to  lay  their  grievance
before  Got.  Tryon.  He  was  clerk  of  the  con-
vention of  March.  1774.  that  resolved  to  defend  by
force  Ethan  Allen,  and  the  others  who  were  out-
lawed by  the  legislature  of  New  York.  I>r.  Fay
was  surgeon  under  Allen  at  Ticonderoga.  ami
afterward  in  OoL  Warner's  regiment.  He  I
member  of  the  convention  of  January,  1777.  whv  h

ired  Vermont an  independent  state,  and  drew

up  the  declaration  and  petition  t-.  oongraai  an-
nouncing the  act  and  the  reasons  for  it. He  was


tutional  convention  of  July.

•In-  council  of  safety,  a  member  of  the

uncil  in  1778  86,  judge  of  tha  supreme

court  in  1988,  ami  of  probate  In  IT88-*7,  and  agent

of  the  state  t..  oongraai  in  January.  I '.

177!».  .lune.  17*1,  and  February,  1788. He  pnb-

li-hcil.  in  connection  with  Ethan  Allen, a  pamphlet

mi the New Hampshire and New York OOntTO-

llartfi.nl.  Conn.. 1780).— Hi*  SDH, II.  in. in

\Hcn.  ii.  in  Bennington,  Vt,  in  1778 ;  d. tbata,

20  Aug.,  1865,  was  a  cadet  in  tin-  l'.  S.  military
academy  fn-m  March.  1*07.  till  June.  1H08.  when
he  waa  graduated  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  did  garrison  duty  at
various  forts,  and  was  mustered  out  M  18  .lune,
18181  H, •  irm  chief  forage-master  of  the  northern
division  of  the  ariuv  in  1H1«^'17.  and  l'.  S.  military
store-ke.-iM-r  at  Albany,  N.  Y..  from  lKlMtill  lH4'i.
lb-  pulifished  an  u Official  Account  of  Battlea
Fought  between  the  Army  ami  Naw  of  the  United
States  and  Great  Britain  in  1818-18 M  (1818V

FAY.  Theodore  Sedgwick,  author,  b,  in  New
York  city.  10  Feb..  1K07.  Hi  Motived  a  liU-ral
education,  and  studied  law,  but  never  practised.
In  1888  he  liecame  associate  editor  of  the  New
York  "  Mirror,"  under  the  joint  control  of  himself.
George  P.  Morris,  and  Natnaniel  P.  Willis.  Soon
then-after  Fay  trav-
eOad  in  Kurope,
and  wrote  an  ex-
tended series  of  let-
tersof  travel,  which
were  published  in
his  paper.  He  con-
tinued as  co-editor
of  the  "  Mirror"  for
several  vears,  and
eventually  became
secretary  of  the
American  legation
in  Berlin,  uenna-
ny,  remaining  at
that  post  from  1837
until  1853.  From
18.k{  until  1861  he
was  minister-resi-
dent in  Bern, Switz-
erland, since  which
time  he  has  lived  in  retirement in Berlin. His

E"  Mentions  comprise  "  Dream  and  Reveries  of  a
•t  Man'*  (N.w  York.  1888);  "The  Minute-
k"(1833):  "Norman  Leslie  *»  (1888);  "Svdnev
Clifton"  (1888);  "Countess  Ida"  (1840) :  "H..U>-
ken,  a  Romance  "  (1843) ;  *•  Bobarl  Rueful "  (Phila-
delphia. 1844):  "I'lric,  or  the  Voices,"  poeii
York.  1881):  "Views  of  Christianity"  (1856);
"  History  of  Switzerland  "  ( 1H4M>> ;  "(ireat  Outline!
of  Geographv  "  (1867);  "First  Steps  in  Geography  "
<1N7:{);  and  "A  History  of  Germany  "  (1888} lie

also  published  i  series  of  papan  on  Bendmenearo>

His  "Norman  Leslie."  a  storv  of  Old  New  York
cit  v.  was  successful! v  produced  as  a  play.

FKAIUNG.  Albert,  philanthropist,  h.  in  Hing-
ham.  Mil-.,  II  March.  1 7!»M :  d.  there.  24  May.
1N7">.  After  attending  the  public  school  of  his
native  town  he  became  a  clerk  in  Worcester.
Mass.,  and  was  afterward  a  ship-chandler  in  Bos-
ton. He  retired  from  this  business  in  18(18,  and
•  I  in  manufacturing,  accumulating  a  large
fortune,  from  which  he  gave  liberally.  Hi-  il-na-
.inoiinte.l  to  about  $200,000.  including
$30,000  to  the Hingham public library,  and an

equal  mm  to  the  college  of  Liberia. Ha  van

pnaidenl Of the American colonization -

and  of  several  charitable  organizations,  and  wa>


<^e^rj/!<7i^


424


FEARING


FEBIGEB


also  noted  for  his  many  private  acts  of  charity.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1841,  and  for
many  years  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  first  as
a  conservative  Whig  and  afterward  as  a  Democrat.
He  was  an  earnest  supporter  of  Harrison  in  1940,
and  received  a  service  of  plate  from  his  friends  for
his  efforts  in  the  canvass,  and  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Tavlor  ticket  in  1848.

FEARING,  I >r ii  jam  in  Dana,  soldier,  b.  in
Harmar.ohin,  to  Oct.,  1837;  d.  there,  9  Dec,  1881.
He  was  graduated  at  Marietta  in  185(5,  and  entered
a  Philadelphia  publishing  house.  In  April,  1861,  he
enlisted  in  the  2d  Ohio  regiment,  took  part  witli  it
in  the  battle  of  Hull  Hun,  t>ecame  adjutant  of  the
36th  Ohio  in  August,  and  on  17  Dec.  was  made
major  of  the  77th  Ohio,  which  he  commanded  at
Shiloh.  On  26  Aug.,  1862,  he  was  made  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  92d  Ohio,  which  he  had  assisted
in  raising,  and  was  promoted  to  colonel  on  22
March,  1863.  Ho  defended  Hoover's  Gap  at  the
head  of  three  regiments,  and  distinguished  him-
self at  Chickamauga,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  He  rejoined  his  regiment  in  March,
1864,  led  it  at  Resaca,  Kenesaw,  Atlanta,  and
Jonesboro,  and  on  2  Dec.  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  commanded  a  brigade
in  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea,  and  was  again  se-
verely wounded  at  Bentonville,  where  he  led  a
charge,  of  which  Anson  C.  McClurg,  in  his  "  Lost
Chance  of  the  Confederacy,"  says,  "  Upon  this
movement  of  Gen.  Fearing's  brigade,  in  all  proba-
bility, turned  the  fortunes  of  the  day."  After
the  war  he  engaged  in  manufacturing  in  Cincin-
nati, but  illness  caused  by  his  wounds  forced  him
to  retire  in  1869,  and  finally  ended  his  life.  Gen.
William  T.  Sherman  spoke  of  him  as  "  the  bravest
man  that  fought  on  Shiloh 's  field."

FEARON,  Henry  Bradshaw,  English  travel-
ler, b.  in  London  about  1770.  He  was  a  London
surgeon,  and  was  sent  by  thirty-nine  English  fami-
lies to  the  United  States  in  1817  to  ascertain  what
part  of  this  country,  if  any,  would  be  suitable  for
their  residence.  He  gave  an  account  of  his  ex-
periences in  "  Narrative  of  a  Journey  of  5,000
Miles  through  the  Eastern  and  Western  States  of
America"  (London,  1818).  Sydney  Smith,  in  a  re-
view of  this  book,  said  that  its  author  was  M  no
lover  of  America,  and  a  little  given  to  exaggerate
in  his  views  of  vices  and  prejudices."  Fearon  also
published  a  work  on  "Cancers"  (London,  1784).

FEATHERSTON,  Winfleld  Scott,  soldier,  b.
in  Rutherford  county,  Tenn.,  8  Aug.,  1821.  He  was
educated  at  various  academies,  and  in  1836,  while
at  school  in  Georgia,  served  for  three  months  as  a
volunteer  against  the  Creek  Indians.  He  then
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.
He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  in  1847-'51,  but  was  defeated  for  a
third  term  by  the  Union  candidate.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  1852,
and  was  sent  by  his  state  to  Kentucky  in  Decem-
ber, 1860,  to  confer  with  the  authorities  on  the
subject  of  secession.  In  May,  1861,  he  became
colonel  of  the  17th  Mississippi  regiment.  He
served  in  Virginia  in  1861-2,  and  on  4  March  of
the  latter  year  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general
for  gallantry  at  Hall's  Bluff.  He  was  wounded  on
the  fifth  day  of  the  battles  around  Richmond,  and
in  January,  1863,  was  transferred  to  Vicksburi;  at
his  own  request.  He  commanded  an  expedition
sent  to  meet  Porter's  gun-boats,  ascending  Dear
Creek,  joined  Johnston  in  Georgia  in  May.  1864,
and  continued  with  that  army  till  the  surrender  in
commanding  a  division  much  of  the  time.
After  the  war  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  law,


and  was  a  member  of  the  Mississippi  legislature  in
1876-'8  and  1880-'2.  In  1K«1  he  became  judge  of
the  2d  judicial  circuit  of  the  state.

FEATIIEKSTOMI A  Kill.  Geonre  William,
traveller.  b,  in  1?K0;  d.  in  Havre,  France. 28  Sept..
1806.  In  his  early  life  lie  ipenl  many  man  in
North  America,  and  in  1834-'o  made  for  the  I  .  S.
war  department  a  geological  inspection  of  part  of
the  western  country.  In  his  reports,  which  were
printed  by  order  of  congress,  he  is  called  "  United
States  geologist."  The  government  authorized
these  examinations  to  be  made  only  in  the  terri-
tories of  the  United  States;  but  Featherstonhaagb
took  notes  upon  all  the  country  passed  over  in  his
journeys,  for  use  when  congress  should  authorize  a
geological  map  of  the  United  States.  Such  a  map
is  now  projected  (1887),  fifty  years  after  Feather-
stonhaugh  s  surveys.  On  account  of  his  thorough
knowledge  of  the  country,  he  was  appointed  by  the
British  government  a  commissioner  to  settle  the
northern  boundary  of  the  United  States,  under  the
Ashburton  treaty,  and  for  the  successful  execution
of  this  task  was  made  British  consul  for  the  de-
partments of  Calvados  and  Seine.  France.  His
writings  on  statistical  and  political  subjects  were
clear  and  vigorous,  and  his  geological  memoirs
merited  the  approval  of  his  friends  Muck  lam  1  and
Murchison.  His  publications  include  a  translation
of  Cicero's  "  Republic  "  (New  York,  1828) ;  "  Geo-
logical Report  of  the  Elevated  Country  between
the  Missouri  and  Red  Rivers  "  (Washington,  1835);
"  Geological  Reconnoissance  in  1835  from  Green
Bay  to  Coteau  de  Prairie  "  (1836) ;  "  Observations
on  the  Ashburton  Treaty  "  (London,  1842) ;  "  Kx-
cursion  through  the  Slave  States "  (New  York,
1844);  and  "Canoe  Voyage  up  the  Minnay  Sotor"
(2  vols.,  London,  1847).

FEBIGER,  Christian,  soldier,  b.  on  the  island
of  Fllnen,  Denmark,  in  1746 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1796.  His  father  died  when  the  son
was  about  sixteen  years  old,  and  the  boy,  after  re-
ceiving a  military  education,  went  to  Santa  Cruz
on  the  staff  of  his  uncle,  who  had  been  appointed
governor  of  that  island.  He  travelled  through  the
American  colonies  on  a  tour  of  observation  in  1772,
and  in  the  following  year  engaged  in  commerce  in
the  eastern  states.  He  joined  a  Massachusetts
regiment  on  28  April,  1775,  became  its  adjutant
shortly  afterward,  and  distinguished  himself  at
Bunker  Hill.  He  was  in  Arnold's  Quebec  expedi-
tion, was  taken  prisoner  at  the  storming  of  that
city  on  31  Dec.,  1775,  and  was  sent  to  New  York
with  other  prisoners  in  September,  1776.  On  13
Nov.  he  was  appointed  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
Virginia  line.  He  joined  his  regiment,  the  11th
Virginia,  on  being  exchanged,  1  Jan.,  1777,  and
fought  in  the  Philadelphia  campaign,  being  made
colonel  of  the  2d  Virginia  on  26  Sept.,  after  the
battle  of  the  Brandywine.  He  was  on  the  right  of
Greene's  wing  at  Germantown,  led  4,000  men,  with
two  guns,  at  Monmouth,  and  commanded  the  right
column  in  the  attack  on  Stony  Point,  where  he  dis-
tinguished himself,  taking  the  British  commander
prisoner  in  person.  He  was  sent  to  Philadelphia
on  1  Sept.,  1780,  to  forward  stores  to  the  army,  and
was  afterward  on  recruiting  duty  in  Virginia,
though  he  was  in  the  field  at  intervals,  and  was

firesent  at  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis. 1  le  ret  ired
rom  active  service  on  1  Jan.,  1783,  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  on  30  Sept..  and  then  settled  in

f'hiladelphia,  where  he  engaged  in  business.  Dur-
bg  his  military  service  FeDJger  bore  the  sobri-
quet of  "  Old  Denmark."  He  was  treasurer  of
Pennsylvania  from  13  Nov.,  1789,  until  his  death.
— His  grandson,  John  Carson,  naval  officer,  b.  in


HTKIt


4J0


Pitt-burc.  I'i.  II  Feb.,  IH'-M,  .nt.-r.Ml  the  naw
from  Onto  it-  u  midshipman,  14  Sept.,  Ikjjh.  ami
wax  iti  thf  "Concord,'  <>f  tin-  Brazil  aquadron,
when  -he  vim  wn-ckul  on  the  eastern  coast  of
Afrioa  in  i^M.  Hi-  became  passed  midshipman,
:■  ut« -mint.  :{(>  April.  1888.  He
was  on  tin-  ••(MTimiiiti.wn,"  of  tin-  BhI  India
squadron,  in  1868  '60,  and  on  the  sh>op  "Savan-
niili  "  iii  1861,  and  on  ii  Au.-..  1868,  was  commis-
sioned oommander,  ami  assigned  to  the  steamer
of  the  Western  gulf  blockading
squadron. Altar  ooinmanding  rariom  vuestei  ■

that  ami  tin-  msSJafippi  squadron,  hi-  WM  niven
the  "  Mattnltesct,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squad-
ron, in  1864,  and  in  that  steamer  took  twit,  on  5
May.  lmu.  in  the  fight  between  the  little  fleet  of
Ian  vessels,  onder  Cast,  Melanotou  Smith,  and
the  Ooofederate  ram  "Albemarle,'1  In  AlU-marle
souml.  N.  C,  In  this  engagement  the  ram  was  de-
feated, and  her  tender,  the  "  Bombshell,"  raptured,
ami  Fchiger  was  oommended  for  his  "gallantry
and  -kill*'  l>y  ('apt.  Smith  and  Rear- Admiral
Samuel  I*.  Le.  He  commanded  the  "  Ashuelot,"
of  the  A-iatic  squadron,  in  lHM-'H,  and  on  «>  May
of  the  latter  year  was  promoted  to  captain.  He
was  ins|M>ctor  of  naval  reserve  lands  in  1809-'?'.2.
was  made  commodore,  9  Aug..  1H?4,  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  examiners  in  lH74-'<;,  and  com-
mandant of  the  Washington  navv-yard  in  lN?l&-'80.

He  was  promoted  to  roar  admire!,  i  Fell..  iks2,  and
on  1  July,  1H82,  was  retired  OB  his  c.wn  application.
having  been  in  the  service  over  fortv  vears,

FK( 'IITKK.  Charles  Albert,  actor,  h.  in  Lon-
don, England.  2.1  Oct.,  1N'24:  d.  near  (juakertown.
Pa.,  5  Aug..  1979k  His  father  was  of  (Jcrman  j*r-
entage,  but  lx>rn  in  France.  His  mother  was  an
Englishwoman. Charles  was  taken  to France  at

an  early  age
and  there  edu-
cated. He  gave
himself  for  a
time  to  the
studyand  prac-
tice of  the
sculptor's  art,
but  had  a
natural  in-
clination for
the  stage,  and
made  his  dt-
biit  at  the
Salle  Moliere
in  1840  in  a
•ps .  *>  piece called

\^7lcL4/e&44&$>  "  I  *  Marl  de

/  ((-*  la  Veuve."  Af-

*  VJ  ter  a tour  of

tin-  principal  cities  and  visiting  Italy,  he  went  in
1844  to  Berlin,  where  he  had  graal  success  as  Du-
val in"  La  dame  au  Camclias."  After  perform-
ing in  London  in  French,  he  appeared  in  an  Kng-
li-h  version  of  "Rny  Bias  "at  the  1'rincess  theatre.
tot,  I860,  In  the  following  year.  80  March.
at  the  same  house,  he  a-toiii-hed  and  perplexed
London  playgoers  by  his  marvellous  impenonatkm
Of  Hamlet  in  English.  It  was  not  the  Hamlet  to
which  they  had  been  accustomed,  but  was  never-
theless a  Rand  conception  well  carried  out.  In
the  following  October  be  appeared  as  Othello,  pro*
dneing  a  similar  effect. He  iiecame  lessee  <>f  the

am  in  January.  lsM.  and  brought  out  in
cession  "The  Duke's  Motto." M Ball  Desnaum,"  end

tig Strike." Claude Melllotte. in the

is,"  Iiecame  one  of  his  favorite  ehar-
:-. He  came  to  the  United  States  at  the  close


of  I *»«!'.».  in 1. 1  ap|«-ared  at  NiUo-  in  the  t  liar,
of  Hamlet.  A  few  nights  In-fore  he  had  seen  Kd-
w  in  IiiMith  in  the  -nine  character,  and  had  Is-cn
-insularly  demoiistnitive  in  hi-  approval  His  own
impersonation  of  the  character  was  very  dilTerent,
but  it  was  well  received.  The  large  audience  was
enthusiastic,  and  the  critic-  sought  for  DM
rather  than  faults.  After  a  tour  through  the
states  he  returned  to  jBoropO.  He  again  visited
the  I'nited  States  in  1*?"J,  ha\ing  deterinined  to
make thi-  country his home. Wherever he iq>-

[•eared  he  commanded  lain  audiences  and  almost
abuloii-  prue-:  but  his  American  career  was  not
a  success  in  the  full  sense  of  the  Word,  As  a
manager  in  BotSOB  he  fniliil.  As  a  place  of  retreat,
when  not  on  starring  engagements,  he  purchased  a
farm  in  the  village  of  Richmond.  Ilucks  co..  three
miles  from  t^uakertown.  I'a.,  and  in  the  company
of  Lizzie  Price,  whom  lie  had  married,  he  there
s|M-nt  most  of  hi-  time.  He  became  very  corpu-
lent, which  untitled  him  for  some  of  hi-  favorite
characters.  He  contracted  an  incurable  malady,
and,  after  considerable  suffering,  died  on  his  farm,
in  actor  he  despised  all  stage  conventionalities,
but  was  sympathetic  ami  realistic.  If  he  had  had
more  restraining,  more  self-governing  power,  he
would  have  lieen  greater  M  an  actor  and  M  a  man.
FKDKKMANN.  Nicholas,  traveller,  b.  in  Clin.
Swabia,  in  1501:  d.  in  Vienna.  Austria,  in  1550.
He  early  start ed  on  a  military  career,  and  was
engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Welsers,  wealthy
merchants  of  Augsburg,  to  whom  Charles  V.  had
granted  the  province  of  Venezuela  in  payment  of
the  sums  they  had  lent  him.  They  were  to  conquer
the  country  at  their  own  eilMMMl.  Ollllof  Spanish
troops,  fit  out  four  vessels,  build  two  cities  and
three  forts  within  two  years  after  they  took  pos-
session, and  send  out  156  German  miners.  Fedcr-
nmim  was  appointed  captain  of  one  of  thcconi|»anies
of  the  Spanish  soldiers,  and,  accompanied  by  the
miners,  embarked  at  San  Luoar  de  llarrameda,  I
Oct.,  1888;  His  ship  was  driven  on  one  of  tin-
Canary  Islands,  and  afterward  attacked  by  pirates,
who  made  him  prisoner:  but  after  paying  a  heavy
ransom  was  released  again,  set  sail,  ana  reached
Santo  Domingo  in  16801  He  then  went  to  Com,
where  he  was  left  in  order  to  acclimate  the  troops,
and  received  the  title  of  captain-general  lieuten-
ant. Having  many  soldiers  for  whom  he  could
find  DO  employment,  he  determined  to  make  a
journey  into  the  interior  or  along  the  southern
coast.  "My  preparations  being  complete,"  he
savs,  "on  the  l'Jth  of  Oeutember  I  eel  out  with
a  hundred  men  on  foot  and  sixteen  on  horscliack,
accompanied  by  a  hundred  Indians,  who  carried
our  provisions  and  all  that  was  necessary  for  our
subsistence  or  defence."  It  is  difficult  to  deter-
mine the  point  that  Feilermaiin  and  his  compan-
ions reached,  or  to  Identify  the  tribes  through
which  they  passed.  It  is  conjectured  that  they
travelled  southwesterly  as  far  as  the  les-er  chains
of  the  Andes,  a  distance  of  5(H)  miles.  In  some
cases  the  Indians  defended  themselves  fiercely.
Federniaiin  lost  several  of  his  men.  ami  was  seri-
ously wounded.  These  checks  were  cruelly  avenged
on  the  unfortunate Indians. The  Spaniards  then

turned  toward  the  toast,  folio m lag  it to  Ooro,

which  they  reached  on  1?  March.  188L  Here
l'eilermann  was  detained  by  a  fever  until  9  I
when  he  sailed  for  Santo  Domingo  and  thence  to
Spain.  He  reached  Seville  mi  16  Jan..  1688,  After
an  audience  with  the  empTO*.  he  returned  to  Augs-
burg, where  he  wrote  a  narrative  of  his  travels.
Ambro-ius  Al  finger,  captain-general  of  Venezuela,
under  whom he had served,  having  died.  Feder-


-»,><;


IT.KHAN


FEIJO


ma 1 1 ii  at  once  sought  the  emperor  and  asked  for
the  vacant  post.  This  appointment  he  received,
hut  soon  after  it  was  revoked  at  the  request  of  the
Welsers,  and  the  office  given  to  Georges  (fa  Spire.
lie  determined,  however,  to  return  to  Venezuela,
and.  accepting  the  office  of  lieutenant  under  the
governor,  he  reached  Coro  22  Dec  15:54.  with  Spire
and  1(50  soldiers.  They  were  first  to  attempt  dis-
coveries toward  the  south,  and  t  he  troops,  who  were
divided  into  two  bodies  under  the  respective  com-
mands of  the  two  German  officers,  were  to  meet  in
the  neighborhood  of  Barquisimeto.  While  Georges
de  Spire  went  eastward,  Federmann  journeyed  to
the  west,  with  his  mind  well  made  up  never  to  re-
join his  associate,  but  to  go  on  a  voyage  of  dis-
covery on  his  responsibility.  Keeping  always  to
the  west,  and  in  a  continual  struggle  with  the  In-
dians, he  overcame  prodigious  obstacles  on  his
route,  which  are  well  depicted  in  the  pages  of  the
Spanish  historians,  Piedrahita  and  Castellanos.
Finally  he  arrived  in  New  Granada,  and  had  the
good  fortune  to  reach  the  plateau  of  Bogota  at  the
very  time  that  Quesada  and  Sebastian  de  Benalca-
zar  appeared  there  at  the  head  of  their  troops.
One  had  got  there  by  following  the  course  of  the
Magdalena  river,  the  other  had  come  through
Ecuador.  The  meeting  was  by  no  means  a  grati-
fying one  to  the  three  chiefs,  and  heated  discus-
sions followed  as  to  which  of  the  three  conquerors
this  rich  province  should  belong.  It  was  finally
decided  to  take  the  question  to  Spain  to  be  decided
by  Charles  V.  Federmann  left  with  regret  a  re-
gion rich  in  precious  metals,  and  almost  as  ad-
vanced in  civilization  as  Mexico  or  Peru,  to  present
himself  at  the  court  of  Charles  V.,  1538.  He  now
received  the  reward  of  his  insubordination;  the
Welsers,  indignant  at  his  treatment  of  Georges  de
Spire,  threatened  him  with  a  ruinous  lawsuit,
which,  however,  they  were  induced  to  discontinue.
The  bold  captain  could  not  face  his  misfortunes,
which  he  considered  the  result  of  sheer  injustice,
and  the  courageous  spirit,  which  had  dared  with-
out flinching  all  the  dangers  of  the  New  World,
was  quelled  by  grief  and  mortification.  His  work,
which  he  left  with  his  brother-in-law,  John  Kiel-
haber,  a  burgess  of  Ulm,  when  he  set  out  on  his
last  trip,  was  published  in  German.  The  title,
translated,  is  "  Fine  and  agreeable  narrative  of  the
first  voyage  of  Nicholas  I1  edermann,  the  younger,
of  Ulm,  to  the  Indias  of  the  Ocean  sea,  of  all  that
happened  to  him  in  this  country  up  to  his  return
to  Spain,  written  with  brevity,  and  diverting  to
read  (Haguenau,  1557).  This  book  gives  curious
details  concerning  the  Indians,  their  manners,  and
the  means  adopted  to  subdue  them.  The  author
expresses  himself  with  a  simplicity  that  wins  con-
fidence. A  French  translation  was  inserted  in
Ternaux-Compans',  entitled  "  Voyages,  relations  et
raemoires  originaux  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de  la
decouverte  de  I'Amenque,  publies  pour  la  premiere
fois  en  francais "  (Paris,  1837).  The  account  of
Federmann's  second  voyage  is  lost,  but  a  summary
of  it,  with  his  portrait,  may  be  found  in  the  works
of  Castellanos  and  Piedrahita.

FEEHAN,  Patrick  A.,  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in
Tipperarv,  Ireland,  in  1829.  He  was  educated  at
Maynooth  college,  Kildare,  and  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  1852.  He  selected  St.  Louis  as
the  scene  of  his  missionary  labors,  and  was  ap-
pointed president  of  the  Seminary  of  Carondelet.
He  acquired  great  reputation  as  pastor  of  the
Church  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  in  St.  Louis,
and  in  1865  was  consecrated  bisnop  of  Nashville,
Tenn.  The  Roman  Catholic  church  made  much
progress  in  this  state  during  his  administration,


and  in  1H7J)  the  Dumber  of  churches  and  priests
had  nearly  trebled.  He  had  Bounded  a  oolfage
controlled  liv  the  Christian  Brothers,  a  convent  and
refuge  of  Sisters  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  two
orphan  asylums.  He  also  introduced  into  Ins  dio-
cese the  Sisters  of  Mercy,  the  Dominican  Si>tns.
the  Sisters  of  Charity,  and  tin-  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,
all  of  whom  he  placed  in  charge  of  academic-  and
parochial  schools.  In  1880,  Chicago  was  erected
into  an  archiepiscopal  see,  with  two  suffragan  bish-
ops, anil  Dr.  Feehan  was  consecrated  its  jfrg{  an  h-
bishop.  During  his  administration  he  has  created
nine  new  parishes  in  Chicago  alone,  and  has.  in  a
sense,  founded  St.  Mary's  training-school.  He  was
at  the  plenarv  council  of  Baltimore  in  1884.

FKGAN,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Athlone,  Ireland,
in  1827;  d.  in  Fort  Shaw,  Montana.  25  June,  1886.
He  served  in  the  constabulary  in  his  native  country,
but  came  to  the  United  States  in  early  life,  and  en-
listed as  a  private  in  the  2d  U.  S.  infantry,  29  Oct.,
1851.  He  re-enlisted  eight  times,  entering  the  ser-
vice again  as  soon  as  his  term  expired,  and  was
finally  retired  on  8  May,  1885.  He  was  sent  to  the
soldiers'  home  in  Washington  in  1870,  but  ob-
tained a  discharge  and  returned  to  active  service.
Fegan  was  a  well-known  character  in  his  regiment,
and  many  stories  are  told  of  his  shrewdness  and
humor.  He  served  with  credit  in  the  civil  war,
and  was  wounded  at  Antietam.  In  March,  1868,
at  Plum  Creek,  Kansas,  he  stood  guard  single-
handed  over  a  deserter  he  had  captured  and  a
powder-train,  defended  both  against  a  crowd  of
men  who  wished  to  recapture  the  deserter,  and
brought  his  charge  safe  to  camp.  For  his  gallantry
he  was  given  the  U.  S.  medal  of  honor.  On  6
Dec,  1882,  Fegan  was  made  the  subject  of  a  spe-
cial presidential  message  to  congress.

FEIJ6\  Diogo  Antonio  (fay-ho),  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  S.  Paulo,  10  Aug.,  1784:  d.  there,
10  Nov.,  1843.  He  received  his  early  education  in
a  clerical  college  in  his  native  city.  In  1807  he
was  ordained  priest,  and  soon  afterward  began  to
teach  in  Parahyba.  In  1820  the  constitutional  revo-
lution triumphed  in  Portugal,  and  Feijo  was  sent
as  a  representative  from  the  province  of  S.  Paulo
to  the  Portuguese  assembly,  to  which  he  was  ad-
mitted, 11  Feb.,  1822.  On  25  April  he  made  an
eloquent  speech  in  defence  of  Brazilian  rights,
which  were  threatened  by  the  Portuguese  major-
ity. The  Brazilian  deputies  were  unsuccessful,
and  Feijo,  with  five  others,  left  Lisboa  secretly  for
Falmouth,  where,  on  22  Oct.  of  the  same  year,
they  published  a  manifesto  explaining  their  con-
duct. Feijo  afterward  returned  to  Brazil,  and  re-
tired to  Itu.  In  1824  Dom  Pedro  I.  submitted
to  the  municipalities  of  the  empire  his  project  of  a
constitution,  which  was  almost  unanimously  ac-
cepted, except  at  Itu,  where  Feijo  proposed  to
amend  it.  The  province  of  S.  Paulo  elected  him
successivelv  to  the  legislatures  of  1836-'9  and
1830-'3.  In  1827  he  proposed  the  abolition  of
clerical  celibacy,  and  in  1828  submitted  a  project
for  the  reform  of  municipalities.  In  1831  Feijo
was  appointed  by  the  regency  minister  of  just  ice,
and  in  this  capacity  dissolved  undisciplined  mili-
tary bodies,  checked  on  7  Oct.  of  that  year  the
revolution  in  the  island  of  Das  Cobras,  organ-
ized on  10  Oct.  a  body  of  military  police,  and  in
1832  suppressed  another  revolt.  In  1833  he  was
appointed  life  senator,  and  in  1834  the  electors
of  the  empire  made  him  regent  of  Brazil.  On
the  previous  day  he  had  been  appointed  bishop  of
Mananna.  but  had  declined  the  dignity  for  politi-
cal reasons.  As  regent,  he  soon  proclaimed  a  lib-
eral and  advanced  programme,  bu^  his  policy  met


FEINIXDKH


I.IPK


m


with  such  opposition from tin  Lives  thnt

signed  lii-  Sept.,  IKt?. llr  then  re-

tired to  S.  Paulo,  and  did m>t appear i"  tin
ate  again  until 1888. In 1842  he  edited  11  politi-
alled  "  0  Justieiero." In  tin-  Mime  veer
rotation  broke  oal  mm  Campinas,  whin-  Poijo
wbk  staying,  and.  although  enfeebled1  by  AM  and
si.  kness,  lie  took  iiiHin  himself  the  rcs|>onsibility  "f
the  movement,  and,  being  defeate«i,  was  arrested.
taken  to  Santos,  and thenee  t<> Rio  Janeiro, to
bo  tried  by  the  senate. He  succeeded  in  explain-
ing hi-  conduct  before  that  body,  and  thlo  pentad
the  laet  aol  <>f  hie  political  li f « ■ .  for  In-  died
Boon  afterward. Honors  were  paid  to  his  mem-  |
on  i>v  the  government.

II  ININGEB,  Karl  William  Frederick,  mu-
i),  1 1.  in  Durlach,  Baden,  (Jermany,  81  July,
1844.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1H.VI.  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Marv's  college,  Columbia,  S.  ( '.,  and  ]
afterward  studied  music  in  the  conservatory  nt
I-ei|»ii\  Germany.  He  led  an  orchestra  in  U
and  in  1864  *6  served  In  the  National  army.  Be
afterward  taught  music  for  seventeen  rears,  and  in
1874  travelled  through  Brazil,  where  he  met  with
success  as  a  violinist.  Mr.  Feininger  has  developed
a  new  mode  of  teaching  the  piano,  "  based  upon
absolute  knowledge  of  human  character,"  ami  is
the  author  of  numerous  orchestral  companions,
including  overtures,  symphonies,  and  choruses
with  orchestral  accompaniment,  besides  many
Knglish  and  Ccrman  songs.  He  has  also  com-
posed an  unfinished  opera,  "  Die  Brtlder."  He  \
produced  his  orchestral  compositions  with  success
in  Berlin  In  lKHfi,  those  performed  at  his  first  eon-
cert.  ?  Oct..  including  his  "  Academische  "  over-
ture (1888) :  his  ••  Naniss  **  overture  (lMtW);  a  sym-
fhonv  (op.  12),  which  was  highly  praised  by  Fran/
,iszt"(1870);  and  "Kmotive  Pictures"  (1885).

FKKK.  Robert,  artist,  b.  in  Oyster  Bay.  L.  I..
about  1 72") ;  d.  in  Barbadoes,  West  Indies,  aged  about
forty-four.  He  left  home  when  young,  was  taken
primmer  and  carried  to  Spain,  where  he  passed  his
time  in  making  rude  paintings.  With  the  pro-
ceeds of  these  he  returned  home,  settled  at  Xew-
port.  and  became  a  port  rait -painter.  He  was  one
of  the  earliest  American  artists,  his  first  pictures
bearing  the  date  1 7  Pi.  Many  of  his  portraits  are
in  the  Bowdoin  college  collection,  and  in  that  of
the  Rhode  Island  historical  societv.  Providence.
One  of  the  best  is  that  of  Lady  Wanton,  in  the
Redwood  library.  Newport.

FF.LCH.  Alpheus,  jurist,  b.  in  Limerick.  York
co..  Me..  M  Sept,  lHtMJ.  His  grandfather,  Abijah
Feleti.  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  had  removed
to  that  region  while  it  was  still  a  wilderness,  and
Alpheus,  who  was  left  an  orphan  at  three  roan
of  age,  was  brought  up  in  his  house.  Young
Felch  entered  Phillips  Exeter  academy  in  1881,  wai
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1K27.  ami  in  1880  was
admitted  to  the  liar  at  Bangor.  Me.  He  punned
to  Monroe,  Mich.,  in  1^18.  and  in  1N43  to  Ann
Altar,  where  he  has  since  roiiflod.  He  was  in  the
legislature  in  lKtVT  and  in  lKlK-'o.  as  one  of  the
state  bank  commissioner*,  did  much  to  npOM
bands,  made  possible  by  a  general  "wild-cat"
banking-law.  which  he  had  opposed,  ami  which
was  afterward  declared  unconstitutional  by  the

State supreme  court. He  was  auditor-general  of

its  for  a  few  weeks  in  1848,  and  judge  of  the

State  supreme  court till |s|(i,  when  he  rewgaed  t<>

enter  upon  the  otVn f  governor  of  the  state, to

which  he  had  been  elected,  as  a  Democrat,  in  the

previous  year. He  resigned  this  also  in  1847,  h*v<

n  chosen  to  the  U.  s.  senate,  where  he  re-

1  until  1858,  serving  for  four  years  as  (•hair-


man  of  the  committer-  on  public  lands.  At  Un-
close of  his  term  President  Pierce  appointed  him
on  the  commission  to  settle  Spanish  and  Mexican
land-claim-,  under  t  f (iundalupc  Iliilnl-

go.  and  he  Itccamc  its  president.  The  work  Of  tin-
OOnunWon,  involving  many  important  decisions,
was  finished  in  1868,  and  it-  reports,  consisting  Of
forty  large  volumes,  were  lrt|rfftlttd  in  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Interior  at  Washington.  He  retired
from  practice  in  1*78.  and  in  lN71»-'88  was  or<*-
fessor  of  law  in  Michigan  university.  Bowdoin
gave  him  the  degree  of  M,.  I>.  in  1h77.

FKliDKK,  John  Myers,  lawyer,  b.  in  Orange-
burg district. S.  ('., 7 .lulv. 1781; d. in I'nion

Point.  (Ja..  l  Sept,  1881.  llis  grandfather,  a  na-
tive of  Switzerland,  came  to  South  Carolina  ebonj
1720,  and  was  killed  during  the  Revolution  while
defending  his  house  again*t  an  attack  by  Tories.
John  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  1H<14,  studied  at  the
Litchfield.  Conn.,  law-school,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  at  Columbia.  S.  ('.,  in  ism.  lb  was  a
major  of  volunteers  in  the  war  of  1818,  and  was
several  times  in  the  legislature  U-tween  1812  and
1H80.  He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  tarred  from  1H81  till  1888.  declining  a
third  candidacy.  From  1K40  till  his  death  he  was
a  state  senator.  After  reaching  the  head  of  his
profession,  Major  Polder  retired  about  1*80.  lx-came
a  successful  mill-owner  and  planter,  and  in  time
accumulated  a  fortune.

FELIPE,  r  FELIPILLO  (fa-le-pe,  or  fa-le-
peel  -yo),  Peruvian  Indian,  b.  in  Poeches,  Peru,  in
1606,  or,  according  to  the  historian  flnmora.  in
1510;  d.  on  an  expedition  to  Chili  in  1585.  When
Francisco  Pizarro  arrived  at  TumU-z  in  1527,  he
asked  the  Indian  chiefs,  who  received  him  well,  for
some  boys  to  learn  Spanish,  so  that  they  might
serve  him  on  his  return  as  interpreters.  He  car-
ried two  boys  to  Spain,  where  they  were  baptized,
and  one  of  them,  receiving  the  name  of  Felipe,  re-
turned with  Pizarro  in  1531.  and  was  of  great  use
in  the  conquest  of  Peru,  saving  the  life  of  the  con-
queror ami  his  followers  at  the  beginning  of  the
campaign  by  revealing  to  him  a  conspiracy  of  the
natives  of  the  island  of  Puna  to  cut  the  Spanish
vessels  adrift  and  kill  the  invaders.  After  the  fall
of  Caiamarca.  16  Nov.,  1532,  Pizarro  sent  Felipillo
with  Hernando  de  Soto  to  treat  with  the  Inca  Ata-
hualpa.  While  on  this  mission  he  fell  in  love  with
one  of  the  Inca's  wives,  and.  thinking  that  the  lat-
ter's  death  would  give  him  possession  of  the  woman
he  loved,  he  began  to  give  the  Spanish  chiefs  an
incorrect  translation  of  Atahualpa's  words  in  the
different  interviews  with  Soto,  in  which  he  Matted
as  interpreter.  He  thus  excited  a  SOSpioioa  that
the  Inca  wa«  collecting  troops  and  making  other
secret  preparations  for  the  destruction  of  the  in-
vaders, and  this  was  one  of  the  causes  of  Atahual-
pa's execution,  which  was  decided  upon  jwrtly
through  covetousness,  partly,  as  (iomara  says,  in
the  iM'lief  that  his  death  would  save  the  lives  of
the  Spaniards.  Felipillo  had  even  arranged  with
some  Yanaeona  chiefs,  enemies  of  Atahualpa,  to
confirm  his  calumnies  about  the  Inca's  hostile
ptaparation.  The  historians  (tarcilaso  de  la  Vega,
Herrera,  and  (iomara.  shaking  abooi  Felipillo.
are  all  of  opinion  that  he  was  the  only  native
that  assisted  in  the  destruction  of  his  cm|H-ror.  In
1888  Felipillo  was  assigned  to  the  service  of  Al-
inagro,  and  accompanied  him  in  1884  0B  BM1  cxi>e-
dition  against  Podrodl  Alvarado.  who  had  invaile<|
the  province  of  l^uito.  He  deserted  Almagro.  and
gave  Ahantdo  information  ebovJ  the  inferior  force
of  the  former,  proposing  to  serve  a*  a  guide  in
surprising  his  little  army,  but Alvarado.  who is


428


FELIX


FELTON


supposed  to  have  known  that  he  was  in  territory
already  ceded  to  Pizarro,  preferred  to  make  an  ad-
vantageous arrangement  with  Almagro.and  caused
Mm  at  the  HIM  time  to  pardon  Fehnillo's  treason.
In  Cuzco.  Felipillo  incited  the  Inca  Manco  against
the  Spaniards  by  underhand  intrigues,  and  con-
tributed tliereby  to  the  revolt  of  the  Indians  and
the  burning  of  the  city  in  1535.  He  also  took
part  in  the  dissensions  between  Pizarro  and  Al-
magro.  When  Almagro  marched,  in  September,
1535,  to  the  conquest  of  Chili,  he  carried  Felipillo
with  him  as  interpreter,  but  a  few  days  after  pass-
ing the  desert  Felipillo  fled.  He  was  taken  pris-
oner and  strangled  by  Almagro's  orders,  who  knew
of  his  repeated  treasons.  The  historian  Gomara
says  that  before  his  death  Felipillo  confessed  that
he  had  falselv  accused  Atahualpa.

FELIX,  Louis.  Baron,  b.  in  St.  Pierre,  Marti-
nique, 28  Dec,  1765  ;d.  in  Mexico,  1  July,  1836.
He  took  orders  when  very  young,  and  was  almoner
of  the  Count  de  Bentheim,  lieutenant-governor  of
the  Dauphine,  at  the  beginning  of  the  revolution
of  1789.  He  then  gave  up  his  orders  and  became
clerk  of  the  national  convention  until  1795,  when
he  joined  Hughes,  a  member  of  the  assembly,  in
organizing  the  government  of  Guadeloupe,  and  re-
ducing the  revolted  negroes  there  to  subjection.
He  took  the  responsibility  of  revoking  certain
measures  unpopular  with  the  whites,  and  managed
affairs  with  such  skill  that  the  colony  was  com-

Sletely  pacified  in  1796.  Baron  Felix  remained  in
uadeloupe  in  1795-'99,  devoting  himself  to  ad-
ministrative and  judicial  labors.  In  the  mean
while  Hughes  was  restive  under  the  sense  of  the
obligations  he  owed  to  Felix,  and  asked  to  have
him  recalled  to  France  in  1800.  He  had  scarcely
arrived  when  Napoleon  made  his  coup  d'etat  of  the
18th  Brumaire,  and  named  him  a  member  of  the
tribune.  Felix  took  an  active  part  in  the  delibera-
tions of  this  assembly  until  it  was  suppressed  in
1803.  He  was  then  sent  to  Mexico  as  minister
and  French  consul-general.  He  was  afterward
French  minister  at  Washington,  and  kept  the  post
until  1806,  but  remained  consul-general  in  Mexico
till  the  fall  of  Napoleon  in  1814.  He  returned  to
France  in  1815,  and  Prince  Talleyrand,  who  es-
teemed him  highly,  sent  him  as  minister  to  South
America,  where  he  remained  four  years.  He  was
then  consul-general  and  minister  extraordinary  to
the  Levant  in  1819-'22,  consul-general  to  Mexico
in  1825-'30,  deputy  from  Marseilles  in  1832-35,
and  in  1835-'6  minister  to  Mexico,  where  he  died.
His  books  relating  to  this  continent  are  "  Apercu
sur  les  Etats  Unis  "  (Paris,  1814) ;  "  Apercu  sur  le
Mexique "  (1815) ;  "  Rapport  au  ministre  des  af-
faires etrangers  sur  la  situation  des  Francais  dans
le  Mexique  et  l'Araerique  du  Sud  n  (1820) ;  "  Thro-
ne des  gouvernements,"  in  which  he  compares  the
governments  of  Europe  with  those  of  the  United
States  and  South  America,  and  declares  in  favor
of  the  New  World  (1823).

FELLER,  Henrietta,  missionary,  b.  in  Lau-
sanne. Switzerland,  about  1788;  d.  in  Grand  Ligne,
Canada,  27  March,  1868.  She  married  M.  Feller,  a
magistrate  in  Lausanne,  and  soon  after  his  death,
and  the  death  of  their  only  child,  she  came  in  1835
to  Montreal,  and,  joining  two  of  her  friends,  M.
and  Madame  Olivier,  began  her  labors  as  a  teacher
and  missionary.  On  account  of  delicate  health,  M.
and  Madame  Olivier  were  compelled  to  leave  Mon-
treal in  a  short  time.  Madame  Feller  determined
to  continue  the  school,  but  did  not  succeed,  and
went  to  St.  John's.  Financial  aid  reached  her  from
Switzerland,  and,  several  of  the  Baptist  ministry
becoming  interested  in her  welfare,  she  was  en-


abled to  maintain  her  school  until  the  first  rebel-
lion in  Lower  Canada,  when  the  BUM  to  the  United
States.  Late  in  1836  she  removed  to  Grand  Ligne,
again  opening  a  school ;  and,  after  various  visits  to
the  Atlantic  cities  for  aid,  she  was  successful  in
raising  funds  for  the  erection  of  a  mission-house,
of  which  she  became  director.

FELLOWS,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,
in  1733  ;  d.  in  Sheffield,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,
1808.  He  served  in  the  French  and  Indian  war,
was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  provincial
congress  in  1775,  and  soon  after  the  battle  of  Lex-
ington led  a  regiment  of  minute-men  to  Boston.
He  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  25  June.  177<>.
commanding  a  brigade  at  the  battles  of  Long
Island,  White  Plains,  and  Bemis  Heights,  where
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  capture  of  Burgoyne.
After  the  war  he  was  sheriff  of  Berkshire  count  v.

FELLOWS,  John,  author,  b.  in  Sheffield,  Mass.,
in  1760;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  Jan.,  1844.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783,  and  published
"  The  Veil  Removed :  Reflections  on  Humphrey's
Essay  on  the  Life  of  Israel  Putnam  "  (New  York,
1843) ;  "  Exposition  of  the  Mysteries  or  Religious
Dogmas  ana  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,
Pythagoreans,  and  Druids";  and  a  work  on  the
authorship  of  the  Junius  letters.

FELT,  Joseph  Barlow,  antiquarian,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  22  Dec.,  1789;  d.  there,  8  Sept.,
1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1813,
licensed  to  preach  in  1815,  and  was  pastor  of  Con-
gregational churches  at  Sharon,  Mass..  in  1821-'4,
and  in  Hamilton,  Mass.,  in  1825-'34.  He  was  com-
missioned by  Gov.  Everett,  in  April,  1836,  to  ar-
range the  ancient  state  papers,  then  in  almost
hopeless  confusion,  and  in  1845  spent  six  weeks  in
England  searching  for  duplicates  of  lost  records.
As  a  result  of  his  labors,  which  were  ended  in
1846,  the  state  archives  are  now  contained  in  sev-
eral scores  of  carefully  classified  volumes.  After
serving  as  librarian  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society  in  1842-'58,  he  retired  to  Salem,  where  he
engaged  in  literary  work.  He  was  president  of
the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society  in
1850-'3,  recording  secretary  of  the  American  sta-
tistical association  in  1839-59,  and  a  member  of
many  other  historical  societies.  Dartmouth  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1857.  Dr.  Felt  was
noted  for  his  thorough  acquaintance  with  New
England  history.  He  published  "Annals  of  Sa-
lem." called  by  Bancroft  "  an  accurate  and  useful
work  "  (Salem,  Mass.,  1827 ;  2d  ed..  2  vols.,  1845-'9) ;
"History  of  Ipswich,  Essex,  and  Hamilton,"  in-
cluding numerous  biographies  (Cambridge,  1833);
"  Historical  Account  of  Massachusetts  Currency "
(Boston,  1839) ;  memoirs  of  Roger  Conant  (1848),
Hugh  Peters  (1851),  and  William  S.  Shaw  (1852) ;
"Genealogical  Items  for  Gloucester  and  Lvnn"
(1850-'l) ;  "  The  Customs  of  New  England  "  (1853) ;
"  Ecclesiastical  History  of  New  England  "  (2  vols.,
Boston,  1855-'62) ;  and  various  addresses.

FELTON,  Cornelius  Conway,  scholar,  b.  in
West  Newbury,  Mass.,  6  Nov..  1807 ;  d.  in  Chester,
Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1827,  having  partially  supported  himself  thn  ogjh
his  course  by  teaching  in  Concord  and  Boston,  and
at  the  Round-Hill  school  in  Northampton,  Mass.
In  his  senior  year  he  was  one  of  the  conductors  of
the  "Harvard  Register,"  a  students'  periodical.
After  teaching  for  two  years  in  Geneseo,  N.  Y..  lie
was  appointed  Latin  tutor  at  Harvard  in  1829.  be-
came Greek  tutor  in  1830,  college  professor  of
Greek  in  1832.  and  in  1n;',4  was  given  the  Kliot
professorship  of  Greek  literature.  He  was  also  for
many  years  regent  of  the  college In  1853-'4  he


'M.I.


MO


&  4  Sitz


tudj  mil'  tli«-  various  oolleet

art ami autiiiuities, and spent five months iii
Greece,  where  he  «Ii-m>i<  d himself  not  only |q the

topography  "i  the  <-.'iiiiirv  hikI  t !■••  remains  of

ancient  iirt there,  but  I"  n-  present language  and
ire,  t"  which  he  attached  [Treat  Importnnoe.

II.  was  »m  i-nthu-
sjastic  defender  "f
tin-  modern  Greeks,
by  wlioiii  In-  MM
known,  faring  his
Btay  among  them,
as  the  ••  Aini-rii -an
professor."  He  \  i-it-
ed  Knrope  a  second
tiin«-  in  |x.")M,  and
in  1880  was  elected

preatdenl of Har-
vard OoUoga.  which
* Jk.f^T\, ^^^^ oflht'  he  held  until
F  v^ * v \  hisdeath.  President

\  v  ™  Felton  was  a  incni-

Ikt  of  the  Massa-
chusetts board  of
education,  and  one
of  the  regents  of
the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution. His  literary  labors  were  extended,  and
he  was  one  of  the  most  profound  and  enthusiastic
classical  scholars  in  the  country,  Besides  uniting
large  contributions  to  current  literature,  he  pub-
lished a  translation  of  Menzel's  ••  (ierinan  Litera-
tim"" fl  vols.,  1K40,  in  George  Ripley's  '•  Speci-
mens of  Foreign  Literature"):  "Classical  Studies,"
original  and  translated  elections,  in  connection
with  Prof.  Sears  and  Edwards  (1843);  a  transla-
tion of  Prof.  Arnold  Guyot's  lectures  on  "The
Earth  and  Man"  (1849);  a  selection  from  the
writings  of  Prof.  Popkin,  with  a  memoir  (1852);
•'  Life  of  William  Eaton,"  in  Sparc's  ••  American
Biographies  "  (New  York,  1853);  a  revised  edition
of  Smith's  "  History  of  (ireeee,"  with  a  continua-
tion from  the  Roman  conquest  to  the  present  time
">>;  and  "Selections  from  Modern  Greek
Writers "0656V  After  his  dentil  appeared  "Fa-
miliar Letters  from  Euroj>e,"  giving  an  account  of
his  last  trip  (Boston,  1864),  and  "Greece.  Ancient
■nd  Modem,"  his  most  important  work,  composed
chiefly  of  his  lectures  before  the  Lowell  institute
cJ  \ols..  Beaton,  1867).  He  was  also  the  author  of
ml  Greet  text-lxM>ks,  including  an  edition  of
Homer,  with  Flaxman's  illustrations  (1833). — nis
brother,  Samuel  Morse,  civil  engineer,  b,  in  W.-t
Newhurv.  Mass..  I?  July,  1801);  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  '24  .Ian..  1888,  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1*34.  studied  civil  engineering,  became  superin-
tendent and  engineer  of  the  Fitehburg  railroad  in
1H43.  and  left  it  in  l!s">l  to  beoome  the  president  of
the  Philiulelphia,  Wilmington,  and  Baltimore  road,
wh.-re  be  remained  until  1n»;.->.  Mr.  Felton  planned
and  directed  the  secret  passage  of  Mr.  Lincoln  from
Harrisburg  to  Washington  previous  to  his  inaugu-
ration a-  president  in  186L  He  received  informa-
tion that  a  deep-laid  plot  existed  to  seize  the  cap-
ital with  its  archives  and  records,  ami  then  declare
the  southern  conspirators  to  Im-  the  government
df  facto  of  the  I'nited  States.  At  the  same  time,
all  communication  between  Washington  and  other

filaces  was  to  be  cut  off,  except  a  controlled  line  to
he  south  ;  and  the  transmutation  of  troo|>s  to  de-
fend the  capital  was  in  be  prevented. He  was  also

Informed  that,  in  case  his  road  attempted  to  i
troops  to  the  defence  of  Washington,  the  hri'
were to be burned and the  trains attacked by
parties  disguised  as  negroes. Incase  Mr.  Lincoln


'  was  found,  he  wa-  to  pe  put  out  of  the  way.
Felton organized and armed a long of trained

men.  who,  while apparently whitewashing the

bridges,  were  in  reality  a  guard  that  could  hi
summoned  instantly,  fie  also  established  a  secret
police  floree.  Mr.  1-Vltoti  avoided  ■  s|M-<ial  train
from  Philadelphia  to  Washington  by  delayii
regular  train  f<>r  the  nominal  purpOM  of  forward-
ing an  "  important  package."  When  Mr.  Lincoln
wae  safely  on  the  train  the  telegraph  wires  in  all
directions  licyivccn  Harrisburg  Philadelphia,  and
Washington  were  cut.  and  not  united  again  until
eight  o'clock  oil  the  following  morning.  After
they  were  joined  the  liiM  message  announced  the
safe arrival of the "important package." The

Imckage  was  merely  a  bundle  <>f  On  r»|><>rts.  sjafB*
ully  aealed  and  directed,  and  sent  by  s|»ccial  mes-
aBttger,  but  its  arrival  meant  the  arrival  of  Mr.
Lincoln  at  the  capital.  Mr.  Felton  also  planned
j.nd  organized  tin-  transjMirtation  of  troops  to
Annapolis  when  communication  by  way  of  Balti-
more was  cut  off  in  April,  1881,  Be  was  a  com-
missioner of  the  Hoosac  tunnel  in  1888,  was  chosen
{^resident  of  the  Pennsylvania  steel  eonpUUy  in
865  (holding  the  office  twenty-three  yenra>  and  a
ooniaahnionar  <>f  the  Union  and  Central  Pacific
railroads  in  1869.  He  was  a  member  of  tin- Cen-
tennial board  of  finance  in  1878,  and  director  of
the  Northern  Pacific  railroad  in  lN?0-'3,  and  of  the
Pennsylvania  railroad  in  1873- 'H3.  He  published
■  Philadelphia.  Wilmington,  and  Baltimore  Kail-
road  Investigation  into  the  Alleged  Misconduct
of  the  Superintendent  "  (Philadelphia,  1854-'5).
— Another  brother,  John  Brooks,  lawyer,  b.  in
Saugus,  Mass.,  in  1827;  d.  in  Oakland.  Cal.,  3  May,
1*77,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1H47.  and  re-
mained there  for  two  years  as  a  tutor  in  Greek.
Afterward  he  spent  some  time  in  European  travel,
and  was  graduated  from  the  Harvard  law-school  in
1853.  During  the  same  year  he  settled  in  Ban
Francisco.  His  knowledge  of  French  and  Spanish
led  to  eminence  at  the  bar,  of  which  he  remained  a
member  till  his  death.  He  was  successful  both  as
an  advocate  and  before  the  higher  courts.  The
large  fees  that  he  received  were  notable  even  in
California.  His  fee  in  one  case  was  said  in  the
newspapers  of  the  time  to  amount  to  more  than  a
million  dollars.  He  served  several  times  as  presi-
dential elector,  and  was  mayor  of  Oakland,  where
he  lived.  He  was  for  inanv  years  a  regent  of  the
University  of  California,  of  which  he  was  one  of
the  founders.  Mr.  Felton  possessed  attractive  so-
cial qualities  and  brilliant  wit.  In  the  city  of  Ban
Francisco  the  news  of  his  death  was  received  with
public  demonstrations  of  sorrow,  the  places  of
amusement  were  dosed,  and  the  flags  displayed  at
half-mast  on  the  dav  of  his  funeral.

I'KNDALL,  .losjas.  colonial  governor  of  Mary-
land. He  was  ordered  in  1655  by  Gov.  Stone  to
the  pablk  stores  at  Patuxeiit.  but  was  made
prisoner  in  the  fight  that  ensued,  and.  having  af-
terward raised  another  insurrection,  was  appointed
governor,  10  July,  1656,  as  a  reward  for  his  fancied
services  to  the  proprietary  government.  He  was
■Upemaded  in  December,  1880,  for  having  turned
against  his  patron,  was  tried  in  DuejemOBT,  1881,
convicted  of  treason,  and  sentenced  to  U-  bottiohod,
but,  on  his  petitioning  the  governor  anil  council.
was  pardoned and made  to pay  a  moderate  line.

For  engaging  In  seditious  practices  he  was  after-
word hanished.  and  a  fine  of  forty  thousand
pounds  of  toliaeco  was  imposed  on  him  in  1881,
FENBAXL,  Philip  Hioard.  lawyer,  h.  in  Al-
In  17!M;  d.  in  Washington.  1>.  ('.,
[8Feb*(1888i He  was  graduated  at Princeton  in


430


FENDLER


I'KNTON


1815,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Alexandria
about 1820. Some years later lie removed to

Washington,  I).  C,  where  he  tilled  the  office  of  dis-
trict attorney  to  1K41  7>.  and  1N49-53.  He  ranked
for  years  as  the  ablest  advocate  of  the  capital,  and
Wrote  much  mi  literary  and  political  topics.

FKNIMjKR,  August,  German  botanist,  b.  near
Konigsberg  in  1*13;  d.  in  the  island  of  Trinidad,
27  Nov..  is.s:{.  He  came  to  the  United  States,  and
in  1840  was  employed  in  collecting  botanical  speci-
mens in  Texas  and  Mexico.  He  was  the  author
of  "  The  Mechanism  of  the  Universe,"  a  work  of  un
erratic  character,  and  "  Meteorology  of  Colonia
Tovar.  Venezuela"  (1857).

FENN,  Harry,  artist,  b.  in  Richmond,  Surrey,
England,  14  Sept.,  1838.  He  was  educated  at
Ilesworth  and  Richmond,  and  at  the  age  of  eight-
een came  to  the  United  States.  He  has  achieved
great  success  as  an  illustrator  of  books,  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  American  water-color  society,
and  has  been  one  of  its  exhibitors  nearly  every
year  since  its  organization.  Some  of  his  best
work  is  contained  in  "  Picturesque  America,"
"  Picturesque  Europe,"  and  "  Picturesque  Pales-
tine." He  has  travelled  extensively  through  the
United  States,  Canada,  Europe,  Egypt,  and  Pales-
tine, and  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.

FENNELL,  James,  actor,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1706 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  June,  1816.
He  was  well  educated,  and  studied  for  the  bar,  but
made  his  first  appearance  as  an  actor  in  1787  at
the  Edinburgh  theatre,  under  the  assumed  name
of  Cam  bray.  His  success  was  such  that  he  at  once
found  an  engagement  at  Covent  Garden  theatre,
London,  where  he  appeared  at  the  end  of  the  same
year  under  his  own  name  as  Othello.  He  remained
several  seasons  in  London,  acting  and  writing  for
dramatic  publications,  and  later  spent  some  time
in  Paris.  In  1793,  Fennell  came  to  this  country,
and  made  his  first  appearance  in  Philadelphia  with
eminent  success,  i  rom  1797  till  1806  he  played
in  New  York,  Boston,  and  other  cities  as  a  star
actor.  Afterward  he  taught  reading  and  elocution
in  Boston,  and  for  a  time  kept  an  academy  in
Charlestown,  Mass.  In  1814  he  established  exten-
sive salt-works  near  New  London,  Conn.,  which  led
to  his  financial  ruin.  In  the  early  part  of  his  ca-
reer Fennell  was  an  actor  of  promise.  He  was  of
commanding  appearance,  well  educated,  and  care-
fully studied  his  characters.  His  Othello,  Zanga,
Glenalvon,  and  Pierre  could  hardly  be  excelled;
but  any  permanent  success  was  prevented  by  his
eccentricity  and  irregular  habits.  He  published
"  The  Wheel  of  Truth,"  a  comedy ;  "  Picture  of
Paris";  "Linden  and  Clara,"  a  comedy  (1791);
"Proceedings  at  Paris"  (1792);  and  "Apology  for
my  Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1814).

FENNER,  Arthur,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  Providence,  It.  I.,  m  1745;  d.  there,  15  Oct.,
1805.  His  ancestors  were  among  the  earliest  in-
habitants of  Providence.  He  was  at  one  time  clerk
of  the  superior  court,  and  was  afterward  governor  of
the  state  in  1789-1805. — His  son,  James,  senator,
b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1771 ;  d.  there,  17  April,
1846,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1789,  and  was  U.
S.  senator  from  1805  till  1807.  He  was  governor  of
Rhode  Island  in  1807-'ll,  1824-'31,  and  1844-'5.

FENNER,  Cornelius  George,  poet,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  1.,  30  Dec,  1822 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  4  Jan.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1842,  studied  theology,  and  became  pastor  of
the  1st  Unitarian  church  in  Cincinnati.  His  wife
was  the  eldest  daughter  of  Albert  G.  Greene.  His
best-known  poem  is  "Gulf-weed."  He  published
"  Poems  of  Many  Moods  "  (Boston,  1846).


FENNO.  William  Augustus,  actor,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  1  March,  1N14;  d.  in  New  York  city.  19
I'd i..  1878.  Hi>  early  life  was  spent  with  his
father's  family  near  Boston,  but,  at  an  early  age,
a  love  of  adventure  led  him  to  ship  as  a  sailor
on  board  a  merchantman  on  a  voyage  round  the
world.  After  an  extended  cruise  he  studied  for
the  stage,  and  made  his  first  appearance  at  the  age
of  seventeen  at  the  Bowery  theatre.  New  York,  as
Snake  in  the  "  School  for  Scandal."  He  appeared
in  Philadelphia,  5  Oct.,  1848,  at  the  An  h  street
theatre,  as  Romeo,  visited  California  in  1850,  ami
went  to  England  in  1864.  His  provincial  tours
were  numerous  and  extended.

FENOUILLET,  Emile  de  (fe-noo-yay '),  Cana-
dian author,  b.  in  Hyeres,  in  the  department  of
Var,  France,  in  1806;  d.  in  Quebec,  25  J  in  te,
After  pursuing  a  course  of  legal  studies  at  Aix,  he
removed  to  Montpellier,  and  soon  afterward  to
Paris,  where  he  became  a  writer  on  the  "  Epoque."
Subsequently  he  accepted  a  professorship  at  lionn,
and  wrote  letters  that  were  published  in  "  L'uni-
vers"  of  Paris.  In  October,  1854,  he  arrived  in
Quebec,  and  during  the  next  two  years  was  editor-
in-chief  of  the  "Journal  de  Quebec."  Soon  after-
ward he  was  appointed  professor  of  history  and
literature  in  Laval  normal  school.

FENTON,  Reuben  Eaton,  statesman,  b.  in
Carroll,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y..  4  July,  1819 ;  d.  in
Jamestown,  N.  Y.,  25  Aug.,  1885.  Hisearlv  educa-
tion was  obtained  at  Pleasant  Hill  and  Fredonia
academies,  in  his
native  county.  He
was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1841,
and  began  prac-
tice in  Jamestown,
but,  finding  law
uncongenial,  he  en-
gaged in  mercan-
tile pursuits,  and
in  a  few  years  ac-
quired a  moder-
ate fortune.  Mean-
while he  took  ac-
tive interest  in
politics,  and  in
1843  was  elected
supervisor  of  the
town  of  Carroll,
which  office  he
held for eight

years.  -In  1852  Mr.  Fenton  was  elected  to  con-
gress, and  was  active  in  the  contest  over  the
Kansas  -  Nebraska  bill,  being  one  of  the  forty-
four  northern  Democrats  that  voted  against  the
further  extension  of  slavery.  This  action  resulted
in  his  defeat  in  1854,  when  he  was  nominated  by
the  Whigs  and  Democrats  against  the  Know-
nothing  candidate.  The  Republicans  of  his  dis-
trict nominated  Mr.  Fenton  for  congress  in  1856,
and  he  was  elected  by  a  large  majority,  serving
from  1857  till  1864,  when  he  resigned,  having  been
chosen  governor  of  his  state.  He  heartily  supi>orted
the  cause  of  the  Union  in  the  civil  war,  and  stood
firmly  by  President  Lincoln  and  his  cabinet  in
their  war  measures.  He  was  inaugurated  gover-
nor at  the  opening  of  the  year  1865,  and  was  re-
elected by  an  increased  majority.  In  1868  he  was
elected  to  succeed  Edwin  D.  Morgan  as  U.  S.  sena-
tor, and  served  from  1869  to  1875.  The  only  pub-
lic trust  held  by  him  after  leaving  the  senate  was
that  of  chairman  of  the  U.  S.  commission  at  the
International  monetary  conference  in  Paris  in  1878.
Mr.  Fenton  actively  promoted  the  interests  of  the


^3^€^^


.  |-i  »N


Wi  K


481


oonununitj  in  which  ha  lived. I !«•  projected  the
of  two  ii<  w  railri «dl  Into  Jamestown,  iiikI

was  one  of  the  main  contributors  t..\* ani  establish-
ing there  a  Swedish  orphanage. Bo  also  aarvad  a

i  as  president  <>f  the  village.  Ili»  Inst  Dahlia
■ddreaa  was  made  on  the  occasion  of  Gen.  Grant's
funeral,  when  H  memorial  service  was  held  la  Wal-
uut  Grove.  Ins  iilact'  of  resilience.

MMiiN. Nil  Hum Matthew,  lawyer,  b. in
wich,  Chenango  oo.,  N.  Y..  19  Dee.,  lmw;  d.
Flint,  Mich.,  19  May,  1*71. Ue  waaoneof  the
earliest  emigre  neeee  oountj,  .Mich.,  and.

after  taking  an  active  jmrt  in  founding  the  village
that  bean  his  name,  be  resided  there  ami  at  Flint,
and  engaged  in  the  practice  of  law.  In  1K4*  be
was  elected  lieutenant -governor  of  Michigan,  and
re-elected  in  1N,>()  and  1801.  At  the  hngWinfalg
of  theeivil  war  be  became  a  member  of  the  state
military  Itoard.  ami  was  one  of  the  principal  or-
ganizers of  the  nth  Michigan  regiment,  which  ha
commanded  and  which  participated  in  BO  many
battles  in  various  [>arts  that  it  Uthiih'  known  as
the  ••  wandering  regiment."

FEN  WICK.  Cuthbert,  b.  in  England ;  d.  at
Fcnwick  Manor.  Md.,  in  loo.").  He  was  one  of  the
Roman  Catholics  that  accompanied  Leonard  Cal-
vert to  Maryland  in  1884  He  found  a  good  and
powerful  friend  in  ('apt.  Thomas  Cornwaleys,  for
whom  he  acted  as  agent,  and  was  with  his  patron
in  the  engagement  on  the  Chesapeake,  between  I
pinnace  commanded  by  a  partisan  of  Claiborne,
and  two  armed  boats  commanded  by  Cornwaleys
for  the  government.  He  sat  in  the  a-» embly  of
1<>4H,  and  in  several  others.  He  was  speaker  of  the
house  of  burgesses  when  it  sat  separate  from  the
council  in  Kt4!».  and  voted  for  the  toleration  act.

FKMVK'K,  Edward  IK,  K.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
St.  Man's  countv.  Md.,  in  17(58;  d.  in  Woooter.
Ohio, 26  Sept,  1888.  He  was  sent  to  the  College  of
Bornheim.  near  Antwerp.  Belgium,  in  his  sixteenth
year.  On  completing  his  collegiate  course,  he  joined
ihe  Dominican  order, and  entered  the  ecclesiastical
seminary  of  Bornheim  as  a  theological  student.
After  his  ordination  he  was  appointed  professor
and  procurator  of  the  Dominican  college.  On  the
invasion  of  Belgium  by  the  French  revolutionists.
he  was  imprisoned  and  threatened  with  death,  but,
on  proof  of  his  American  citizenship,  was  released
and  went  to  England,  where  he  joined  n  convent
of  his  order.  Being  anxious  to  introduce  the
Dominican  order  into  the  United  States,  he  per-
suaded three  memben  to  accompany  him  on  his
return  home.  They  were  well  received  bv  Bishop
Carroll,  who  suggested  that  they  should  devote
themselves  to  the  evangelization  of  the  vast  unex-
plored regions  in  the  west.  In  1800,  Father  Fen-
wick  traversed  the  entire  vallev  of  the  Mississippi
on  a  tour  of  ol>servat ion  with  the  view  of  finding  a
suitable  centre  for  his  miaaionarj  labors.  He  se-
lected a  farm  in  Kentucky,  paid  for  it  out  of  bia
[irivate  fortune,  and  in  the  spring  of  lHOtt  built  on
t  the  Dominican  convent  of  St.  Hose  of  Lima,
which  he  made  the  headquarters  of  his  mission  in
Kentucky  and  Ohio.  In  order  to  devote  himself
to  the  duties  of  his  mission,  he  resigned  the  office
of  provincial,  which  he  held  in  his  order,  and  lived
almost  constantly  on  horseback,  penetrating  the
states  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky  in  every  direction,
and  thus  laying  the  foundation  of  ihe  Roman
Catholic  church  in  the  a/eat  He  built  the  first
church  in  Cincinnati  in  lHli>,  after  previously
founding  eight  other  churches,  and  in  1822  l»

bishop  of  that  diocese, lie  wenl  to  ESuropa  in

:  for  pecuniary  aid.  and  returned  to  Cincinnati

in  ls-jji  with  ample  resources. He  at  bnoa  began  the


'  ion  of  a  cathedral,  built  |M»ro<  hial  mhools,  and
founded  convents  of  the  Charity  and  of

the  Dominican  nuns,  in  i*;n  be  opened  tha
Atheiiaiiiu,  afterward  known  as  the  College  of  m.
Prancia  Xavier. lb-  next  wenl  to  riail  the  Indian

trilies  in  the  Northwestern  territory.  At  Macki-
naw he  labiied  among  them  for  three  weeks,
selected  twit  to  he.  trained  for  the  priesthood,  and
sent  them  to  Rome.  The  rest  of  his  life  was  spool
in  missionary  work  among  the  Indians,  ami  ex-
hausting labtQi  in  every  part  of  his  vast  diocese.
While  on  one  of  his  visitations  he  was  attacked  bf
cholera,  which  ended  fatally  after  a  few  da> -.  Ha
cousin,  Benedict  Joseph,  K.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  St.
Mary's  county,  Md..  ;t  S-pt..  17*2;  d.  in  Boston.
Mass..  in  1840,  entered  Georgetown  college  in
and  in  1808  Itecainc  a  student  in  the  Theological
seminary  of  St.  Sulpice.  He  was  ordained  in  1808,
and  stationed  at  St.  Pater*!  church.  New  York
city.  While  here  he  founded  the  N>w  York  lit—
erarv  institute,  and  also  liegan  St.  1'atrick's  ca-
thedral in  MulbetTJ  street,  from  i.lans  and  designs
of his  own. He  was  appointed!  vicar-general in

i  —  i * »,  and  in  1817  i>ecainc  president  of  Georgetown

college,  and  pastor  of  Trinity  church.  Georgetown.
In  1818  he  went  to  Charlestown,  at  the  request  of
his  bishop,  to  compos,,  dissensions  which  had
sprung  up  among  the  French- and  the  English-
speaking  Rinnan  Qatholiocof  that  city.  He  was
completely  successful  in  his  efforts,  and  remained
as  vicar-general  up  to  1822,  when  he  returned  R
Georgetown  college,  and  was  appointed  pn«urator-
general  of  the  Jesuits  in  the  United  States.  In
1885  Im-  was  OOneecrated  bishop  of  the  diitcese  of
Boston,  which  then  embraced  the  whole  of  New
England,  and  contained  only  four  churches.  He
opened  schools  in  the  city  of  Booton,  built  in
Charlestown  the  convent  and  academy  of  St.  Bene-
dict for  young  ladies,  which  became  one  of  the
first  institutions  of  the  kind  in  the  country,  and
then  undertook  the  task  of  making  a  visitation  of
his  diocese.  He  travelled  through  every  part  of  it
in  1827,  spending  some  weeks  among  the  I'assa-
maipioddv  Indians  of  Maine,  and  the  remnant  of
the  Abnakis.  organizing  congregations  and  mark-
ing out  sites  for  churches.  He  procured  funds
from  the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith,
with  which  he  was  enabled  to  pro\  ide  missionaries
and  churches  for  the  Indians,  and  when  he  visited
them  again  in  1881  he  found  them  making  rapid
progress  in  civilization.  About  this  time  he  hail
erected  seventeen  new  churches.  In  1884  the  con-
vent of  St.  Benedict  in  Charlestown  was  attacked
by  a  mob  and  burned  during  the  night.  The  nuns.
however,  had  bean  warned  of  the  at  tack,  and  escaped
without  injury.  In  184:5,  Bishop  Fcnwick  Bounded
the  College  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and  placed  it  in
charge  of  the  Jesuits.  At  his  death  there  were  fifty
churches,  an  orphan  asylum. and  numerous  Roman
Catholic  schools,  colleges,  and  academies  in  his
diocese.  When  Bishop  Fcnwick  was  a  young  priest.
he  was  sent  for  by  Thomas  I'aine.  who  was  then
siitTering  from  the  illness  of  which  he  died,  and
afterward  described  the  visit  in  an  interesting
letter  to  his  brother.  Rev.  Enoch  Fcnwick.

FKMVK'K.  George,  colonist,  d.  in  England  in
1657.  He  came  to  America  in  1881  to  take  charge
of  the  Saybrook  plantation,  so  named  after  Lords
Say  and  BfOOk,  who  with  others  procured  a  patent
for  the  territory  from  Robert,  Earl  of  Warwick,  in
After  a  visit  to  England  he  came  Iwck  in
1888,  and  henceforth,  as  patentee  and  agent  for
the  others,  governed  and  superintended  the  settle-
ment till  IMIt  when  he  sold  its  jurisdiction  and
territory  to  the  Connecticut  colony  for  i'lJtOO. His


4*2


FENWICK


fkrguson


wife  died  at  Saybrook.  and  her  monument  i-  still
to  be  seen  there  near  the  fort.  Fen  wick  was  after-
ward a  colonel  in  the  parliamentary  army,  and
was  one  of  the  judges  of  Charles  1.

FKNW1CK,  John,  colonist,  l>.  in  England  in
1618;  d.  in  1661.  He  obtained  in  1673  a  grant  of
land  in  the  western  partvof  New  Jersey,  and,  emi-
grating there  in  1675,  founded  a  Quaker  colony  at
Salem.  His  title  to  the  proprietorship  was  dis-
puted by  Gov.  Andros,  who  confined  him  in  prison
for  two  years.  Soon  after  conveying  his  property
to  William  Penn,  he  died  in  povertv.

FENWICK,  John  R.,  soldier,  b,  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1780;  d.  in  Marseilles,  France,  19  March,
1842.  He  was  educated  in  England,  and  was  dis-
tinguished for  his  literary  attainments  early  in
life.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant  of  U.  S.  ma-
rines in  1799,  captain  in  1809,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  of  light  artillery  in  December,  1811.  He
was  severely  wounded  and  made  prisoner  at  the
battle  of  Queenstown  Heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  was
brevetted  colonel  in  March,  1813,  for  gallant  con-
duct on  the  Niagara  frontier,  and  was  on  the  same
date  appointed  adjutant-general  of  the  army,  with
the  rank  of  colonel.  He  was  disbanded  with  this
rank  in  June,  1815,  but  retained  in  the  army  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  light  artillery.  He  was  com-
missioned colonel  of  the  4th  artillery  in  May,  1822,
and  brevet-brigadier-general  in  March.  1823.

FENWICK,  Kenneth  Neander,  Canadian  phy-
sician, b.  in  Kingston,  Ont.,  21  April,  1852.  He
was  educated  at  Queen's  university,  Kingston,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1874,  and
at  the  Royal  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons
there,  where  he  was  graduated  as  M.  D.  in  the  same
year.  He  then  went  to  England,  took  the  degree
of  M.  R.  C.  S.  in  1875,  and  spent  some  time  in  Paris
in  hospital  practice.  He  became  demonstrator  of
anatomy  in  the  Medical  college  of  Kingston  in
1876,  was  afterward  professor  of  medical  jurispru-
dence and  sanitary  science  for  four  years,  professor
of  physiology  for  a  like  term,  and  in  1885  was
elected  to  the  chair  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of
women  and  children,  which  he  now  holds.  He  was
elected  a  fellow  of  the  Obstetrical  society  of  Edin-
burgh in  1885,  and  is  now  (1887)  one  of  the  sur-
geons to  Kingston  general  hospital.

FERGUSON,  Adam,  Canadian  agriculturist,  b.
in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  March,  1783;  d.  26
Sept.,  1862.  He  studied  law  and  was  admitted  as
an  advocate,  but  never  practised.  In  1833  he  came
to  Canada,  and  with  James  Webster,  of  Guelph,
founded  the  town  of  Fergus,  in  what  is  now  the
county  of  Wellington.  He  was  called  to  the  legis-
lative council  of  Upper  Canada  in  1841,  and  after
the  union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  held  a
seat  in  that  body  from  1841  till  his  death.  He  was
widely  known  as  an  agriculturist,  and  was  a  di-
rector on  the  first  board  of  agriculture.  To  him  is
largely  due  the  credit  of  establishing  the  agricul-
tural association,  of  which  he  was  repeatedly  presi-
dent, and  the  chair  of  agriculture  in  University
college,  Toronto. — His  son,  Adam  Johnston,  Ca-
nadian statesman,  b.  in  Balthayvock  house,  Perth-
shire, Scotland,  in  1815;  d.  30  Dec,  1867,  was
first  educated  in  Edinburgh,  came  to  Canada  in
1833,  studied  law,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1859.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  4th  battalion  of  the  Wellington  militia,
and.  while  yet  a  young  man,  became  a  district
judge  of  Upper  Canada.  Entering  into  political
life,  he  sideu  with  the  Liberal  party  in  Canada,  and
sat  in  the  lower  house  of  the  provincial  parlia-
ment for  Waterloo,  from  1849  till  1854,  and  for  the
South  Riding  of  Wellington  from  1854  till 186%


In  1860  he  was  elected  by  acclamation  to  the  legis-
lative council  from  the  Brock  division,  and  re-
elected on  his  appointment  to  ofltos  In  i*»'»::.  Proa
March  till  July,  1863,  he  was  receiver-general,
when  he  was  appointed  provincial  secretary  in  the
government  of  John  SandfleM  MaodonakL  Jn
1866  he  was  president  of  the  council  in  the  admin-
istration of  Sir  N.  F.  Belleau,  and  in  1867  he  be-
came a  senator  and  president  of  the  privy  council
in  the  government  of  the  Dominion.  Mr.  Fergu-
son exercised  much  influence  with  the  political
party  with  which  he  was  associated.  He  assumed
the  name  of  Blair  after  that  of  Ferguson  on  suc-
ceeding to  the  estate  of  Balthayvock  in  1862.

FERGUSON,  Colin,  clergyman,  b.  in  K-nl
county,  Md.,8  Dec.,  1751 ;  d.  there,  10  March,  1806.
He  was  the  son  of  a  Scotch  emigrant  in  very  mod-
erate circumstances.  His  early  education  was  be-
gun at  home,  but  he  afterward  went  to  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  entered  the  university  there,  and,  after
several  years'  diligent  study,  returned  to  Maryland
an  accomplished  scholar.  In  1782  he  was  an  in-
structor in  Kent  county~«chool  at  Chestertown.
The  year  following,  when  Washington  college  (the
oldest  in  Maryland)  was  organized,  he  was  chosen
professor  of  languages,  mathematics,  and  natural
philosophy.  He  held  this  chair  for  ten  yean,
when  he  was  appointed  president.  The  institu-
tion, however,  having  been  deprived  of  its  funds  by
the  legislature  of  Maryland,  Dr.  Ferguson  resigned
in  1804,  and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  re-
tirement. He  studied  theology  under  Rev.  William
Smith,  D.  D.,  rector  of  Chester  parish,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  deacon's  orders  in  Christ  church,  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  3  Aug.,  1785,  and  to  priest's  orders,
7  Aug.,  by  Bishop  Seabury.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  in  St.  Paul's  parish,  Kent  co.,  Md.,  which
was  the  only  parish  of  which  he  ever  had  charge.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Washington
college  in  1787,  and  was  an  active  member  of  the
Episcopal  general  convention  of  1789,  at  which  the
constitution  of  the  church  was  discussed  and
adopted.  Dr.  Ferguson  was  a  ready  writer,  but  he
published  nothing  of  importance.

FERGUSON,  Donald,  Canadian  legislator,  b.
in  East  River,  Prince  Edward  Island,  7  March,
1839.  His  grandparents,  who  came  from  Perth-
shire, Scotland,  settled  near  Charlottetown  in  1807.
He  was  political  writer  for  the  "  Island  Argus  "  in
1869  and  1870,  and  was  collector  of  revenue  at
Charlottetown  for  a  short  time.  He  was  elected
for  King's  county  in  the  provincial  parliament  in
June,  1878,  and  on  the  resignation  of  the  Davies
ministry  in  March,  1879,  he  became  a  member  of
the  executive  council  and  commissioner  of  public
works.  Since  1880  he  has  been  provincial  secretary
and  commissioner  of  public  lands.  He  was  elected
by  acclamation  at  the  general  election  of  1879,  and
was  appointed  provincial  secretary  and  commis-
sioner of  crown  lands  in  March,  1880.  He  was  re-
elected in  June,  1882.  He  has  published  "  Agri-
cultural Education,"  a  lecture  (Charlottetown,
1884),  and  "  Love  of  Country,"  a  lecture  (1885).

FERGUSON,  Elizabeth,  poet,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1739;  d.  near  Graeme  Park,  in  Mont-
gomery co.,  Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1801.  Her  grandfather
was  Sir  William  Keith,  colonial  governor  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  her  father  was  Dr.  Thomas  Graeme,  a
Scotchman,  collector  of  customs  at  Philadelphia.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  Mrs.  Ferguson's  wit  and
l>eauty  made  her  a  favorite.  To  divert  her  mind
from  a  personal  disappointment,  she  became  a
writer  of  poems  and  a  translator  of  French  verse,
but  the  close  application  attendant  upon  this  im-
paired her  health,  and  she  travelled  abroad,  as  the


PERI  \


188


•gee  <>f bit aged friend, K<v. l»r. K.hard

I  br  daily  record  of  travels  was  written  in

a  happy  vein,  iiml  contained  a  \  i  va<i«>tis  sent*  of

between English  iiml  colonial  society,

ti,  though  urgently  solicited  f"r  put ilit-ait i< >n .
she  declined  t  Qted. Sk.m  after  li.  •

turn  home  she  married  it  .Scotchman.  Hugh  Ihnrv

ruson,  after  which  she  lived  at  Graeme  Park
until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  in  1778,
when  her  husband  took  the  side  of  the  crown.  -In-
remaining  true  to  her  country,  mid  a  separation
followed.  ||i  r  husband's  American  estate  nwi*  con-
fiscated. Init  a  .-mall  jmrt  of  it  was  restored  to  her

he  legislature  in  17*1.  After  the  British  en-
tered Phuadephia,  Mrs.  Ferguson  was  the  bearer  of
an  offensive  letter  from  the  He  v.  Mr.  Duch/  to  Gen.

hington.  The  general  sent  the  letter  to  eon-
gress.  and  hinted  to  Mrs.  Ferguson  that  he  "  highly
disapproved  the  corresiiondcncc,  and  mpiHTUlB  it
would  be  discontinued. But  she  soon  proposed

to  Got.  Johnstone  to  offer  .Joseph  Heed  "ten
thousand  guineas  and  the  best  post  in  the  govern-
ment "  to  exert  his  Influence  with  Gen.  Washing-
ton, and  in  other  ways  "  to  settle  the  content."  which
brought  out  the  memorable  reply  of  Reed,  after-
ward published  by  Mrs.  Ferguson  in  a  narrative
for  her  own  defence.  Her  life  after  the  Revolu-
tion was  passed  in  pursuits  of  literature  and  in
offices  of  benevolence.  Several  of  her  letters  win
printed  in  the  "  Port-Polio.*' Her  poetical  oorra-

Sonileiice  with  the  Rev.  Nathaniel  Kvans.  under
e|M-n-nameiif  ••  Laura."  was  also  published.  She
tnUMOribed  the  entire  Bible,  to  impress  its  contents
more  deeply  on  her  memory.  But  her  most  im-
|Nirtant  work  was  a  translation  of  Feiielon's
••  f elemaque  "  into  English  heroic  verse,  which  oc-
cupied her  for  three  years.  The  manuscript  was
deposited  by  her  heirs  in  the  Philadelphia  Frank-
lin librarv.  More  than  twenty  years  after  its  cora-
S let  ion  she  rewrote  four  volumes. — Her  nephew,
ohn  Young,  who  translated  D'Argent's  "  An-
cient Geography,"  died  a  lieutenant  in  the  British
army.  The  copy  of  his  work  in  the  Philadelphia
library  contains  a  memoir  by  Mrs.  Ferguson.

FKKttl'SON,  James,  civil  engineer  and  as-
tronomer, li.  in  Perthshire.  Scotland,  31  Aug.,
17H7  :  d.  in  Washington,  I).  OL,  28  Sept..  1807.  He
was  brought  to  the  United  States  in  1800,  was  as-
sistant civil  engineer  on  the  Erie  canal  in  }817-'19,
assistant  surveyor  on  the  boundary  nommfastnn
under  the  treaty  of  Ghent  in  1819-'22,  astronomi-
cal surveyor  on  the  same  commission  in  1888-17,
civil  engineer  for  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  in
'::■-'.  first  assistant  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  in

:  '47,  and  assistant  astronomer  of  the  0.  S.

u  observatory  from  1847  till  his  death.  While
holding  this  last  office  he  discovered  three  aster-

.  for  which  he  was  awarded  the  astronomical
prize  medal  by  the  Academy  of  sciences  of  France
in  1*54.  and  again,  by  the  same  institution,  in  1800.
Pmf.  Ferguson  was  a  contributor  to  Gould's  "  As-
tronomical Journal"  and  to  the  "  A-troiiomische
Nachrulitin  ";  also  to  the  "Episcopal  Church  Re-
view "  and  other  magazines.

II  KM  SON. Patrick. British  soldier, d. at

King's  Mountain.  N.  ('..  7  Oct,  I7si». Bewaaa

•  f  James  Ferguson,  an  eminent  jurist,  and  a

nephew  of  Lord  Elilwmk. At  the  age  of  eighteen

iilered  the  army  in  Flanders,  llecmne  to  this
Country  in  the  spring  of  1777.  and  was  engaged  in

the  battle  <»f  the  Brandywine  In  September  of  that
year. In  October,  1778,  he  led  ■  band  that  de-
red  the  shipping  at  Little  Fgg  harbor,  burned

-is,  and laid  waste the lands  of  the patriots.
Th.y  surprised  Pulaski's  oommead,  and  killed  all
vol.  ii. — 28


•  oiild.  taking  no  evJoOBOfll  Fergus.. n  was
active  ..n  the  Hudson  iii  1 779. and  -•  distinguished
himself  at  the  siege  of  Charleston  in  17no  that  he
was  particularly  mentioned  by  the  commander  fci

chief.  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  and  appointed  major  of
the  7Nt regiment. He  was  deputed to  vi»it

district  in  south  Caroline, to  procure,  ii»tsof  the

militia,  and to  MS  that the  orders  of  ConwtJJJl

w.re  carried  into  execut  ion. Any  Carolinian  ti
after taken inarms  against the king might be
sentenced  to  death for deSBltloU and tna-«.ii. In

8eptesnbsr,  when  Oornemltti  began  his  march,  bj

relied  on  the  loyalists  of  North  Carolina  t..  recruit
his  armv.  On  his  left,  Maj.  FbjMUauu  WSJ  sent  with
2<Mt  of  the  In-st  troops  In  the  uplands  of  South  Caro-
lina, where  he  enlisted  young  men,  loyalists  who
had  fled  t<>  the  mountains  for  security,  and  fugi-
ti\es  i if  the  worst  c diameter,  who  sought  his  standard
for  the  chances  of  plundering.  After  a  gallant
defence,  he  was  defeated  and  slain  in  the  bloody
contest  of  King's  Mountain,  the  spirit  of  which
victory  to  the  American  soldiers  was,  says  Bancroft,
"like  the  rising  at  Concord,  in  its  effects  like  the
successes  at  Bennington,  and  changed  the  asjtcct
of  the  war.  It  encouraged  the  fragments  of  tin-
defeated  and  scattered  American  army  to  sash
each  other  and  organize  themselves  anew."  Fer-
guson was  reputed  to  In-  the  Ust  mark-man  in  the
army.  He  invented  a  musket  to  be  loaded  at  the
breech,  which  could  be  fired  seven  times  in  a  min-
ute with  remarkable  precision.  Just  bsfofl  the
battle  of  the  Brandywine,  Gen.  Washington  was
taking  observations  outside  the  lines,  attended  by
a  French  officer  in  hussar  uniform.  Ferguson,
who  did  not  recognize  the  approaching  party,  or-
dered three  shots  fired  at  them,  but  quickly  coun-
termanded the  order.  The  hussar  made  a  circuit
on  his  return,  but  Washington  passed  very  near
Ferguson,  and  was  ordered  Dy  him  to  halt,  which
order  was  disregarded.  There  was  ample  oppor-
tunity to  take  his  life,  but  it  was  not  attempted.
On  the  following  day  Ferguson  learned  the  name
of  his  distinguished  visitor.

FERtUSON,  Samuel  David,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Charleston.  S.  ('.,  1  Jan.,  1842.  He  emigrated
with  his  parents  to  Liberia,  in  Africa,  at  the  age  of
six  years.  He  received  his  education  in  the  mis-
sion schools  under  Bishop  Payne,  was  appointed  a
teacher  in  1802,  and  was  ordained  deacon  by  the
bishop,  28  Dec.,  1865.  and  priest.  18  March.  1888.
During  his  diacoiiate  he  served  sj  assistant  minis-
ter in  St.  Mark's  parish.  Har|wr,  and  when  made
priest,  became  reoCoroftbe  same  parish.  He  was
president  of  the  standing  committee  for  several
years,  and  also  business  agent  of  the  mission,  and
su|H-rinteiident  of  the  (ape  Pal  mas  female  orphan
asylum  and  girls'  school.  Having  been  ejected
missionary  bishop  for  West  Africa  in  1885,  he
came  to  the  United  States,  and  was  consecrated
in  Once  church.  New  York  city.  24  June,  lss.~,.
Soon  afterward  he  returned  to  Cape  Pal  mas.  l.iU--

ria.  and  entered  upon  the  duties  of  his  office.

FERIA.  Pedro  (fa-re-a).  Mexican  bishop,  b.
in  Feria.  Kstreinadura.  Spain,  in  1884]  d.  in  Chia-
pas, Mexico,  in  1888.  tie  was  ordained  in  the
cloister  of  San Estchandc  Salamanca  OH 5 Feb.,

i.">4.->.  received  the  degree  of  doctor  in  theos

and  in  1551  was  sent  to  Mexico,  entering  the  mis-
sions of  the  Za|M>tcc  Indiana,  in  whose  language

he  preached  and  published  several  religious  |..

He  was  elected  superior  of  the  impanel  convent

of  Mexico,  •,»(>  May,  1867,  went  to  Florida  as  pro-
vincial vicar  in  1880,  and  in  1507  was  appointed

provincial  of  the  province  of  Santiago  in  Mc\
returning  in  1878  B0  Spain  as  ecclesiastical  attOV>


434


1T.KI.ANI>


FERNANDES  PINHEIRO


ney-general.  Altar  some  time  he  retired  to  the
convent  <>f  Salamanca  as  director  of  novices,  and
was  appointed  bishop  of  Chiapas,  taking  possession
of  his  diocese  in  1575.  He  was  called  to  the  third
Mexican  provincial  council  in  1585,  but  on  his
voyage  he  broke  a  leg  in  Oajaca,  and  had  to  re-
main there  for  nearly  a  vear  to  be  cured.  He  wrote
from  there  to  the  council  "  Tratado  canonico  renei-
tidodcsdc  < >ajacu al  concilio  provincial  de  Mexico"
and  "  De  la  preferencia  de  los  regulares  para  los
curatos  de  los  Indios,"  which  are  printed  and  pre-
served in  the  library  of  the  college  of  San  Gregorio
in  Mexico,  with  his  "  Vocabulario  de  la  lengua
Zapoteoa,"  which  is  still  considered  as  a  text-book.
FERLANI),  John  Antony  Baptist,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  25  Dec,  1805;  d.  in
Quebec  in  1865.  In  1813  his  family  left  Montreal
and  settled  in  Kingston.  Here  he  resided  three
years,  and  learned  to'  speak  English.  In  1816  he
entered  the  seminary  of  Nicolet,  where  he  remained
fourteen  years.  He  was  ordained  priest,  14  Sept.,
1828,  and  named  vicar  of  Quebec  the  same  day.
After  holding  various  pastorates,  he  was  appointed
professor  in  the  seminary  of  Nicolet  in  1841,  and
in  1848  was  elected  superior.  In  the  preceding
year  he  displayed  great  courage  during  the  typhus
epidemic  which  had  broken  out  among  the  Irish
emigrants  at  Grosse-Ile.  In  1850  he  was  trans-
ferred from  the  seminary  to  the  archiepiscopal  resi-
dence, and  was  named  a  member  of  the  archbishop's
privy  council.  He  became  chaplain  of  the  mili-
tary hospitals  of  Qnel>ec  in  1855,  and  was  appointed
professor  in  the  faculty  of  arts  in  the  Laval  uni-
versity the  same  year.  He  was  elected  dean  of  the
faculty  of  arts,  18  March,  1864.  Between  the  years
1858  and  1862  he  gave  a  course  of  successful  pub-
lic lectures  on  the  period  that  began  with  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  Acadians  and  ended  with  the  death
of  Montcalm.  In  the  midst  of  his  labors  he  found
time  to  write  several  books,  all  relating  to  Canada,
his  object  being,  as  he  says  himself,  to  make
Canada  known  and  loved  by  tiis  fellow-countrymen.
It  is  on  his  "Cours  d'histoire  du  Canada"  (vol.  i.,
Quebec,  1861 ;  vol.  ii.,  by  M.  Laverdiere,  1865)  that
his  reputation  as  an  historian  chiefly  rests.  He
brought  to  light  a  multitude  of  facts  that  were

{>reviously  unknown  or  misrepresented,  rectified  a
arge  number  of  dates,  and  narmonized  and  ex-
plained the  confused  accounts  of  the  early  settle-
ments. He  was  the  author  of  "Observations  sur
une  histoire  du  Canada  par  l'Abbe  Brasseur";
"Voyage  au  Labrador";  "Journal  d'un  voyage  k
la  cote  de  Gaspe  " ;  and  "  La  vie  de  Mgr.  Plessis,"
all  of  which  were  published  in  Quebec.

FERNALD,  Charles  Henry,  naturalist,  b.  on
Mount  Desert,  Me.,  16  March,  1838.  He  was  edu-
cated principally  at  the  Maine  Weslevan  seminary,
and  during  the  civil  war  served  in  the  U.  S.  navy
as  acting  ensign.  In  1865  he  became  principal  of
Litchfield  academy,  and  in  1866  principal  of  Houl-
ton  academy.  He  then  was  called  to  the  chair  of
natural  history  in  the  Maine  state  college,  and  held
it  from  1871  till  1886,  when  he  became  professor
of  zoology  in  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  col-
lege. Prof.  Fernald  is  a  member  or  various  scien-
tific societies,  and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in
1886  from  the  Maine  state  college.  He  has  a  large
collection  of  tortricida^,  and  has  very  thoroughly
studied  these  moths.  His  principal* publications
are  "  Catalogue  of  the  Tortncida?  of  North  Ameri-
ca" (Philadelphia,  1882);  "Butterflies  of  Maine"
(Augusta,  1884):  "Grasses  of  Maine "  (1885) ;  and
"  Sphingidre  of  New  England  "  (1886).

FERNALD,  Merrill  Caldwell,  educator, b.  in
South  Levant,  Me.,  26  May,  1838. He  was  gradu-


ated at  Bowdoin  in  1861,  and  subsequently  taught
in  Levant,  Searsport,  and  Bethel,  lie.  Later  he
spent  some  time  in  the  chemical  laboratory  at
Harvard  in  the  study  of  analytical  chemistry  and
mineralogy,  and  also  acted  as  assistant  to T
Joabh  P.  Cooke.  In  1868  he  became  professor  of
mathematics  and  physics  in  the  Maine  state  col-
lege of  agriculture  and  the  mechanical  arts,  and  in
1819  became  president  of  that  institution,  now-
known  as  the  Maine  state  college.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  the  state  board  of  agriculture  in  1869,
and  has  published  in  its  reports  papers  on  subjects
connected  with  his  special  studies,  besides  meteoro-
logical and  mathematical  tables,  and  records  of
barometrical,  geodesic,  and  astronomical  works.
President  Fernald  has  been  supervisor  of  schools,
and  received  the  degree  of  doctor  of  philosophy
from  Bowdoin  in  1881.

FERNANDES  CALABAR,  Domingos,  Brazil-
ian soldier,  b.  in  Olinda  near  the  close  of  the  16th
century ;  d.  in  Porto  Calvo,  22  June,  1635.  He  was
of  African  descent,  and  little  is  known  of  his  early
life.  He  was  living  in  Pernambuco  when  the
Dutch  attacked  the  city  in  1630,  and,  notwith-
standing his  humble  condition,  gathered  some
men,  joined  the  volunteers,  and  gained  a  series  of
victories  which  forced  the  invaders  back.  In  1632
he  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Campo
Real,  and  afterward,  with  his  troops,  repulsed  the
Dutch  at  several  places.  He  was  rewarded  for  his
devotion  by  the  contempt  of  his  countrymen,  who
were  envious  of  his  prowess.  Wounded  by  this
conduct,  he  left  the  Portuguese  and  joined  the
Dutch,  whom  he  led  to  the  capture  and  plunder
of  the  town  of  Yguarassu.  He  captured  the  for-
tress of  Rio  Formoso  in  Jan.,  1633,  won  an  impor-
tant battle  at  Itamaraca  in  June,  and  in  December
led  the  conquerors  to  the  fortress  of  Reis  Magos.
In  March,  1634,  he  routed  the  Portuguese  army,
which  had  defeated  the  Dutch  in  January  of  that
year,  and  captured  the  port  of  Santo  Augustinho.
The  Portuguese  being  threatened  on  all  sides,  the
commander,  Alburquerque,  in  order  to  spare  the
rest  of  the  troops,  began  to  retreat  toward  La-
gunas  in  June,  1635,  but  before  reaching  Porto
Calvo  he  found  out  that  that  town  had  been  occu-
pied by  Fernandes,  thus  strengthening  the  Dutch
garrison  commanded  by  Picard.  Sebastiao  do
Souto,  a  feigned  friend  of  Picard,  treacherously
allured  him  and  200  of  his  men  to  a  place  where
the  Portuguese  had  prepared  an  ambush,  com-
pletely routing  them.  The  garrison  of  Porto  Calvo
then  had  to  capitulate,  and  Fernandes  Calabar,
who  was  major  of  the  Dutch  army,  was  taken  pris-
oner and  hanged  bvthe  Portuguese  at  Porto  Calvo.

FERNANDES  PINHEIRO,  JosS  Feliciano
(fer-nan'-dez),  Viscount  of  Sao  Leopoldo,  Brazilian
statesman,  b.  in  Santos.  9  May,  1774;  d.  in  Porto
Alegre,  6  June,  1847.  He  began  his  studies  in  his
native  country,  and  completed  them  at  Coimbra,
Portugal,  where,  in  1798,  he  was  graduated  as
bachelor  in  canonical  laws,  but  abandoned  his  ec-
clesiastical functions  and  entered  the  magistracy.
He  assisted  Velloso  in  establishing  the  literary  in-
stitution "  Arco  do  Cogo,"  wrote  most  of  the  scien-
tific work  " Fora Pluminense,"  and  compiled  the
"  Historia  Nova  e  Completa  da  America."  In  1800
he  returned  to  Brazil,  and  was  appointed  ju
excise  duties  of  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.  In  180$  he
was  given  charge  of  the  organization  of  a  flotilla
for  coast  defence.  He  was  made  colonel  in  1810,
and  in  1812  accompanied  the  army  to  Montevideo.
In  1816  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  a  jury  for  the
trial  of  numerous  criminals  in  Rio  Grande  d«>  Sul.
In  1821  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Portuguese


IKMXHA


:\  WD!!/


488


legislature  for  the  province  of  Bio  Paulo,  hut  left

when  he  lii-niil  of  tlic  independence  "f

irn he  was  again elected for

I 'an  In  to  tin1  constituent assembly  of Brazil.

A-«t  sppointcd  president  of  Hin  (irande  do  Stil.

and  founded  the  flrsl  typographic*]

eatalili-imi.  nt  then,  the  oolont  of  sio  Gsopotdo,

mi. I  the  oharity  hospital. »>ti  18  Oct,,  IBM,  M  wa»

made  counsellor  uf  Mate,  and  mi  21 Nov.  accepted

portfolio  of  minister  of  the  empire, lb

:  his  influence  for  the  improvement  of  public
Instruction,  reorganised  the  school  of  medicine.
bunded  a  literary  academy  in  the  eapital,  and  es-
tablished ohaira  of  law  in  silo  Leopoldo  and  olinda.
On  M  N"V..  1887,  SOOn  after  negotiating  a  treaty

of  peace  with  the  Argentine  republic  and  a  oosn>
ininial  treaty  with  England,  be  resigned  his  office.
In  MO  he  retired  tomporarOY  from  the  senate.
ami  went  for  his  health  to  Sao  Pedro,  where  he
was  at  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  18.11.  In  1837
he  again  took  his  scat  in  the  senate,  and  was  in-
trusted with  Importanl  oommissiona  In  1838  he
Bounded  the  (icographical  and  historical  institute.
Don  PodlO  II.  conferred  many  honors  on  Fcrnan-
des.  He  was  a  member  of  many  Kuropean  scicn-
title  societies,  and  was  the  author  of  several  works,
the  most  Important  of  which  are  "  Vida  e  feitos
de  Alexandre  dc  (iusm&o  e  de  Bartholmneu  Lou-
lanoo  de  Gusmao*';  "  Resposta  as  Breves  Annota-
eOes  que  sobre  a  liiemoria  (riismao,  escrevera  o
consellieiro  Manuel  .1.  M.  da  Costa  c  S»i."

FEKXANDES-SARD1NII  A.  Pedro,  Brazilian
K.  0,  bishop,  b,  in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  in  1497;  d.
on  the  coast  of  Brazil  in  July.  155(5.  His  parents,
who  were  of  noble  family,  destined  him  for  the  pro-
fession of  arms,  but  he  entered  the  church  in  early
life.  On  the  establishment  of  a  government  in
Brazil  in  1549  the  clergy  of  that  country,  without
a  head  to  govern  them,  were  guilty  of  the  grossest
negligence  and  vices.  In  1551  Femandes-Sardinha
was  elected  and  consecrated  first  bishop  of  Brazil,
ami  arrived  in  his  diocese  on  1  Jan.,  1552.  OoQB
Dining  severity  with  prudence,  he  soon  improved
the  character  of  the  secular  clergy  as  well  as  of  the
.its,  who  were  beginning  to  work  in  the  new
region.  During  the  government  of  Thome  de
Sonsa everything  went  favorably,  and  rapid  prog-
ress was  made  in  the  conversion  of  the  Indians;
but  in  1553  Duarte  da  Costa,  who  was  of  a  domi-
nating and  quarrelsome  character,  became  gov-
ernor, and  soon  serious  differences  arose  between
him  and  the  bishop,  and,  as  the  quarrel  became
daily  more  bitter,  the  case  was  submitted  to  the
Brown,  and  both  were  ordered  to  appear  at  court.
Fcrnandes-Sardinha,  sailed  from  Bahia,  2  July.
155(1,  but  the  vessel  was  attacked  by  violent  storms,
and  on  Hi  July  was  wrecked  on  the  reefs  near  the
mouth  of  the  Silo  Francisco  river.  The  crew  and
passengers  were  saved,  and  tried  to  travel  along
tin-  coast  to  Olinda,  but  after  a  few  davs  they  fell
itito  the  hands  of  cannibals,  who  slaughtered  and
ate  the  prisoners.  Only  three  persons  escaped,  who
afterward  related  that  one  of  the  first  to  be  sacri-
Bosd  was  the  bishop,  who  suffered  his  fate  with
resignation,  and  up  to  his  last  moment  exhorted
and  consoled  his  fellow-sufferers.  The  place  where
tlii->  tragedy  occurred  has  since  been  called  the
bishop's  wood.  Fcnmniles,  during  his  episcopacy,
established  the  college  of  the  mission  of  slo  Paolo.

FERNANDEZ,  Diego,  Spanish-American  bas-
in,  l>. in Palencia,  Spain,  about 1580,  d.  in
la,  1581. He  adopted  the  military  profession,
went  to  Peru  in  1545,  and  took  part  in  the  cam-

Sl  1553  and  1554,  in  which  Francisco  Giroo
I  at  defeated  and  his  party  destroyed. The


Marquis  de  Canetc,  who  was  viceroy  in 1556,  gave
him  an  office,  and  ordered  him  to  write  the  In
of  the  events  m  which  he  bid  taken  part.
ward  returned  to  Spain,  where  Sandoval,  the  presi-
dent uf the council of the llidias,  requestiil llitll
to  write  also  an  account  of  the  troubles  caused  by
(ioti/alo I'izarro and his  adherents. The work
composed  by  Pwjsmdai  is  entitled  "  Pita
guiu la  (.arte  de  la  1  listeria  del  Peru  "(Seville,  1 B
The  author  gives  a  detailed account  of  all  that
passed in Peru  from  the  arrival  of  the  first
toy,  HUSO  Nunez  de  Vela,  in  1544. Since  he  took

Iiart  in  several  of  the  events  that  he  d«S0ribBS,  and
;new  all  the  men  of  whom  he  writes,  hi*  bistorj  is
usually  regarded  as  the  IkM  account  of  the  con-
quest of  Peru,  (tarcilaso  de  la  \'ipi,  however,  ac-
cuses him  of  partiality,  and  says  that  his  record  of
events  is  colore*  1  by  his  animosity  toward  individ-
uals. The  sale  of  the  work  was  forbidden  by  the
council  of  the  Indias.  and  the  iiihahitaiits  of  Span-
ish America  were  particularly  forhidden  to  read  it.
FERNANDEZ.  Juan.  Spanish  soldier.  h.  in  Se-
ville in  14JMI;  d.  in  I53.s.  He  accompanied  Her-
nando Cortes  when  the  hitter  conquered  Mexico,
and  also  served  under  I'izarro,  but  quitted  his
tarries  and  entered  that  of  Pedro  Alvarado.  Fer-
nandez was  an  experienced  pilot,  having  frequently
made  the  voyage  between  Peru  and  Panama,  and
Alvarado  gave  him  the  command  of  the  Sort,
ordering  him  to  explore  the  coast  from  Puerto
Viejo  to  the  territory  governed  by  Pizarro,  and  to
take  possession  of  it  in  due  form.  After  lulfilling
this  mission  he  was  sent  to  Nicaragua  in  search  of
the  troops  that  Alvarado  had  left  in  Panama.  Be
was  to  keep  near  the  coast  with  his  fleet  while
Alvarado  marched  by  land  upon  Quito.  Diego  de
Alraagro,  who  belonged  to  the  party  of  Pizarro,
wrote  immediately  to  Rivera,  aim  to  his  parti-
of  Pachacama,  to  arrest  and  hang  Fernandez,
whom  he  considered  a  deserter  from  their  own
partv.  Shortly  afterward  Alvarado  jienctrated  into
the  heart  of  the  country,  crossing  the  Andes  by  a
perilous  march.  Alvarado  subsequently  agreed  to
renounce  all  his  claims  and  cede  his  ships  to  his
rival  on  receipt  of  one  hundred  thousand  dollars,
and  Fernandez  was  thus  obliged  to  enter  the  ser-
vice of  his  former  commander,  who  pardoned  him,
and  in  1535  appointed  him  captain  of  a  galleon,  in
which  he  made  two  voyages  to  Spain.  He  was
still  discontented  under  Pizarro.  and  left  him
again  in  1537,  taking  Milks  as  pilot  under  Anto-
nio Quesada,  governor  of  Hispaniola.  The  follow-
ing year  he  was  appointed  adjutant,  and  accom-
Knicd  Antonio  de  Sedefio,  who  had  been  ordered
the  governor  to  reduce  to  submission  the  island
of  Trinidad.  Instead  of  fulfilling  their  mission,
tiny  ilis.-mliarked  on  the  continent  in  order  to  dis-
cover the  province  of  Meta,  which  was  said  to  be
rich  in  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  The  party  pene-
trated into  the  country  for  some  distance,  but.
after  se vend  fights  with  the  Indians,  were  forced  to
turn  back.  Sedefio  died  in  Octolier.  1538,  and
Fernandez  was  then  proclaimed  commander,  but
survived  him  but  a  few  davs.

FERNANDEZ,  Juan,  Spanish  navigator,  b.  bj

Cartagena,  MM;  d.  in  157<;. The  jealousy  with

which  the  Spanish  court  retarded  the  diffusion  of
intelligence  regarding  its  possessions  in  America  is
periMpe  the  reason  why  si  little  is  known  about  his
voyages.  The  following  incidents  embrace  nearly
all  it  is  [Missible  to  ascertain  concerning  him.  lb-
made  frequent  voyages  along  the  coast  of  Snith
America,  and.  according  to  the  custom  of  sailors  st
the  time,  kept  i don  to  the  shore.  When  sailing
from  Peru  to  Chili,  however,  he  found  that  the  pas-


436


FERNANDEZ


FERNANDEZ  DE  CASTRO  ANDRADE


sage  wib  rendered  extremely  long  and  labofiont  by

the  winds  that prevailed  constantly  in  these  lati-
tudes, an<l  bethought  that  he  would"  avoid  them  by

standing  out  from  land. Bit  plan  was  suoosssfal,

and  he  arrived  in  Chili  without  any  dillicult y.  mak-
ing the  journey  in  a  nnich  less  time  than  when  lie
followed  the  shore.  In  one  of  these  voyages,  prob-
ably alxuit  1568,  he  discovered  the  island  which
l>ears  his  name.  According  to  some  writers,  the
Spanish  government  granted  him  possession  of  it,
while  others  say  that  he  met  with  a  refusal.  He
remained  some  time  on  it,  however,  and  when  he
departed  left  several  goats  behind  him,  which  mul-
tiplied  to  such  an  extent  that  the  island  was  soon
stocked  with  them.  The  islands  of  Saint  Felix
and  Saint  Ambrose  were  discovered  by  him  in
1574.  He  was  so  much  encouraged  by  these  suc-
cesses that,  in  the  hope  of  making  stifl  more  im-
portant discoveries,  he  sailed  from  the  coast  of
Chili  in  1576,  bearing  out  farther  from  land  than
in  the  preceding  voyages.  He  sailed  over  about
forty  degrees  toward  the  west  and  southwest,  and,
after  a  month's  journey,  landed  on  a  coast  which
to  all  appearance  was  that  of  a  continent.  The
inhabitants,  who  were  white,  well-made,  and  de-
cently clothed,  received  the  Spaniards  kindly.  As
his  ship  was  very  small  and  badly  equipped,  Fer-
nandez did  not  push  his  researches  farther,  but,
after  a  short  stay,  embarked  for  Chili.  He  made
his  companions  promise  to  keep  the  discovery  a
secret,  and  arranged  with  them  to  return  with  a
larger  expedition,  but  he  was  prevented  in  some
way  from  putting  his  design  m  execution,  and,
after  his  death,  the  whole  affair  was  forgotten.
According  to  another  version,  he  partially  dis-
closed his  discovery  to  certain  persons  who  aban-
doned the  idea  of  pursuing  it  after  his  death.
These  details  are  found  in  a  work  published  by
Luis  Arias,  a  Spaniard,  entitled  4*  Memoir  to  rec-
ommend to  the  King  the  Conversion  of  the  Natives
of  Newly  Discovered  Islands"  (1609;  English  trans-
lation, Edinburgh,  1773).  It  has  been  conjectured
by  some  geographers  that  the  coast  perceived  by
Fernandez  was  that  of  New  Zealand,  and  they  ac-
count for  the  discrepancy  between  the  real  distance
of  New  Zealand  from  South  America  and  the  forty
degrees  over  which  Fernandez  sailed  by  supposing
that  Arias,  from  his  ignorance  of  nautical  matters,
made  an  error  in  his  calculations.  Another  dis-
covery by  Fernandez  was  that  of  Easter  island,
forty  degrees  west  from  the  Chilian  coast,  which
was  generally  thought  to  have  been  sighted  first
by  Roggeween,  a  Dutch  navigator,  in  1722,  but
Duperrey,  a  French  savant,  has  restored  the  credit
of  its  discovery  to  Fernandez.

FERNANDEZ,  Prospero,  Costa  Rican  presi-
dent, b.  in  San  Jose  de  Costa  Rica,  18  July,  1834;
d.  there,  11  March,  1885.  He  studied  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Guatemala,  and  in  1852  entered  the  mili-
tary service  under  the  new  conscription  law.  In
1854  he  became  lieutenant,  and  in  1855  marched
with  the  auxiliary  forces  of  Costa  Rica  to  Nicara-
gua to  repel  the  invasion  of  William  Walker  and
his  filibusters.  He  took  part  during  1856-'7  in
the  battles  of  Santa  Rosa,  Jan  Jacinto,  and  Rivas,
and  finally  in  1886,  during  Walker's  second  inva-
sion, in  the  capture  of  his  steamers  in  the  river
San  Juan.  In  1870  he.  took  an  active  part  in  the
revolution  headed  by  Col.  Tomas  Guardia,  which
broke  out  on  27  April  against  the  government  of
President  Jesus  Jimenez.  Dr.  Rruno  Carranza
was  appointed  provisional  president,  but  resigned
on  8  Aug.,  and  Guardia  as  commander-in-chief
Micc.eded  him,  bat,  in  view  of  the  hostility  of  the
national  assembly,  retired  to  Alajuela,  and  was


proclaimed  dictator  by  the  military  forces  under
Fernandez.  7  Oct.  Under  Guardias  despotic  gov*
ernment,  Fernandez,  promoted  to  general  of  divis-
ion, held  aloof  from  |>olitics.  but  was  for  some
time  governor  Of  the  province  of  Alajuela.  in  ISM
was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  military
forces  of  the  republic,  and  in  1882  elected  by  popu-
lar vote  to  the  presidency  for  the  constitutional
term  of  four  years.  When  Guardia  died  before  the
expiration  of  his  term,  6  July,  1884,  Lizano  as-
sumed the  power  for  some  weeks,  and  on  1(1  An;:..
Fernandez  was  installed.  His  government  con-
tributed to  the  material  progress  of  the  country.
A  revolt  that  broke  out  in  October,  18*4.  in  favor
of  the  expelled  Jesuits,  was  promptly  quelled.
Before  the  expiration  of  his  term  Fernandas:  died,
and  Vice-President  Bernardo  Soto  succeeded  him.
FERNANDEZ  DE  CASTRO  ANURADK  Y
PORTl'GAL,  Pedro  Antonio,  count  of  Lemos,
marquis  of  Sarria  and  duke  of  Taurisano,  viceroy
of  Peru,  b.  in  Madrid,  1634 :  d.  in  Lima,  6  Dec.,
1672.  He  was  educated  for  the  army  and  enjoyed
high  favor  at  court.  He  was  appointed  viceroy  of
Peru  by  King  Charles  II.  in  1666,  and  arrived  in
Lima,  21  Nov.,  1667.  Soon  after  his  arrival  the
rebellion  of  the  brothers  Jose  and  Gaspar  Salcedo,
rich  miners  of  the  province  of  Paucarcolla,  which
had  begun  in  1665,  took  such  proportions  that
Lemos  resolved  to  go  personally  to  the  seat  of
disturbance.  He  soon  subdued  the  rebels,  and  in-
stituted a  court,  which  condemned  the  chief,  Jose*
Salcedo,  with  forty-one  others,  to  death.  Gaspar
Salcedo  was  banished  for  six  years,  and  condemned
to  a  fine  of  12,000f.  and  costs.  This  sentence  waa
appealed  to  Spain  and  reversed,  Gaspar  Salcedo
was  set  at  liberty  and  fine  and  costs  returned  to
him,  and  the  natural  son  of  Jose,  a  captain  of  the
same  name,  was  in  1703  given  by  Philip  V.  the
title  of  marquis  of  Villarica.  Notwithstanding
that  the  injustice  committed  by  Lemos  was  gen-
erally acknowledged,  there  was  in  1679  printed  at
Lima  a  work  entitled  "  Estatera  jurfdica  en  defensa
del  virey  conde  de  Lemos  y  del  Oidor  Ovalle  sobre
la  muerte  del  maestre  de  campo  Don  Jose  Salcedo
en  1668."  The  viceroy  had  the  city  of  Laycacota,
consisting  of  about  3,000  inhabitants,  entirely  de-
stroyed, and  made  Puno  capital  of  the  province.
After  this  campaign  he  visited  the  provinces  of
Chucuito  and  Cuzco,  and  returned  to  Lima  in  1669.
During  his  absence  in  campaign,  for  the  first  time
in  the  nistory  of  the  New  World,  he  did  not  leave
the  government  in  the  hands  of  the  Andiencia,  but
appointed  his  wife.  Ana  de  Bona,  a  daughter  of
the  Duke  of  Gandia,  regent.  He  was  a  fervent
Catholic,  and  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Jesuits,
going  to  such  an  extreme  that  in  the  building  of
the  temple  of  Los  Desamparados,  near  the  bridge
of  Lima,  he  daily  carried  building  material  as  a
common  laborer,  and  often  served  as  clerk  or  sacris-
tan at  mass  with  Father  Castillo.  In  the  early
part  of  1670  the  news  arrived  at  Lima  that  the
famous  English  privateer  Morgan  had  taken  Cha-
gres,  captured  Panama,  and  sacked  the  city.  The
viceroy  fitted  out  an  expedition  of  eighteen  vessels
with  nearly  3,000  troops,  but  it  arrived  in  Panama
too  late,  as  Morgan  had  evacuated  the  city.  Later
in  the  same  year  renewed  rumors  of  a  foreign  inva-
sion kept  the  country  alarmed,  and  the  vi<
ordered  all  the  Pacific  ports  to  be  put  in  a  thorough
state  of  defence.  The  new  church  of  I.
rados  was  finished  and  opened  30  Jan.,  167'J.  and
this,  as  well  as  the  canonization  of  St.  Rosa  toward
the  end  of  the  year,  was  celebrated  by  the  v
vith great  splendor,  but  in  the  last  he  contracted
a  sickness  of  which  he  died  in  a  few  days.


S  wi'iv.  DE  i


PERU rlKDBZ  Ml  pikduahIta 437


<Pf^


I  I  KB  \MH  / l»l <  ni:i»o\  \ |>|ego.  mar-
iadalcazar  and  oount  of  Posadas,  viceroy

.  Ii.  in tin- last •  1  •  1  it rt •  •  r  of  the

Itith  century  (place  unknown);  dL  in  Guadalcaxar

■boot 16B0. Hev/aaa  ilmiannanl  "f  Gonzalo  de

mil  m  educated  for  a  military  career.

In his youth he

fought viiliitnt lv  in

the wars of Flan-

and in 1611

was  appointed

roy  of  Mexico. I >ur-

ing  his  administra-

tion  in  1618,  the  en-

trinear  Adrian  Boot
n  pin  tin-  works  for
Mm  drainage  of  thr
valley  of  Mexico,  in
1614  the  city  of
I.erina  wii>  founded,
mid  in  1616  tile  1'.-
|M-huan  Indians  re-
volted, killing  their
missionaries,  but
Fernandez  soon  con-
quered them.  Dur-
ing 1014  there  were
rumors  of  the  ap-
proach of  a  Dutch
fleet  in  the  Pacific,  and  Fernandez  fortified  the
jH»rt  of  Acapulco.  He  also  equipped  three  war-
ships there,  which,  after  the  fears  of  war  had  been
disjM  lied,  he  scut  in  March.  1015,  on  an  exploring
expedition  to  the  coast  of  California.  In  1020  the
aqueduct  of  the  city  of  Mexico  was  finished,  con-
sisting of  900  arches  and  costing  250,000f.  In
1681.  shortly  before  the  death  of  Philip  III.,  Fer-
nandez was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru,  but  the
sickness  and  death  of  his  wife  detained  him  for
some  time,  and  he  did  not  reach  Lima  till  25
July.  1668.  In  1886,  when  the  war  between
Spain  and  Holland  was  renewed  and  there  was
danger  of  an  invasion  by  a  Dutch  fleet,  the  vice-
ordered  all  important  points  to  l>e  fortified
with  the  greatest  activity,  and  gave  a  military
organization  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  coast.
Fernandez  remained  personally  for  four  months
in  Callao,  and  put  everything  in  good  state  of
defence.  Karly  in  1624  the  Dutch  fleet,  consist-
ing of  eleven  vessels  with  294  guns  and  1,000
troops,  under  command  of  Admiral  Jacob  Clerk,  ap-
peared before  Callao, and  anchored  at  the  island  of
Sun  Lorenzo.  The  Dutch  admiral  sent  a  fire-ship
against  the  boom  and  chain  at  the  entrance  of  the
harbor,  but  an  unfavorable  wind  took  it  to  the
bearh  at  some  distance  from  the  town,  where  it  ex-
plode 1  without  doing  great  damage.  Repeated
attacks  and  bombard— to  of  the  pirt  were  suc-
cessfully repulsed  by  the  forts  and  two  men-of-
war,  the  "  Loreto"  and  "San  Hartoloiue."  anchored
in  the  bay.  Admiral  Clerk  sent  Mveml  expe-
ditions  againal  other  points  of  the  coast  without
notable  results,  ami  died  on  Ixwird  his  fleet.  His
^sor.  after  five  months  of  fruitless  hostilities,
abandoned  the  coast  and  returned  to  Europe.  Dur-
ing the  rest  of  the  year  Fernandez  applied  himself
to  the  Improvement  of  Ins  government,  bonded
the  Dionaetery  <>f  Sauta  Catalina  in  Lima,  and
ordered  barracks  to  lie  built  at  Callao  for  the
lodging  of  negro-slaves  arriving  from  Africa,  who
had  previously  been  kept  by  their  importera  ;n
open  camps  till  their  side. In  1685  be  appointed

hn  nephew.  Luis  de  Cordova  y  Arcc.  gtfveiUOIOf
Chili,  and  when,  in  1686,  the  order  arrived  from
Madrid  to  take  up  again  the  warfare  against the


Araucanians,  Fcrnai  re> enforcements  and

ammunitions  to  Chili  from  Callao.  In  1825,  Per-
nandez  also  succeeded  in  quelling  the  civil  war-
fan'  between  the  rival  factions  of  the  I
and  Vicunas  in  Potosi.  which  had  lasted  for  three
years,  ami  OB  16  <»<t.  of  the  BUM  fBM  the  new
cathedral  at  Lima,  which  had  been  fliiished  b)  the
\ieerov.  was. ejerated. Pernandei  enad

during  his  administration  the  construction  of  the
cathedrals  of  Cnzco,  Arequipa,  and  Guamauga.  In
1686  he  established  the  uimcrsity  of  San  Pedn»
Nolasco,  and  in  the  same  vear  regulated  the  mail
service.  He  had  the  bridge  over  the  Apurimac
river  established  at  the  most  convenient  potaL
constructed  another  at  Chancer,  and  also  or<i

a  yearly  visit  Drone  of  the  supreme  judges  through

the  court  district  to  remedy  the  abuses  coinmitted
by  the  judges,  priests,  and  Spaniards  generally
against  the  Indians.  Fernandez  collected  afl
official  letters,  informations,  orders,  and  consulta-
tions during  his  administration  in  Mexico  and
Peru  from  1012  till  1"2N  in  three  volumes,  ami
Mai  them  to  the  council  of  the  Indies.  besides  the
official  information  given  to  his  successors.  On  14
Jan..  1666,  the  new  viceroy  arrived,  and  Fernandez
delivered  to  him  the  government  and  returned  to
Spain,  where  he  resided  in  a  palace  which  he  had
liuilt  in  the  town  of  (iuadalcazar.  near  Cordova.

FKKNANDEZ  Dl  PIE  DBA  HIT  A,  Lucas
.South  American  historian.  I>.  in  Iiogota  in  1024;
d.  in  Panama  in  1686.  H*  studied  in  his  native
city  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  San  Hartoloine.  and
finished  his  education  in  the  I'niversitv  of  Santo
Tomas,  where  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  the-
ology in  1047.  During  his  academical  years  he
published  several  dramas,  which  have  not  bean
preserved.  In  1054  he  was  appointed  prebendary
of  the  cathedral  of  Iiogota.  beoMM  successively  its
canon,  treasurer,  and  precentor,  and  was  vicar-
general  and  governor  of  the  archbishopric  during
the  vacancy  of  the  see.  He  was  at  the  same  time
the  favorite  preacher  of  the  city,  and  this,  with  his
literary  merit,  obtained  for  him  the  friendship  of
the  president  of  New  Granada.  Dionisio  Perez
.Manriqiie.  who  arrived  from  Spain  in  1054.  In
1000  he  was  elided  dean  of  the  cathedral  of
Popavan,  and  in  1666  went  to  Spain  on  a  commis-
sion from  the  president,  staying  in  Madrid  for  six
years  and  employing  his  leisure  time  in  writing  his
work  "  Historia  del  Noevo  Beino  <le  Granada."  for
which  he,  as  a  descendant  OB  the  maternal  side  ..f
the  Peruvian  Incus,  had  a  apodal  vocation.  His
work  is  considered,  together  with  (iareilaso  de  la
Vega's,  as  the  most  reliable  history  of  the  conquest
and  of  the  l?th  century,  enpeejaitv  as  regards  New
Granada  and  Fcuador.  It  was  not  completed,  as
after  the  publication  Of  the  first  part  (Antwerp,
1666)  the  author  died,  and  it  is  not  known  what
became  of  his  manuscript.  In  Spain  he  was  offend
the  bishopric  of  Santa  Marta.  continued  I » v  the
pope,  and  in  100U  sailed  for  Cartagena,  where  he
was  consecrated.  He  began  to  visit,  evangelize,  and
partly  civilize  the  savages  in  his  dioce.se,  and  Ugan
to  reluiild  in  stone  his  cathedral  which  had  beta
constructed  of  wood  and  straw.  He  distributed
his  whole  revenue  in  charities,  and  lived  in  pov-
erty. In  liiTi!  he  was  promoted  to  the  bishopric  of
Panama,  but  before  M  could  leave  Santa  Marta
this  city  was  taken  and  sacked  by  the  lua-can
Duncan  and  Cos.  The  churches  were  pillaged,  the
bishop  taken  prisoner,  and  the  pirates,  Inlieving
his  poor  apparel  to  be  a  aign  of  avarice  end  ndaarlv
habit,  •objected  him  to  torture,  to  Bod  OOl  the  hid-
ing place.  Of  his  money  and  jewelry.  As  he  was
unable  to  pnj  his  ransom  he  was  carried  as  a  pris-


438


FERNANDEZ LIZARDI


fernAxdkz-pexa  y  angulo


oner  to  the  island  of  Providence  and  delivered  to
the  buccaneer  chief  Morgan.  This  chief  was  moved
by  the  venerable  ■ppnaninnr  <>f  Fernandez,  wl  him
at  liberty  without  ransom,  and,  hearing  that  he  had
been  appointed  bishop  of  Panama,  made  him  i

firesent  of  a  costly  chalice  and  pontifical  rol>e  which
tad  fallen  to  his  share  in  the  stick  of  Panama  in
L07O)  and  conducted  him  with  the  greatest  respect
in  one  of  his  ships  to  Chagres.  Scarcely  nad
Fernandez  arrived in Panama  when he began

{reaching  to  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Isthmus  of
)arien,  spending  his  whole  income  in  this  task.
1 1 \b  >ermons  were  heard  not  only  in  the  pulpit,  but
also  weekly  in  the  streets  and  public  squares  of
Panama,  until  he  died,  poor  but  venerated  by  all.
FERNANDEZ  LIZARDI,  Jo»6  Joaquin,
Mexican  author,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1771 ;
d.  there  in  June,  1827.  He  was  graduated  in  1787
at  the  University  or  Mexico  as  bachelor,  and  in
1789  as  licentiate.  In  1812  he  was  deputy  magis-
trate of  Tasco,  Guerrero,  and  as  such  delivered  to
the  revolutionary  chief  Morelos  all  the  arms  and
ammunition  in  that  place  on  1  Jan.  In  the  same
year  he  moved  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  began  to
publish  the  newspaper  "  El  Pensador  Mexicano  "
(The  Mexican  Thinker),  under  which  name  Fer-
nandez is  now  generally  known.  In  this  paper  he
advocated  free  schools  and  compulsory  education,
and  one  of  his  articles,  in  which  he  censured  the
decree  of  the  viceroy  Venegas  depriving  the  revo-
lutionary priests  of  the  right  to  be  judged  in  clerical
courts,  caused  his  imprisonment  for  seven  months.
As  soon  as  he  regained  his  liberty  in  1813  he  pub-
lished several  articles  on  the  plague,  at  that  time
ravaging  Mexico,  and  in  the  following  three  years
published  many  reviews,  the  best  of  which  is  called
"  Alacena  de  Frioleras  "  ("  The  Locker  for  Trifles  ").
He  also  published  at  this  time  his  most  famous
work,  "  Periquillo  Sarniento  "  (1810 ;  new  ed.,  illus-
trated, 2  vols.,  Mexico,  1884),  a  collection  of  fables
(1817),  and  "La  Quijotita  and  Ratos  Entreteni-
dos"  (1819).  After  the  Spanish  constitution  was
re-established  in  Mexico,  Fernandez  published  sev-
eral pamphlets,  one  of  which,  a  dialogue  between
Chamorro  and  Dominiquin,  caused  his  imprison-
ment for  the  second  time.  In  the  next  year  he
published  a  paper  called  "  El  Conductor  Electrico,"
and  a  series  of  articles,  "  Conversaciones  del  Payo
y  el  Sacristan."  His  defence  of  the  freemasons
(1822)  caused  his  excommunication,  but,  undaunted
by  the  prosecution  of  the  clergy  and  reactionary
party,  he  published  a  second  defence,  his  "  Cartas
del  Pensador  al  Papista,"  and  "  Defensa  del  Pen-
sador dirigida  al  Provisor,"  and  "  Ataque  al  Cas-
tillo de  Ulua,"  and  a  political-moral  paper  called
"El  hermanodel  Penco"  (1823).  He  had  to  suffer
many  prosecutions,  and  often  to  struggle  with
poverty,  but  the  lower  classes  adored  him  and
shared  their  bread  with  him.  He  also  published
two  novels,  "  Noches  Tristes  y  Dia  Alegre"  (1823),
and  "  Vrida  y  Hechos  del  Famoso  Caballero  Don
Catrin  de  la  Fachenda  "  (Mexico,  1832).

FERNANDEZ  MADRID,  Jose\  South  Amer-
ican poet,  b.  in  Cartagena,  Colombia,  9  Feb.,  1789;
d.  in  Barnes-Terrace,  near  London,  England,  28
June,  1829.  In  1810  the  University  of  Bogota
conferred  on  him  the  degrees  of  doctor  of  laws
and  doctor  of  medicine.  He  was  active  among
those  who  took  part  in  the  war  for  independence,
\\;i-  elected  deputy  to  the  convention  of  Cartagena
in  1811,  and  then  representative  to  the  congress  of
New  Granada.  He  distinguished  himself  in  the
assembly,  and  became  its  president.  When  the
government  of  the  united  provinces  of  New  (ira-
nada was established in 1814,  Madrid became


representative  for  Cartagena,  and  filled  the  office
until  1816.  He  ■noceeded  OmbUo  Tones  in  the
presidency  of  the  republic,  14  March,  1816,  ante
critical  circumstances.  The  country  was  overrun
with  Sjwnish  troops,  and  he  was  obliged  to  retreat
before  them  to  Popayan.  He  refused  to  surrender
to  the  Spanish  colonel,  Latorre,  and  continued
fighting  valiantly  against  superior  numbers,  until
he  was  finally  obliged  to  resign  the  presidency  to
the  congressional  commission  which  accompanied
him.  The  patriots  were  then  defeated  by  Samano,
their  forces  annihilated,  and  Madrid  sought  safety
in  flight,  but  was  soon  taken  prisoner  and  trans-
ported to  Havana  in  1816.  He  lived  there  several
years,  supporting  himself  by  practising  medicine,
out  in  1825  he  returned  to  Colombia.  He  became
the  confidential  agent  of  the  Colombian  govern-
ment in  Paris,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  in
June,  1830,  was  minister  to  England.  He  pub-
lished a  collection  of  poems  under  the  title  "  Las
Rosas"  (Havana,  1822);  two*  tragedies,  "Atala"
(1822),  and  "Guatimozin"  (Paris,  1827);  and  arti-
cles on  "  Cultivation,"  "  Commerce,"  "  The  Culti-
vation and  Manufacture  of  Tobacco  in  Cuba,"  and
"  Goitres  " ;  medical  notes  on  "  The  Yellow  Fever,"
which  have  been  translated  into  French ;  a  metri-
cal translation  of  Delille's  "  Les  trois  regnes  de  la
nature,"  and  numerous  other  works.  —  His  son,
Pedro,  author,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1817;  d.  in
Serrezuela,  Colombia,  7  Feb.,  1875,  received  his
early  education  in  Havana  and  Colombia,  complet-
ing it  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  England.
After  his  return  to  Colombia  in  1842  he  was
president  of  the  state  of  Boyaca,  member  of  the
Federal  congress,  and  for  many  years  sub-sec-
retary of  foreign  relations,  but  declined  repeatedly
to  accept  a  portfolio  himself,  as  he  preferred  to
lead  a  studious  life,  teaching  in  different  colleges
and  at  the  University  of  Bogota,  where  he  occu-
pied the  chair  of  philosophy  and  foreign  languages.
He  was  of  very  delicate  constitution,  and  several
years  before  his  death  failing  health  forced  him  to
retire  to  the  small  village  of  Serrezuela,  in  the
mountains,  about  twenty  miles  from  Bogota,  where
he  died.  He  contributed  several  articles  to  peri-
odicals in  Bogota,  on  international  law,  and  the
territorial  rights  of  Colombia  in  the  question  of
boundaries  with  the  neighboring  republics,  of
which  he  had  made  a  profound  study,  and  he  also
published  works  on  "  Nuestras  Costas  Incultas "
and  "  La  Costa  de  Mosquito."

FERNANDEZPESA  Y  ANGULO,  Juan  A.
Ignacio,  Venezuelan  archbishop,  b.  in  Merida  in
March,  1781;  d.  in  Caracas,  18  Jan.,  1849.  He
studied  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and
was  graduated  as  doctor  in  divinity  in  1805  in  Bo-
gota. He  was  then  appointed  to  several  parishes
in  the  provinces  of  Barinas  and  Merida,  but,  with-
out neglecting  his  parochial  duties,  took  an  active
part  in  the  movement  for  the  independence  of
South  America,  and  in  1811  was  sent  by  the  prov^
ince.  of  Barinas  as  deputy  to  the  first  oongTSM  of
Venezuela.  During  the  whole  struggle  for  inde-
pendence he  gave  his  services  to  his  country  as
member  of  the  different  legislatures  of  the  united
republics  of  Colombia,  and,  after  the  erection  of
Venezuela  as  an  independent  republic  in  1830,
was  a  deputy  to  the  constituent  congress  for  one
legislative  period.  He  served  as  professor  of
theology  and  ecclesiastical  law,  and  afterward  as
red  or  of  the  University  of  Merida.  and  was  prel>-
endary,  dean,  and  vicar-general  of  the  cathedral  of
that  city.  His  merits  were  acknowledged  by  con-
gress by  his  nomination  on  24  Jan.,  1N40,  as  arch-
bishop to  the  vacant  see  of  Caraqas,  and  be  was


)f

i

3


NOW


FKKHKIKA


MB


consecrated.  2  Jan..  1842.  in  the  cathedral  of  I*nm-
plona,  Colombia.  He  made  many  improvements
during  the  eight  years  of  his  episoopaoY.

I  I  KNOW,  Be'rthold,  author,  b.  in  Inowraclaw,

province  of  Posan,  IVu^m,  ;"'  No\..  1M7.  He  was
ill.-  ton  "f  Edward  Paroow,  a  royal  councillor,  and
Bartha  da  Jachman,  sister  of  tin-  vice-admiral  of
that name. ll«'  whs  educated  at  I  h*« royal  gym-

iiii  of  ( >ur  Lidy  at  Ma^r<lrlnir<.  Saxony,  and  at

uilar  institution  at Bromlierg,  Posen,  in  1N5H.

then  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  served
during  the  civil  war  as  lieutenant  of  the  'M  I  S
colored  troops,  and  anhaeqoantly  aa  topographical

i r. At  present  he  is  one  of  the  state  lihrari-

keeper  of  the  historical  records  at  AlUinv,
V  V..  and  the  editor  of  the  19th,  18th,  and  Nth
volumes  of  "Documents  Relating  to  the  Colonial
History  of  Now  York"  (Albany,  1877-*86>;  -  State

hives"  (toL i.,  18H7): anil "Albany and it-*

in  the  History  of  the  United  States"  (1887).

Mr.  Fernow  has  also  contributed  to  the  "  Narrative

and  Critical  History  of  America.*'  and  has  written

many  magazine  articles  on  historical  subjects.

Pi!  Kit  AND,  Marie  Louis.  Baron  and  Count,
governor  of  Sant<>  Domingo,  b>  in  Beasnaon,  France,
U  <>ct..  ll'hi;  d.  in  Palo  Uincado,  Sunt..  Do-
mingo, 7  Nov.,  1808.  After  finishing  his  military
studies  he  joined  his  brother,  who  was  pharma-
ci-t-in-chief  of  the  French  army,  then  on  its  way
to  the  United  States  under  the  command  of  Ro-
sjnamhosn  As  a  volunteer,  he  fought  through
the  war  of  American  independence,  and  U'came  a
member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  On  Ma
return  to  France  he  entered  a  regiment  of  dra-
goons. In  1792  he  was  promoted  to  a  lieutenancy,
and  in  1798  was  made  captain.  Shortly  afterward
he  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  as  a  royalist,  bol
was  liberated  and  made  brigadier-general,  serving
with  distinction  in  the  army  of  the  west.  After
the  (teacc  of  Amiens  in  1802,  ho  was  made  gov-
ernor of  Valenciennes.  When  Bonaparte  resolved
to  reconquer  Santo  Domingo,  the  Spanish  part  of
which  had  just  been  ceded  to  France,  Ferrand  re-
Meated  to  Ik*  allowed  to  join  the  expedition.  Af-
ter a  four  months'  campaign  the  French  army
under  Gen.  Leclerc  had  succeeded  in  completely
conquering  the  island,  when  the  arrest  of  Tous-
saint  1  /On vert ure  caused  the  insurrection  to  break
out  afresh.  Gen.  Ijeclerc  died  of  the  yellow  fever
after  a  few  hours'  illness,  and  the  French,  demoral-
ized by  disease  and  divided  by  the  quarrels  of  their
generals,  were  fleeing  before  the  negroes  under
Dessalines.  Gen.  Ferrand  tried  to  defend  the
French  {>art  of  the  island  with  his  brigade,  but
was  forced  to  retire  to  the  city  of  Santo  Domingo,
the  command  of  which  was  unanimously  offered
to  him.  Dessalines,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of
22,000  men,  soon  Invested  the  city,  but  after  sev-
eral bloody  combats  Ferrand  obliged  him  to  raise
the  siege, 18  March, 1808,  and for  three  days

f>ursued  the  wreck  of  his  army.  Ferrand.  holil-
Bg  thenceforward  undisputed  possession  of  the
ish  part  of  the  island,  devoted  himself  to
improving  the  condition  of  the  unfortunate  Span-
ish i -olotiists.  Me  was  made  by  Napoleon  in  1804
lieutenant-general,  and  then  captain-general,  of
tin-  island,  and  had  full  authority  to  carry  out
all  his  plans  for  reform.  He  abolished  the  sys-
tem of  tithes  and  ecclesiastical  rents  which  un-
til then  had  l>eeri  collected  for  the  profit  of  the
state,  and  by  this  means  encouraged  t he  reclaiming
of  uncultivated  lands.  He  also  fitted  oul  nuroer-
privateers  for  the  purpose  of  preving  on  Kng-
lish  commerce.  He  was  aln  created  successively
baron,  count  of  the  empire,  and  grand  commander


of  the  legion  of  honor.  At  this  time  news  arrived
of  great  political  changes  in  S|>ain.  The  governor
'Otto  Bin  first  enlightened  Ferrand  mi  this
point  by  •  declaration  m  war.  The  latter,  depre-
cating the  Useless  shedding  of  blood,  tried  to  !NT-
suadc  the  Spaniard  that  it  wa«  to  their  mutual  in-
terest to  live  in  pi)S>ce,  and  to  avoid  SspOSJafag  the
dimensions  of  the  mother  countries.  The  gov-
ernor of  Porto  Bieo,  however,  proceeded  to  in
an  insurrection  at  Bamhonda  in  October,  1808, and
Ferrand  was  forced  to  take  arms  in  d.  f.  n. . .  His
army  at  tin- time  was  reduced  by  disease  to  alx nit
900  men.  He  de-patched  t«o  siic«t--i\e  detach-
ments of  125  men  each  to  put  down  the  nlxllion,

and  in  the  mean  time  decided  to  i -t the  troops

just  disembarked  by  the  governor  of  Porto  Hico.
This  movement  was  strongly  opposed  by  the  in-
habitants of  Santo  Domingo,  who  feared  for  his
-afetv,  but  he  persisted,  and  met  the  eiiemv,  7
Nov.!  IHifH,  at  Pah.  Hineado,  with  but  ."AMI  mjaj
to  oppose  to  their  lyOOOl  The  first  attack  was
favorable  to  Ferrand,  but  an  assault  of  the  ene-
my's cavalry  turned  both  wings  of  the  French
corps,  and  a  complete  rout  ensued.  The  greater
part  of  the  French  were  killed,  and  Ferrand.  who
was  on  the  point  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the
enemy,  shot  himself  in  despair.  His  head  was  cut
off  on  the  battle-field  and  borne  in  triumph  on  a
pike.  I>ater  the  Spanish  government  repudiated
this  treatment,  and  paid  suitable  honors  to  the  re-
mains of  the  French  general.  The  death  of  Fer-
rand was  a  mortal  blow  to  the  prosperity  of  Santo
Domingo.  It  never  again  enjoved  a  government
so  capable  and  at  the  same  time  so  beneficent.
The  body  of  Ferrand  was  taken  to  France  by  his
aide-de-camp,  Lieut. -Col.  (iilltert  (iuillermin,  who
in  1815  was  one  of  the  seventeen  survivors  of  the
42.000  men  that  Gen.  Leclerc  took  with  him  to
Santo  Domingo  in  1802.  See  Gilbert  Guillermin's
"  Precis  historicpie  OSS  derniers  evciicments  de  la
partie  da  l'cst  da  St.  Dominique"  (Paris,  1911),

FEKKKIRA,  Alexandre  Rodrigue*  (fer-ray  -
e-rah),  Brazilian  traveller,  b.  in  Bahia.  Brazil.  27
April,  1756;  d.  in  Lisbon,  Portugal.  2o  April.  1815.
He  studied  at  Coimbra,  where  he  liccame  professor
of  natural  history  in  1770.  In  177S  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  Portuguese  government  to  make
researches  into  the  geography  and  natural  history  of
the  region  known  under  the  general  name  of  Ama-
zonia. He  went  to  Lisbon,  where  his  in»tructious
awaited  him,  but  his  departure  was  delaved  five
yean,  on  account  of  various  missions  in  which  the
govern  men  t  employed  him.  The  Academy  of  sci-
ences of  Lisbon  admitted  him  to  membership  on
U  .March.  1780.  Having  completed  his  prejtara-
tions,  Ferreira  embarked  at  Lisbon,  and  landed  at
Santa  Maria  de  Bclcin  on  17  Oct..  17*:{.  He  Ugan
his  labora  by  the  exploration  of  the  island  of  Ma-
rajo  or  Joannes,  and  returned  to  the  main-land  in
17*4  to  follow  up  the  great  tributaries  of  the  Ama-
zon. He  subsequently  penetrated  into  territories
that  had  been  completely  unknown,  and  traversed
the  Sierra  de  Cuamuru.  the  Mat to-(i rosso,  the  dis-
trict of  Cuvalw,  and  many  other  NgJOM  to  which
names  had  not  bsSl  given  on  the  inq»crfect  maps
of  the  time.  He  also  made  the  Indian  race  a  study
from a  physiological  and  ethnographical  point  of
view.  Discussions  had  arisen  Utween  the  cabinets
of  Lisbon  and  Madrid  concerning  the  lioiindary-line
of  their  respective  |>ossc-sions  in  Booth  America,
and  Ferreira  received  orders  to  decide  the  QOSStion,
Be  Spent  nine  years— from  17*;ttill  1792 — in  his  in-
\ e-ti^atioiis,  and,  after  re-establishing  the  original
Ixiundary.  continued  bit  lain. is.  suffering  the  great-
est hardships. He returned to Bclem in  July,


440 PKRRKIHA  DE  ARAl/JO  CJriMAKAES


FERRER


1792,  and  in  March,  1788,  to  Lisbon,  whan  Im  «m

employed  in  the  ministry  of  marine.  Ha  VM
named  in  1798  administrator  of  t tit*  royal  cabinet
of  natural  history  at Lisbon,  and  of  the  botanical

gardens  attached  to  it,  which  lie  established.  But
e  felt  the  conlinement  of  this  new  mode  of  life,
his  health  failed,  and  he  died  suddenly  in  1M1">.
The  Portuguese  government  had  spent  large  sums
of  money  in  designs  and  engravings  for  the  works  of
Ferreira  on  the  Amazons.  His  death  put  a  stop  to
their  publication,  but  during  more  than  half  a
century  ethnographical  designs  taken  from  his
manuscripts  continued  to  appear.  Almost  all  the
maps  ancl  several  of  the  memoirs,  prepared  by  lYr-
reira  himself,  are  now  lost.  His  manuscripts,  de-
posited in  the  archives  of  the  Academy  of  sciences
of  Lisbon,  have  been  stolen.  The  published  en-
gravings and  maps  of  his  travels  now  form  a  part
of  the  collection  made  by  Dotn  Pedro  II.,  emperor
of  Brazil.  Ferreira  is  often  called  the  "  Brazilian
Humboldt."  His  memoirs  include  "  Descripcao  da
gruta  do  Inferno,  feita  em  Cuyabti " ;  "  Propriedade
e  posse  das  terras  do  Cabo  do  Norte  pe  la  Coroa  de
Portugal;  memoria  escripta  no  Para  em  1792";
and  "  Viagem  a  gruta  das  Oncas."

FERREIRA  DE  ARAIJJO  GUIMARAES,
Manoel  (fer-ray'-e-rah),  Brazilian  soldier  and  au-
thor,  I),  in  Bahia,  5  March,  1777;  d.  there.  24  Oct.,
1888.  He  went  to  Portugal  to  finish  his  education,
and  was  matriculated  at  the  royal  naval  academy
in  1798.  As  soon  as  he  had  finished  his  course  he
was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  that  school,
and  given  the  commission  of  lieutenant.  Subse-
quently he  lectured  on  mathematics,  worked  for
the  military  society,  and  published  a  translation  of
the  work  "  Analyse  de  Cousin,"  but  afterward  re-
turned to  Bahia,  where  the  captain-general  of  Bra-
zil took  him  under  his  protection.  Soon  afterward
he  was  called  to  Rio  Janeiro  and  appointed  cap-
tain of  the  engineer  corps.  He  organized  the  naval
academy,  and  opened  its  classes  on  1  March,  1809,
and  in  1811  became  director  of  the  military  acade-
my. In  1813  he  was  promoted  to  major,  and  be-
gan the  editorship  of  *•  La  Gaceta  do  Rio  de  Ja-
neiro" and  "Patriota."  In  1821,  when  he  had
attained  the  rank  of  colonel,  he  asked  to  be  re-
lieved from  the  direction  of  the  academy,  and  also
ceased  his  connection  with  the  "  Gaceta.''  Wishing
to  dedicate  himself  to  the  cause  of  independence,
ho  began  the  publication  of  the  paper  "  Espelho."
In  1823  he  was  elected  to  the  Brazilian  legislature
as  a  representative  from  Bahia,  was  a  member  of
the  navy  and  war  commission,  and  took  charge
again  of  the  military  academy.  In  1824  he  was
made  chief  of  the  topographical  committee.  In
1826"  he  again  became  editor  of  the  "Gaceta  do  Rio  de
Janeiro,"  and  was  promoted  brigadier  of  engineers.
Although  Ferreira  had  retired  from  public  service
in  1831,  the  government  of  Bahia  persuaded  him
to  accept  the  chair  of  geometry  and  mechanics  at
the  naval  school.  On  7  Nov.,  1837,  a  republican
revolution  l>egan,  and,  although  Brigadier  Ferreira
remained  loyal  to  his  government,  his  son  took  part
in  the  movement  and  was  court-martialed,  23  June,
1838.  Young  Ferreira  was  ably  defended  by  his
father,  but  was  sentenced  to  death  and  executed,
and  the  elder  Ferreira  did  not  long  survive  hire.
He  published  text-books  on  astronomy  ami  geodesy
(1811),  geometry,  and  applied  mechanics  (is:!.")).

FKRREL,  William,  scientist,  b.  in  Bedford,
now  Fulton,  county.  Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1817.  He  studied
at  Marshall,  DOW  Marshall  and  Franklin,  college,
and  wae  graduated  at  Bethany  college  in  1844.
In  1857  he  became  assistant  in  the  office  of  the
"American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac,"


which  place  he  retained  for  ten  years.  Subse-
quently, until  1882,  he  held  a  special  appointment
in  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  for  the  discussion  <>f  the
tidal  observations.  In  1882  he  was  made  assistant,
with  the  rank  of  professor,  in  the  signal  Barrios
bureau,  where  he  remained  until  October,  1888,
after  which  he  made  Kansas  City.  Mo.,  his  home.
lie  invented  the  maxima  and  minima  tide-predict-
ing machine,  which  is  now  used  by  the  coast  sur-
vey in  predicting  tides.  A  full  description  of  this
machine  is  given  in  Appendix  10  of  the  "  Report
of  the  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  "  (1883).  Prof.
Ferrel  has  received  honorary  elections  to  Aust  rian.
English,  and  German  meteorological  societies,  and
in  1808  was  elected  to  membership  in  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  His  contributions  to  science
include  "Motions  of  Fluids  and  Solids  relative  to
the  Earth's  Surface"  (1859);  "  Determination^  of
the  Moon's  Mass  from  Tidal  Observations"  (1871);
"  Converging  Series  expressing  the  Ratio  between
the  Diameter  and  the  Circumference  of  a  Circle  "
(1871);  "Tidal  Researches"  (1874);  "Tides  of  Ta-
hiti "  (1874) ;  "  Meteorological  Researches,"  Parts
I.  (1875),  II.  (1878),  and  III.  (1881);  "Tempera-
ture of  the  Atmosphere  and  the  Earth's  Surface"
(1884) ;  and  also  "  Recent  Advances  in  Meteor-
ology," being  Part  II.  of  the  "  Report  of  the
Chief  Signal  Officer"  (Washington,  1883).

I  I  I;  I;  I  H».  FERRER,  Bartolome, Spanish
navigator,  b.  in  Bilbao,  Spain  (according  to  Loren-
zana,  in  Coimbra),  in  1499 :  d.  in  Mexico  in  1558
(according  to  Herrera,  in  1548).  He  was  the  pilot
of  Joao  Rodrigo  Cabrillo,  a  Portuguese  captain  in
the  service  of  Spain,  who  was  sent  with  two  ships
in  1542  by  Mendoza,  the  viceroy  of  Mexico,  to  make
discoveries  to  the  north  of  California.  The  expedi-
tion started  on  the  27th  of  June  from  the  port  of
La  Navidad,  and  sailed  along  the  coast  up  to  Punta
del  Aiio-Nuevo,  37°  10'  north  of  Monterey.  The
vessels  were  tossed  about,  and  often  separated  from
each  other  by  the  bad  weather,  and  Cabrillo  died,
on  3  Jan.,  1543,  on  the  island  of  San  Bernardo,  near
the  channel  of  Santa  Barl>ara;  but  Ferrero,  who
succeeded  him  in  command,  continued  his  discov-
eries northward  up  to  lat.  43°,  where  he  saw  the
coast  of  Cape  Blanco,  called  by  Vancouver,  Cape
Orford.  Excessive  cold,  want  of  provisions,  sick-
ness, and  the  unsoundness  of  his  vessel,  forced  him
to  return  without  reaching  the  parallel  mentioned
in  his  instructions.  At  41  30'  he  perceived  a  point
of  land  to  which,  in  honor  of  the  viceroy,  he  gave
the  name  of  Cape  Mendocino.  From  this  point  he
sailed  back  to  La  Navidad,  situated  at  19°  45',  where
they  arrived,  14  April,  1543,  and  established  the
fact  that  the  coast  was  one  continuous  line  between
these  two  points.  In  this  voyage  the  Spaniards
often  saw  the  natives  of  the  country,  who  were
almost  naked,  painted  their  faces,  lived  by  fishing,
and  inhabited  large  houses.  A  full  account  of  the
expedition  is  found  in  the  "  History  of  the  Indias,"
by  John  van  Lae't.  Humboldt,  in  his  work  on
Mexico,  corrects  several'  erroneous  statements  of
the  Dutch  historian,  which  were  drawn  from  the
works  of  old  Spanish  writers,  basing  his  correc-
tions on  certain  documents  that  he  had  occasion  to
examine  in  Mexico.

FERRER,  Rafael  (fer-rer'),  Spanish  mission-
ary, 1>.  in  Valencia  in  1570;  d.  in  San  .lose.  Peru,
in  1611.  He  entered  the  order  of  the  Jesuits,
against  the  wishes  of  his  father,  who  wished  his
Son  to  follow  a  military  career.  He  went  to  C^uito
in  1593  and  became  a  missionary  among  the  Co-
fanis.  a  warlike  mountain  tribe,  who  had  done
much  damage  by  their  frequent  incursions.  In
1001,  with  no  other  arms  than  hif  cross  and  his


:KKR


441


he  penetrate!  Into  their  territol

Jane, (803,  the  mission  of  "Sen  Pablo  and  Ban

f  the  Cofanis  wus  regularly  organised.

In  liMM  three  other  villages  were  brongbi  under

the  influence  of  civilization,  and  theOofnnhl  ceased

toe  terror  of  the  Spanish  government.  Colo-
nists, as  ■  nee,  |>oured  into  the  adjacent

•  •IV.  The  viceroy  "f  Quito  ordered  Ferrer  in
ivilizc  the  unconquered  tribes  along  the
ri^ «-r  Napo,  and  t"  make  a  chart  of  the  lm.Mii
of  tlmt  stream.  Mi-  advanced  more  than  3,600
■ilea  int>>  the  interior,  and  met  with  ■  friendly  ro-
eeption.  II'-  also  made  h  map  of  the  places  he  hail
traversed.  Htul  brought  back  a  tolerably  complete
herbarium  of  the  plants  that he  htul found,  ami

Dted  it  to  the  viccmy  of  Quito.  This  voyage
of  exploration  lasted  thirty-one  month*.  After
resting  at  his  mission  a"M»wg  the  Cofanis  ho  re-
turned to  Quito  from  the  north  and  traversed  a
hitherto  unexplored  forest,  of  which  he  made  a
plan.  He  discovered  a  large  lake  and  the  river
Piloomayo,  which,  on  aooount  of  its  navigability,
was  of  much  set  lies  to  the  colon  izat  ion  of  that
country.  At  Quito  he  received  the  title  of  "Chief
of  the  missions  of  the  Uofanis,"  and  was,  liesi.lcs,
ap|xniited  governor  and  chief  magistrate  of  the  Co-
fanis.  When  Father  Ferrer  returned  to  his  mis-
sions in  1010  he  devoted  himself  t<>  the  civilization
of  the  few  tribes  of  the  Cofanis  that  up  to  this  time
had  not  come  within  his  influence,  ami  met  his
death  at  the  hand  of  a  chief  whom  he  had  obliged
to  renounce  polygamy.  The  savage  surprised  Fa-
ther Ferrer  as  he  was  walking  in  the  neighl>or-
hood  of  San  Jose,  and  cast  him  from  a  narrow
rock  which  was  used  to  bridge  a  torrent.  The
murderer  was  massacred  by  the  other  Cofanis  as
soon  as  they  learned  of  his  deed.  The  account  of
the  explorations  of  Father  Ferrer  never  saw  the
light,  ami  the  original  manuscript  was  lost.  An
extract  from  it  was  published  in  the  collection  of
the  ••  Ix.»ttres  Kdifleaiites "  by  Father  Dettre,  pub-
lished in  the  last  century  and  reprinted  in  1H40.
Resides  this.  Father  Bernard d*  Bblagne  published
in  the  "  Itibliot heca  Societatis  Jesu  '  the  same  ex-
tract under  the  title  "  Relations  du  pere  Ferrer  de
Me  Voyages  dans  l'Amazonie  et  des  mission-;  au'tl
a  fonuees  en  la  nation  Cofane"  (1763).  followed  by
a  notice  of  Ferrer's  life.  Father  Ferrer  published
"  Arte  de  la  Lengua  Cofana"  (Quito,  164$),  and  he
translated  into  the  language  of  the  Cofanis  the
catechism,  and  selections  from  the  gospels  for  every
Sunday  in  the  year.  The  original  manuscript  of
this  translation  was  discovered  in  a  Spanish  con-
vent, and  published  in  Paris.

Ft:  Kit  Kit.  Ventura  1\,  Spanish  author,  b.  in
Havana,  Cuba.  18  March.  1772:  d.  there  in  1857.
He  studied  in  his  native  city  and  then  went  to  Spain,
where  in  17i>4  I btained  a  place  among  the  life-
guards of  the  king.  In  1*00  the  Madrid  govern-
ment seal  him  to  Mexico  on  a  special  com  mission,
and.  after  fulfilling  it.  he  returned  to  Spain.  In
1806  he  was  appointed  to  fill  a  high  offlos  in  Carta-
L,  Colombia,  where  he  founded  a  society  for  the

Eropagation  of  science  and  literature,  and  estaln
she<l  a  printing-house  and  a  new spa|M-r.  In  t >s-J  1
he  went  to  Havana,  where  he  wa* assigned  an  office
in  the  finance  department  of  the  government,  and
Introduced  many  important  reforms.  He  published
aje  ii  la  Isia  de  Cuba,"  being  vol.  xx.  of  *•  Kl
Viaier-i  I'ui verbal  '*  (Madrid,  \1'X\\:  uHistoria  de
los  Oictadores  dc  Bonn  "(Cartagena,  1811);  "Ral-
anza  (ieneral  del  Comercio,n  the  first  work  of  this
class  ever  printed  in  Cuba  (Havana,  1836);  "Arte
"le  Vivirenol  Mundo"  (1830);  and  several  transla-
tions from  Latin,  French,  and  Italian.


Ft:  it  it  Kit  m  kLDOK  \i»<» i  mm  Bgmkk

navigator,  lived in the Kith  oentui  ling

to  Leon  rinelo,  he  sabmttted  t<>  the  council  of  the
Indira  a  new  method  of  ascertaining  longitude,
for  which  a  premium  of  8,000  ducats  hail  U.-n
offered,  but his  invention  have  failed,  as

the  premium  was  DOTawarded  to  him.  In  1-VHH  he
sailed  from  Acapulco  with  an  expedition  to  dis-
cover a  northeast  ptoMffl  to  the  Atlantic,  and  on
his  return  wrote  ••  Relation  del  Descubrimtento  del
Kstrecho  de  Allien  en  1888V  the  manuscript  of
which  found  its  way  into  the  library  of  the  bishop
of  Segovia  and  state  councillor  of  Portugal.  I
roniino  Mascarenos.  \  nam  IM  presented  to  the
French  geographer,  limu-hc.  who  read  a  memoir
ciinceriiing  it  in  the  Academy  of  sciences  in  Paris,
II Nov.,  17!KI. There is  a  copy  of  l».||i pojMBl  in

the  twenty-third  volume  of  manuscripts  of  the

library  of  the  metropolitM  church  of  Mexico.
This  "Relacion"  gave  rise  to  the  sulrscijucnt  ex-
plorations of  Fuea  and  Hartoloinc  Fucntes,  but
was  full  of  fantastical  descriptions,  and  Ferrer's
whole  liook  has  been  branded  as  a  tissue  of  im-
proltahilitics  and  downright  falsehoods.  Ferrer's
other  work  is  of  a  better  character,  and  was  printed
and  published  under  the  title  of  "  Imagen  del
Miimlo  sobre  la  Ksfcra,  Cosmografia,  (Jcografia  v
Arte  de  N'avegar"  (Alcaia,  18861

I  I  KKKKO,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Granada,
Spain,  IM  Jan..  I86L  UN  parents,  were  Italian,
and  he  was  brought  to  the  I  nitcd  States  when  an
infant.  His  father's  house  in  New  York  was  fre-
quented by  Italian  political  refugees,  and  he  en-
joyed the  friendship  of  Garibaldi,  Argenti.  AlbfejBj
and  Avazzana.  Refore  the  civil  war  the  son  con-
ducted a  dancing-school,  and  also  taught  dancing
at  the  U.S.  military  academy.  At  the  beginning
of  the  war  he  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  lltn
New  York  militia  regiment.  In  1861  he  raised  t In-
sist New  York  regiment,  called  the  "  Shej»ard
rifles,"  and  led  a  brigade  in  Rurnside's  ex|Nilition
to  Roanoke  Island,  where  his  regiment  took  the
first  fortified  redoubt  capt tired  in  the  war.  He
also  commanded  a  brigade  at  Newborn,  and  under
Gen.  Reno,  and  in  1868  served  in  Tope's  Yirginia
campaign.  He  was  in  the  battles  of  south  Moun-
tain and  Antietam.and  for  his  bravery  in  the  latter
engagement  was  ap|»oiutcd  brigadier-general,  19
Sept.,  isti2.  He  served  at  Fredericksburg  and  at
Vicksburg,  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of  (Jen.
Sturgis's  division,  9th  army  corps,  and  a  division
at  the  siege  of  Knoxville.  He  afterward  man  lied
the  9th  corps  over  the  mountains,  without  roads
and  by  compass  only,  to  Cincinnati.  Fcrrero  was
in  command  at  the  defence  of  Fort  Sanders  against

the  desperate  assault  of Longetreet,  and  at  the

battle  of  Bean's  Station,  under  General  Shackle-
ford,  by  his  timely  occupation  of  Kelley's  Ford,
frustrated  LoiigMrect's  attempt  to  send  a  detach-
ment across  the  Holston.  and  so  paralyze  the  Na-
tional forces  by  striking  them  in  the  rear.  In
Grant's  final  campaign,  including  the  siege  of
Petersburg,  he  commanded  the  colored  division  of
the  !»th  corps.  lb- was  brevet  ted  major-general,  2
1864,  and  mustered  out  in  August.  1865.
FKRRKYROS.  .Manuel  II.  (fer-raj  -. -■■
ruvianstatesnian.il.  in  Lima  in  17S»:t;  d.  then- in
1H7"2.  He  was  employed  in  the  treasury  offices  of
the  Spanish  government  in  his  native  city  from
1SK'>  till  1881,  but.  wlun  the  viceroy  LsjsjgM  re-
tired into  the  interior  and  independOMO  was  pro-

eisjfanedtSB  June.  18H,  Perrejroa  joined  the  pa-
triots and  so.ui  bsjMJM  active  in  |>olitics. In
he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  first  constituent  con-
gress of  Peru,  appointed  secretary  by  his  colleagues.


442


FERR1ER


FERRY


and  was  conspicuous  in  opposing  the  nm -nonary
movement  of  that  vear,  tanaing  to  re-establish  tin-
Spanish  authority  in  Lima.  In  18M  he  lUnHBt-
eel  I'eru  m  envoy  extraordinary  in  Colombia,  and
in  1880  was  minister  plenipotentiary  to  Bolivia.
in  1835-'8  he  strenuously  opposed  the  Peru-Boliv-
ian confederation,  and  on  its  disruption  on  20
Jan.,  1839.  he  was  elected  deputy  of  the  new  con-
st it  uent  congress  of  Huancavo,  and  nominated  its
president.  He  was  again  plenipotentiary  to  Bo-
livia in  1840,  to  the  general  American  congress  in
1847,  to  Chili  and  New  Granada  in  1848,  to  Ecua-
dor  in  1858,  and  deputy  to  congress  in  1860.  In
the  intervals  he  occupied  several  times  the  minis-
try of  the  interior,  the  treasury  and  foreign  rela-
tions, was  councillor  of  state,  director-general  of
customs,  and  for  ten  years  director  of  public  in-
struction, in  which  capacity  he  remodelled  the
whole  system,  and  introduced  valuable  reforms  in
the  faculty  of  philosophy,  arts,  and  law.  He  also
contributed  to  journals  in  Lima,  and  as  president
of  several  scientific  and  literary  commissions  con-
t rilnited  powerfully  to  the  intellectual  develop-
ment of  nis  country.  He  was  an  accomplished
linguist  and  book  collector,  and  left  one  of  the
most  complete  libraries  in  South  America.

K  I'll  MM  Kit.  James,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Fifeshire,  Scotland,  22  Oct.,  1800.  He  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  country,  came  to  Canada  in
1821,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  Mon-
treal. He  became  a  member  of  the  corporation  of
that  city  in  1841,  mayor  in  1847,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  of  militia  the  same  year.  He  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  board  of  the  Royal  institution
for  the  advancement  of  learning  in  1845,  was  sub-
sequently its  president,  and  was  elected  chancellor
of  McGill  university,  Montreal,  in  September,
1884.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the  council  of  Vic-
toria college,  Cobourg.  He  has  been  a  director  of
the  Canada  board  of  the  Bank  of  British  North
America  since  it  was  first  established,  is  chairman
of  the  Canada  board  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway
company,  and  is  connected  with  many  other  or-
ganizations. He  was  a  life  member  of  the  legisla-
tive council  of  Canada  from  27  May,  1847,  until
the  union  in  1867,  when  he  was  called  to  the  senate.
He  was  appointed  member  for  Victoria  in  the
legislative  council  of  Quebec  in  1867.  Mr.  Ferrier
is  a  Conservative  in  politics.

FERRIS,  Benjamin,  author,  d.  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  in  1867.  He  was  a  watchmaker,  lived
for  many  years  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  clerk  of
the  Philadelphia  meeting  of  Friends.  He  published
"  History  of  the  Early  Settlements  on  the  Delaware,
from  its  Discovery  to  the  Colonization  under  Will-
iam Penn  "  (Wilmington,  1846).

FERRIS,  Isaac,  clergvman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  9  Oct.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Roselle,  N.  J.,  16  June,
1873.  He  entered  Columbia  when  but  twelve
years  of  age,  joined  the  military  company  raised
among  the  students  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  did  duty
in  the  forts  around  New  York  harbor.  His  college
course  was  delayed  one  year  by  this,  and  he  was
graduated  in  1816  with  the  highest  honors  of  his
class.  He  taught  in  the  Albany  academy  one  year,
and  then  studied  theology  under  Dr.  James  M.
Mason,  and  in  Rutgers  seminary,  was  licensed  to

Breach  in  1820,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Reformed
hitch  church  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1821.
He  was  afterward  settled  in  Albany  in  1824-'36,
and  at  the  Market  street  church,  New  York,  in
1836-'53.  He  went  to  Holland  as  commissioner
on  behalf  of  American  ■lissiniisi inn  in  the  Dutch
East  Indies  in  1842.  He  was  long  connected  with
the  Sunday-school  union,  was  president  of  the  city


^a^&tT&rrzS


organization  from  1837  till  18753.  was  the  originator
of  the  Rutgers  female  institute,  and  for  a  LoM
period  its  principal  and  the  president  of  its  DOSM
of  trustees  for  eighteen  years,  ami  was  subsequent-
ly connected  with  the  Ferris  institute.  In  1852  be
accepted  the  chancellorship  of  the  University  -of
New  York,  at  that  time  under  serious  embarrass-
ment from  heavy
debts,  He  collect-
ed about  $74,000,
outside  of  the  rent-
als and  other  re-
ceipts of  the  uni-
versity, and  thus
relieved  it  from  its
financial  embar-
rassments, and  ma-
terially raised  the
standard  of  schol-
arship. He  filled
the  chair  of  moral
science  and  Chris-
tian evidence  dur-
ing his  whole  con-
nection with  the
university,  and  was
also  acting  profes-
sor of  constitutional  and  international  law  in
1855-'69.  He  retired  from  the  chancellorship  in
1870,  but  was  immediately  chosen  chancellor  emeri-
tus. He  removed  a  year  later  to  Roselle,  N.  J.,  where
he  resided  until  his  death.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Union  college  in  1833,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  by  Columbia  in  1853.  He  published
numerous  occasional  sermons,  essays,  and  addresses,
including  "Appeal  to  the  Ministers  in  behalf  of
Sunday-Schools  "  (Philadelphia,  1834),  and  a  "  Re-
port on  Separate  Action  in  Foreign  Missions"
(1857). — His  son,  John  Mason,  clergyman,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  Jan.,  1825,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1843,  studied
theology  at  the  New  Brunswick  seminary,  was
licensed,  to  preach  in  the  Dutch  Reformed  church
in  1849,  and  served  in  various  parishes  from  1849
till  1865,  when  he  was  elected  secretary  of  the
Board  of  foreign  missions.  He  became  editor  of
the  "Christian  Intelligencer"  in  1883,  and  treas-
urer of  the  Foreign  mission  board  in  1886.  Mr.
Ferris  is  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Foreign  Mis-
sions," published  in  the  "  Manual  of  the  Reformed
Church  "  in  1869  and  1879.

FERRY,  Orris  Sanford,  senator,  b.  in  Bethel,
Fairfield  co.,  Conn.,  15  Aug.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Norwalk,
Conn.,  21  Nov.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1844,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1846,  and  began  practice  in  Norwalk.  In  1847  he
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  first  divi-
sion of  Connecticut  militia,  and  from  1849  till  1856
was  judge  of  probate  for  the  district  of  Norwalk.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1855,  serving
two  years,  and  in  1857-'9  was  district  attorney  for
the  county  of  Fairfield.  He  was  an  unsuccessful
Republican  candidate  for  congress  in  1856,  but
was  elected  two  years  later,  serving  in  1859-'61,
and  being  again  defeated  in  1860.  When  the  civil
war  began,  he  zealously  supported  the  National
government,  and  in  July,  1861,  became  colonel  of
the  5th  Connecticut  regiment,  joining  Gen.  Banks's
corps  in  Maryland.  He  was  promoted  to  brigadier-
general,  IT  March,  1862,  and  was  assigned  a  brigade
in  Shields's division,  from  which  he  was  transferred
to  Peck's  division  of  the  4th  army  corps  under  (Jen.
Keyes.  He  served  till  the  close  of  the  war,  ree
his  commission.  15  June,  1865,  and  on  23  Ma>
was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Connecticut,  taking


448


at  in  March.  1HI17.  During  1 1 *•-  latter  |wirt  of
thf  reconstruction  period  |m  «>|>|k»s<-«1  I *r«->i« l«-nt
Johnson,  and  voted  guilty  at  bis  impeachment  trial.

In  1872  Mr.  IVrrv  was  re-elected  by  a  coalition  of
Independent  KepubUoani  ami  Democrata,  but  he
ii.  (irant's  administration  ami  op-
posed tin*  Liberal  Republican candidates  at tin

lcntia!  election  of  that  year.  He  voted  against
the  civil  rights  hill  on  the  ground  that  it  would
prejudice  the  cause  of  public  education.  While  in
the  lower  house  of  congress  (Jen.  Ferry  served  as  a

ihciiiIht  of  the  commiit n  revolutionary  claims,

and the special  committee  of  thirty-three  on  the

limis  states.  While  in  the  senate  he  was  a
Member  of  the  committees  on  private  land  claims,
public  buildings,  and  patents,  and  after  his  re-elec-
tion in  1H?'J  was  chairman  of  the  latter  committee.
FKKKY,  William  Montague,  clergyman,  b.
in  Gran  by.  Masses  Sept.,  I7!»»i;  d.  in  Grand  Ha-

.Mich.,  :h>  Deo,  is<>7.  He  was  pad—tad  at
Union  oollege  in  Ihi 7.  studied  theology,  and  went
as  a  missionary  of  the  Presbyterian  church  to
Michigan  in  1821.  He  established  ■  school  for
both  whites  and  Indians  at  Mackinac,  and  lalxm-d
successfully  for  twelve  years.  His  health  failing,
he  was  obliged  to  .seek  a  different  employment.
and  in  is;{4  nnmhsand  with  others  a  tract  of  land
in  the  tirand  Kiver  valley,  where  he  founded  a
settlement  and  went  extensively  into  the  manu-
facture of  lumber. He  was  one  of  the  first  to  per-

the  future  value  of  the  immense  pine  forests
of  Michigan,  and  extended  his  oj>erat  ions  so  that  in
a  single  year  he  shipped  not  less  than  fifteen  mill-
ion feet  of  lumbfT.  At  his  death  he  left  bequests
for  different  lienevolcnt  ohjects.  amounting  to
*  120.000.— His  son.  Thomas  White,  senator,  b.
in  Mackinac,  Mich..  1  Jam,  1897.  received  a  pub-
lic-school education,  and  engaged  in  business  pur-
suits. He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives of  Michigan  in  1850,  of  the  state  senate
in  1856,  and  vice-president  for  Michigan  of  the
Chicago  Republican  convention  of  I860.  He  rep-
resented his  state  on  the  congressional  committee
that  accompanied  the  body  of  President  Lincoln
to  Springfit  Id.  III..  Barred  in  congress  from  4  Dec.,
1865.  tili  :\  March,  1871,  and  was  re-elected  but
did  not  take  his  seat,  having  been  chosen  to  the
U.  S.  senate  to  succeed  Jacob  M.  Howard.  He
took  his  seat  in  the  senate.  4  March,  1871.  As
chairman  of  the  committee  on  rules  he  reported  a
re-classification  and  revision  of  the  rules  of  the
senate,  which  were  unanimously  adopted  without
amendment.  He  was  a  member  of  the  special
committee  of  the  senate  that  framed  the  resump-
tion act  of  14  .Jan..  1875,  was  chosen  president  pro
aja*florv,9  and  l'J  March,  and  again  20  Dec.,  1875,
and  by  the  death  of  Vice-President  Wilson  became
acting  viee-11  resident,  serving  as  such  until  4  March,
1K77.  While  acting  vice-president  he  was  called
on.  in  the  absence  of  President  Grant,  to  deliver
the  address  and  preside  at  the(  Vntennial  OSlebraUon
in  Philadelphia,  4  July,  1M7*>.  ami  he  also  presided
at  the  impeachment  trial  of  Sac.  Belknap,  and
oarer  the  sixteen  joint  meetings  of  congress  during
tin- electoral count  of 1>0»  '7. He  was re-elected

iior.  17  Jan.,  1H77.  and  was  re-elected  president
pro  tiiiifx,rr  of  the  senate, 6  March,  1*77.  M  Feb.,
'i,  1 7  April.  1878,  and  8  March.  I*7!i. He  trav-
elled extensively  in Kurope,  the  Holy  Land,  and
during  the  vears  lsmi-'ti.
I  I  RSEN,  t  ••nut V\el,  Swedish  soldier,  b.  in
kholm  in 1750;  d.  there, 20  June,  1810. lb
was  the s.,n  of  Count Axel, nVld-m»r>lml  <>f  the
army of Sweden, was educated at the military
academy  of  Turin.  Italy,  and  soon  afterward  en-


tered the  Swedish  army. After  bi

was  appointed  eeloaal  of  the  regiment  "BoyaJ
Bsattoav*  Count  Parson  osme  to  the  United  States
ait  a  uieinlKT  <>f  the  staff  of  Koehainlieau,  fought
under  Lafayette  al  Vorktown. and  retired  with  the
French  army,  after  jeecmug  from  Washington  the
order  of  the  Society  of  the!  iiicinnati.  At  the  time
of  the  treason  of  licm-dict  Arnold  he  wrote  inter-
esting letters  to  his  father  in  Knrofie.  which  have
ban  published,  describing  agreeably  men  and  man-
ners in  the  days  ,.f  the  Revolution.  <>n  his  return
to  Fram-e,  Count  PoMM  liecame  a  devoted  adhs
rent  of  the  royal  family,  and  in  their  flight  from
Paris  was  the  disguised  coachman  of  the  fugitives.
After  the  execution  of  Loaifl  XVI.,  Fersen  returm-d
to  Sweden,  where  he  was  made  grand  master  of
the  king's  household,  chancellor  of  I'psala  univer-
sity, liecame  a  court  favorite,  although  he  was  un-
popular with  the  people,  and  was  promoted  grand
marshal  of  the  kingdom.  The  sudden  death.  M
May.  1*10,  of  the  crown-prince  gave  rise  to  the  sus-

Eicion  that  Fersen  and  his  sister.  Countess  Piiier,
ad  |Miisotied  him.  which  is  now  acknowledged  to
be  unfounded.  At  the  funeral,  Fersen  was  at-
tacked by  a  mob  with  sticks  and  stones  and  killed,
while  the  troops  looked  on  with  indifference.

FKSSKNDKN.  Samuel,  law ver,  b.  in  Frvcburg.
Me.,  10  July,  17M4:  d.  near 'Portland.  Mc.  D
March,  l*i;<».  His  father,  the  Kev.  William  Fessen-
ilen.  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1708,  was  the  first  min-
ister of  Frvcburg.  and  frequently  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature.  He  also  served  as  judge
of  probate.  Samuel  received  his  early  education  at
the  Frvcburg  academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1806,  He  studied  law  with  Judge  Dana,
of  Fryeburg,  was  admitted  to  the  Iwr  in  1808,  and
began  practice  at  New  Gloucester,  where  he  rose  to
distinction  in  his  profession.  In  1815-'16  he  was
in  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts,  of  which
state  Maine  was  then  a  district,  and  in  1818-'19
represented  his  district  in  the  Massachusetts  sen-
ate. For  fourteen  years  he  was  major-general  of
the  12th  division  of  Massachusetts  militia  to
which  office  he  was  elected  on  leaving  the  senate.
and  to  which  he  gave  much  attention.  He  removed
to  Portland  in  1888,  and  about  1888  declined  the
presidency  of  Dartmouth.  He  was  an  anient  Fed-
eralist, and  one  of  the  early  members  of  the  anti-
slavery  party  in  Maine.  In  1*47  he  was  nominated
for  governor  and  for  congress  by  the  Liberty  jwrty.
receiving  large  votes.  For  forty  years  he  stood  at
the  head  of  the  bar  in  Maine.  He  was  an  active
philanthropist,  at  published  two  orations  and  a
treatise  on  the  institution,  duties,  and  importance
of  juries.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
u|mui  him  by  Bowdou  in  1848.— His  son,  William
Pitt,  senator,  b.  in  Hoscawen.  N.  II.,  10  Oct.,
1800;  d.  in  Portland.  Me..  8  Sept,  I860,  was  gradu-
ated at  liowdoin  in  1H'.':(,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1887,  Ha  practised  law
first  in  Hridgeton.  a  year  in  Bangor,  and  afterward
in  Portland.  Me.  He  was  a  BMBBDOf  of  the  legisla-
ture of  that  state  in  lKi2.  and  its  leading  debater.
He  refused  nominations  to  congress  in  1881  and
in  1888, and  served  in  the  legislature  again  in  1840,
In-coming  chairman  of  the  house  committee  to  re-
sis,.  the  statutes  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Whig  in  1X40,  .serving  one  term,  dur-
ing which  time  he  moved  the  re  |  tea  I  of  the  rule
that  excluded  anti-slavery  jM-titions,  and  BBOki  u|m>ii
the  loan  and  bankrupt  bills,  and  the  army.  Ib-
gave  his  attention  wholly  to  his  law  business  till
In-  was  again  in  the  legislature  in  1845-*6.  He
acoiiired  a  national  reputation  as  a  lawyer  and  an
anti-slavery  Whig,  and in JX4!»  PfOaOBlted  bafON


444


FESSENDEN


FESSENDEN


^^  S^^f^e^


the  supreme  court  an  appeal  from  an  adverse  de-
cision of  Judge  Story,  and  gained  a  reversal  by  an
argument  which  Daniel  Webster  pronounced  the
best  he  hud  heard  in  twenty  yean,  He  was  again
in  the  legislature  in  1853  ami  1854,  when  his  strong
anti-slavery  principles  caused  his  election  to  the

U.  S.  senate  by  the
vote  of  the  Whigs
and  anti  -  slavery
Democrats.  Taking
his  seat  in  Fel un-
ary, 1854,  he  made,
a  week  afterward,
an  electric  speech
against  the  Kansas-
Nebraska  bill,  which
placed  him  in  the
front  rank  of  the
senate.  He  took  a
leading  part  in  the
formation  of  the  Re-
publican partv,  and
from  1854  till  1860
was  one  of  the  ablest
opponents  of  the
pro-slavery  measures
of  the  Democratic  administrations.  His  speech
on  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty,  in  1856,  received
the  highest  praise,  and  in  1858  his  speech  on  the
Lecompton  constitution  of  Kansas,  and  his  criti-
cisms of  the  opinion  of  the  supreme  court  in  the
Dred  Scott  case,  were  considered  the  ablest  dis-
cussion of  those  topics.  He  was  re-elected  to  the
senate  in  1859  without  the  formality  of  a  nomi-
nation. In  1861  he  was  a  member  of  the  Peace
congress.  By  the  secession  of  the  southern  sena-
tors the  Republicans  acquired  control  of  the  sen-
ate, and  placed  Mr.  Fessenden  at  the  head  of  the
finance  committee.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
the  most  conspicuous  senator  in  sustaining  the
national  credit.  He  opposed  the  legal-tender  act
as  unnecessary  and  unjust.  As  chairmain  of  the
finance  committee,  Mr.  Fessenden  prepared  and
carried  through  the  senate  all  measures  relating
to  revenue,  taxation,  and  appropriations,  and,  as
declared  by  Mr.  Sumner,  was  "in  the  financial
field  all  that  our  best  generals  were  in  arms."
When  Sec.  Chase  resigned  in  1864,  Mr.  Fessenden
was  called  by  the  unanimous  appeal  of  the  nation
to  the  head  of  the  treasury,  it  was  the  darkest
hour  of  our  national  finances.  Sec.  Chase  had  just
withdrawn  a  loan  from  the  market  for  want  of  ac-
ceptable bids ;  the  capacity  of  the  country  to  lend
seemed  exhausted.  The  currency  had  been  enor-
mously inflated,  and  gold  was  at  280.  Mr.  Fessen-
den refused  the  office,  but  at  last  accepted  in  obe-
dience to  the  universal  public  pressure.  When  his
acceptance  became  known,  gold  fell  to  225,  with  no
bidders.  He  declared  that  no  more  currency  should
be  issued,  and,  making  an  appeal  to  the  people,  he
prepared  and  put  upon  the  market  the  seven-thirty
loan,  which  proved  a  triumphant  success.  This
loan  was  in  the  form  of  bonds  bearing  interest  at
the  rate  of  7*30  per  cent.,  which  were  issued  in  de-
nominations as  low  as  $50,  so  that  people  of  mod-
erate means  could  take  them.  He  also  framed  and
recommended  the  measures,  adopted  by  congress,
which  permitted  the  subsequent  consolidation  and
funding  of  the  government  loans  into  the  four  and
four-and-a-half  per  cent,  bonds.  The  financial
situation  becoming  favorable,  Mr.  Fessenden,  in
accordance  with  his  expressed  intention,  resigned
the  secretaryship  in  186")  to  return  to  the  senate,  to
which  he  had  now  for  the  third  time  been  elected.
He  was  again made  chairman  of  the  finance  com-


mittee, and  was  also  appointed  chairman  of  the
joint  committee  on  reconsi ruction,  and  wrote  its
celebrated  report,  pronounced  one  of  the  ablest
state  papers  ever  submitted  to  congress.  It  vindi-
cated the  power  of  congress  over  the  rebellion*
states,  showed  their  relations  to  the  govertmrent
under  the  constitution  and  the  law  of  nation-,  and
recommended  the  constitutional  safeguards  made
necessary  by  the  rebellion.  Mr.  Fessenden  was  now
the  acknowledged  leader  in  the  senate  of  the  R-

Eublicans,  when  he  imperilled  his  part?  standing
y  opposing  the  impeachment  of  President  .John-
son in  1868.  He  gave  his  reasons  for  voting  "not
guilty  "  upon  the  articles,  and  was  subjected  to  a
storm  of  detraction  from  his  own  party  such  as
public  men  have  rarely  met.  His  last  service  was
In  1869,  and  his  last  speech  was  upon  the  bill  lo
strengthen  the  public  credit.  He  advocated  the
payment  of  the  principal  of  the  public  debt  in
gold,  and  opposed  the  notion  that  it  might  lawfully
be  paid  in  depreciated  greenbacks.  His  public
character  was  described  as  of  the  highest  type  of
patriotism,  courage,  integrity,  and  disinterested-
ness, while  his  personal  character  was  beyond  re-
E  roach.  He  was  noted  for  his  swiftness  of  retort.
le  was  a  member  of  the  Whig  national  conven-
tions that  nominated  Harrison  (1840),  Taylor  (1848),
and  Scott  (1852).  For  several  years  he  was  a  regent
of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Bowdoin  in  1858,  and  from  Har-
vard in  1864. — Another  son,  Samuel  Clement,  law-
yer, b.  in  New  Gloucester,  Me.,  7  March,  1815 ;  d.  in
1881,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1834,  and  at
Bangor  theological  seminary  in  1837,  and  was  pas-
tor of  the  2d  Congregational  church  in  Thomaston
(now  Rockland)  from  then  till  1856.  In  that  year
he  established  the  "  Maine  Evangelist,*'  and  in
1858  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be-
gan practice.  He  was  elected  judge  of  the  muni-
cipal court  of  Rockland,  and  was  a  representative
from  Maine  to  the  37th  congress,  serving  from
July,  1861,  till  March,  1863.  Until  the  rise  of  the
Republican  party  he  was  an  abolitionist.  In  1865
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  board  of  exam-
iners of  the  U.  S.  patent-office.  In  1879  he  was  U.  S.
consul  at  St.  John's,  N.  B. — Another  son.  Thomas
Amory  Deblois,  lawver,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  23
Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Lewiston,  Me.,  28  Sept.,  1868.  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1845.  He  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Me-
chanics' Falls,  Me.,  after  which  he  removed  to  Lew-
iston. He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
nominated  Fremont  for  president  in  1856,  in  1858
was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Gov.  Morrill,  of
Maine,  and  in  1860  was  elected  to  the  legislature.
In  1861  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  for  Andros-
coggin county,  and  was  elected  a  representative
from  Maine  to  the  37th  congress,  to  fill  a  vacancy,
serving  from  December,  1862,  till  March,  1863.  He
was  an  able  lawyer  and  eloquent  speaker. — William
Pitt's  son,  James  Deering,  b.  in  West  brook.  Me..
28  Sept.,  1833:  d.  in  Portland.  Me..  18  Nov..  18*
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1852,  studied  law.
and  practised  in  Portland.  He  enlisted  a  company
early  in  the  civil  war,  and  entered  the  service  as
captain  of  the  2d  U.  S.  sharp-shooters.  2  Nov..  1861.
He  served  on  Gen.  David  Hunter's  staff  in  the  De-
partment of  South  Carolina  in  1862-'3,  was  present
at  the  attack  on  Fort  McAllister  in  1862.  at  the
operations  on  the  Edisto,  and  at  Dupont's  attack
on  Charleston.  He  was  assigned  to  the  duty  of
organizing  and  commanding  the  first  regiment  of
colored  troops  in  1862,  but  the  government  was  not
then  ready  to  use  colored  troop-.  He  was  promt
to  colonel  in  1862.  and  m  September,  1863,  reported


KKSSKXIi


FKI'CIITWAKGKR


440


■ n.  Hooker,  and  ffu  n  tin-  campaign

Lookout Mountain  unci Missionary I;

in  tii*'  Atlanta  campaign  in  is«M. lit*  wag  promoted

liri^-  nil  of  voluntei  l.  <»r-

Sheridan  in  October,  and  was  with

him  at  Cedar  Creek. On  18  March,  1*<m.  he  was

etted  major-general  <>f  volunteers,  and  srs
iluts  in  South  Carolina.  He  was  appointed  ragiatar
in  bankruptcy  f«»r  tin-  first  distrust  <>f  Mains  in
>(,  aii'l  raprsaantad  Portland  in  the  legislature
in  1873  1.  ^nothersonof  William  Pitt,  Francis,
soldier,  l>.  in  Portland,  Me,,  in  Maroh,  inw.  was

fradiiatcd at Bowdohl  111  I*.")*,  ami  studied  law  at
larvMnl  ami  in  New  York. He  was  appointed  oap-
tain  in  the  10th  V.  S.  infantry  on  14  May.  1N01.  ami
severely  wounded  at  Shiioh. From  Ootohar,

»,  till  July,  lx»M,  he  was  colonel  of  the  25th
Maine  volunteers,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in
front  of  Washington  and  near  Centre*  ills,  Va.  Be
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  l<>
May.  l*o».  and  mater-general,  u  Nov..  1866.  In
lmi4  he  was  with  Gen.  Hanks  in  the  Bad  river
expedition,  ami  was  present  at  Sabine  Cross-Roads,
Pleasant  Hill,  and  Monett'i  HlulT.  where,  leading
Ins  brigade  in  an  assault,  he  lost  a  leg.  In  Novem-
ber, 1804, he  was  on  duty  in Washington,  and  in

•  was  in  command  of  the  1st  infantry  division.
Department  of  West  Virginia,  and  was  afterward
assigned  to  Hanoook's  1st  veteran  corps.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Wirt/  military  mmailaaVai  in
Washington  in  1866,  and  assistant  commander  of
the  bureau  of  refugees,  freedmen,  and  abandoned
lands  in  1  ««»«>.  He  was  retired  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army,  1  Nov..  1800.
Basel1  fed  SS  mayor  of  Portland  in  1876,  but  de-
clined a  renomination. — Another  son  of  William
Pitt.  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Portland.  Me.,  (5  Jan..
1*41  :  d.  in  CeotreviUe,  Va.,  1  Sept.,  1862,  was
graduated  at  Howdoin  in  1801.  He  began  to  study
law,  but  soon  entered  the  military  service  as  2d
lieutenant  in  the  2d  Maine  battery,  30  Nov.,  1861.
He  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,  8  June,  1862,
was  aide  to  Gen.  Zebulon  H.  Tower  in  July,  1862,
and  was  mortally  wounded  in  the  second  battle  01
Bull  Hun,  31  Aug. — Samuel  Clement's  son.  Joshua
Abbe,  l>.  in  Hocklaml,  Me.,  was  appointed  Bd  lieu-
tenant in  the  1st  U.S.  cavalrv.  24  March.  1862;  2d
lieutenant  6th  artillery.  6  Sept.,  1802 :  Nt  lieuten-
ant, 30  Nov..  1866;  captain.  20  June.  186$;  and  was
wounded  at  Chickamauga. — Another  son.  Samuel,
b.  in  Hocklaml.  Me.,  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant
in  the  6tfa  Maine  battery,  is  Jan.,  1805.  He  is  a
r  and  politician  in  Stamford.  Conn.
FKSSKNDKN,  Thomas  clergyman,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge. Mass.,  in  17:i!l:  d.  in  1818,  B«  was  the  SOB
of  Rev.  William  Peesenden,  of  Cambridge,  and  un-
cle to  the  first  Samuel.  After  graduation  at  Har-
vard in  1758,  he  became  pastor  in  Walnola.  X.  II.,
which  charge  he  held  from  lTtlTtill  1818.  He  was
author  of  "The  Science  of  Sanctity **  (1N04).  and
"The  Boston  Self-styled  GsntlenMn-Reriewers re-
viewed r  (1806).— Bis  son.  Thomas  (ircen,  author,
b.  at  Walpole,  N.  11..  22  April,  1771 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass..  11  Nov.,  ix:t7.  Be  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1  ?'.»<;.  and  during  his  ooilege  term  wrote
a  ballad, entitled  "Jonathans  Courtship."  which
was  reprinted  in  England.  He  studied  law  In  Ver-
mont with  Nathaniel  Chipraan,  occupying  his  leis-
ure in  writing  humorous  poems  and  other  pajMtl
for  the  ••  Pariii.r's  Weekly  Museum"  <>f  Walpole.  of
which  Joseph  Donnie  was  then  editor. Be  went  to

land  in  INOI.  as  agent  for  a  new  hydraulic
machine,  which  proved  a  failure  and  involved  him
in  pecuniary  difficulties,  While  in  London  he  lie-
camc  mterasted  in  lha  construction  of  a  patent


mill  on  the  Thaun  s.  in  whi.h  enterprise  he  wsa
completely  ruinad.  At  this  tune  he  formed  the
acquaintance  of  Benjamin  Douglas  Perkins,  pati-n-
tas  of  the  metallic  tractors,  which  he  advertised  111
a D0OT in Hudibrastie verse,  entitled "Ten

tonitioii,"  in  wkich  he  BtiMmd the  mtdtfl

faculty,  who  op|M>se«T  the  use  of  these  Hist  rilllli  III  s
(published  anonymously,  London,  1866}  Haw-
thorne says:  "It  is  a  work  of  strange,  grotesque
ideas,  aptly ex  Tin- DOSm was  .11  Urged

and  republished  in  New  York  in  1H<>0  as  "  The
Minute  Philosopher."  lb-  returned  to  the  I'niti-d
States  in  1M<>4  and  Settled  m  BoatOB,  but  afterward
edited  the  "Weekly  I  aapeaftdl  *'  in  New  York  for
two  years,  and  in  1H12  began  10  practise  law  in  Bel-
lows Falls,  \'t.  He  removed  to  Pratt  let  «>  rough,  Vt..
in  1Mb*),  ami  was  editor  of  the  "  Heporter  "  there,
but  trom  1*1(1  till  1669  conduct. -d  the  ••  Intelli-
gencer" at  DattoWS  Falls.  ]i,  the  latter  vear  he
established,  in  Boston,  "The  New  England  Farm-
er," with  which  he  remained  connected  till  his
death.  He  edited,  also,  >*Tbi  Horticultural  !(■
ter"  ami  "The  Silk  Manual,"  and  published  "  Ori-
ginal Poems";  "  Democracy  l'n\eiled"  (1H06);
"  Pills,  Poetical,  Political,  and  Philosophical;  pre-
seribed  for  the  Purjiose  of  purging  the  Public  of
Piddling  Philosophers,  Penny  Pin-tasters,  of  Paltry
Politicians  and  Petty  Partisans.  By  Peter  Pcp|»er-
box,  Poet  ami  Plnsician"  (Philadelphia  1809);
"American  Clerks  (  lompmuOBJ "  (18lf>):  "The
Ladies'  Monitor"  (181H);  and  "Laws  of  Patents
for  New  Inventions"  (1822).  His  last  satire  was  a
little  |KM-m,  entitled  "Wooden  Booksellers."  See
an  article  on  Mr.  Fesscnden.  by  Nathaniel  Haw-
thorne, included  in  the  volume  entitled  "  Fatishawc,
and  other  Pieces"  (Boston.  1N76).

FKl  CimVANGKR,  Lewis,  chemist,  b.  in
Flirt  h.  Bavaria,  11  Jan.,  1K05;  d.  in  New  York  city.
25  June,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  a  mineralogist,
and  inherited  a  taste  for  natural  science,  to  which  be
devoted  ■ftnrrtal  attention  at  the  I'nivcrsity  of  Jena
After  receiving  his  doctor's  degree  therein  I"
became  to  the  United  States  in  1821).  and  settled
in  New  York,  where  he  opened  the  first  (brinan
pharmacy,  and  also  practised  medicine,  being  par-
ticularly active  during  the  cholera  epidemic  of
1886.  Sulisequently  he  devoted  his  entire  attention
to  chemistry  and  mineralogy,  and  became  engaged
in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  rare  chemicals.  He
introduced  in  182!>  the  alloy  called  (ierman  silver,
and  was  the  first  to  call  the  attention  of  the  I
government  to  the  availability  and  desirability  of
nickel  for  small  coins.  In  1KI7  he  issued,  by  jht-
mission  of  the  U,  S.  government,  a  large  quantity
of  one-cent  pieces  in  nickel,  and  in  1SIJ4  he  had
struck  off  a  numtier  of  threes-cut  pieoSS  in  the
same  metal, but  they  were  not  put  into  circulation.
After  the  great  fire  of  lK4»i  he  called  the  attention
of  the  authorities  of  New  York  to  the  fact  that
salt|>etre  would  explode  under  certain  conditions.
This  statement  created  much  discussion;  the  ex-
pression ••  Will  sjilt|H'tre  explode  1 "  U-caine  a  by-
word, and  a  play  was  acted  at  one  of  the  theatres
in  which  a  character  repp-sent ing  I>r.  Fcucht-
wanger  was  presented.  He  made  two  large  collec-
tions of  minerals,  one  of  which  he  exhibited  in
London  at  the  World's  fair  in  1851,  and  the  other,
which  he  Ix-ipieathed  to  his  daughters,  was  for  a
time  on  exhibition  at  the  Museum  of  natural  his-
torv  in  Central  park.  New  York.  I>r.  Feucht-
wanger  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies  in  this
country  and  abn>ad,  and  contributed  jwii>crs  to
Silliman's  "  American  Journal  of  Science  '  and  to
the  "  Proceedings"  Of  the  American  association  tor
the advancement of science. He published a


446


PEUILLBT


FIELD


"Popular  Treatise  on  Gems"  (New  York.  1838);
H Elements  of  Mineralogy"  (1889);  "Treatise  OB
Fermented  Liquors  "  (1858) ;  and  '•  Practical  Trea-
tise on  Soluble  or  Water  Glass"  (1870).

FKl'ILLET,  Louis  Econehes,  French  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Mane,  near  ForealquiiT,  Provence,  in
1660;  d.  in  Marseilles,  18  April,  1788,  Hi-  studied
at  the  college  of  the  convent  of  Minimes.  in  Avi-
gnon, and  at  the  early  age  of  ten  astonished  his
teachers  by  observations  on  astronomical  subjects.
On  ',»(>  March,  1680,  Feuillet  received  holy  orders
and  entered  the  convent  of  Minimes  in  order  to
dedicate  himself  exclusively  to  his  studies.  Soon
his  discoveries  in  mathematics  and  astronomy
gave  him  a  wide  reputation,  and  after  a  voyage  to
the  Levant  with  tne  mathematician  Cassini,  was
sent  by  Louis  XIV.  on  a  scientific  expedition  to  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  he  sailed  from  Marseilles,  5  Feb.,
1703,  and  arrived  at-Martinique  on  11  April,  1704.
After  recovering  from  an  illness  which  had  inter-
rupted his  observations,  he  sailed  on  board  of  a  buc-
caneer's ship  in  September,  1804,  and  in  this  queer
company  visited  Puerto  Cabello,  Santa  Marta,
Puerto  Bello,  Carthagena,  and  other  points,  land-
ing for  a  few  days  wherever  the  vessel  touched,  to
make  observations  and  collect  botanical  specimens.
He  afterward  returned  to  Martinique,  and  from
there  sailed  on  a  second  visit  to  Trinidad  and  other
West  India  islands.  He  returned  to  France  in
June,  1706,  and  became  corresponding  member  of
the  Academy  of  sciences,  and  mathematician  in
ordinary  to  the  king.  He  sailed  on  a  second  ex-
pedition on  14  Dec,  1707,  and  arrived  at  Buenos
Ayres  on  14  Aug.  Louis  XIV.  placed  at  Feuillet's
disposal  a  man-of-war,  to  facilitate  his  work,  and
from  Buenos  Ayres  he  sailed  toward  Cape  Horn.
On  24  Dec.  he  observed  the  snowy  mountains
of  Staten  Land,  and  then  advanced  south  several
degrees,  entering  the  Antarctic  ocean.  He  deter-
mined the  positions  of  several  islands,  took  sound-
ings, and  drew  a  chart  of  them.  In  January,  1709,
he  sailed  as  far  as  El  Callao,  Peru,  and  made  a
complete  chart  of  the  Chilian  coast.  He  penetrated
the  interior  of  Peru  as  far  as  the  mountains,  and
then  went  to  Lima.  On  3  Jan.,  1711,  Feuillet  re-
embarked  and  followed  a  new  route  to  the  south-
ward, going  beyond  the  59th  parallel.  He  then
visited  Havana  and  Puerto  Rico,  and  arrived  in
France  on  27  Aug.,  1711,  where  he  was  received
with  great  distinction.  In  1724,  Feuillet  was
again  sent  on  an  expedition  to  determine  the  exact
position  of  the  island  of  Ferro,  where  the  French
geographers  had  located  the  prime  meridian.  His
works  are  "  Journal  des  observations  physiques,
mathematiques  et  botaniques,  faites  sur  les  cotes
orientales  de  l'Amerique  meridionale  et  dans  les
Indes  occidentals  de  1707  a  1712"  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1714) ;  "  Suite  du  journal  des  observations  phy-
siques" (1725).  Both  works  are  illustrated  with
numerous  maps  and  plates.  The  journal  of  Feuillet
and  its  continuation  have  at  the  end  a  separate
work  entitled  "  Histoire  des  plantes  medicinales
qui  sont  le  plus  en  usage  aux  royaumes  du  Perou
et  du  Chili,  composee  sur  les  lieux  par  ordre  du  roi
en  1709, 1710  et  1711."  The  figures  of  these  plants,
most  of  which  were  new,  are  drawn  with  delicacy
and  truth.  Among  others  are  the  fuchsia  and  the
datura  grandiflora,  which  were  afterward  intro-
duced into  Europe.  The  work  of  Feuillet,  with  its
hundred  botanical  plates,  was  afterward  published
in  German  (2  vols.,  Nuremberg,  1756-'7).

FEW.  William,  senator,  b.  in  Baltimore  county,
Md.,  8  June,  1748;  d.  in  Fishkill,  N.  Y..  16  July,
1828.  He  was  descended  from  William  Ffew,  who
came to this  country  with William  Penn. In


1758  the  family  settled  in  Orange  county,  N.  C,
where  he  received  an  excellent  education!  After
Studying  law  he  was  admitted  to  the  l»ar.  and  be-
gan practice  in Augusta,  Ga. In !??•> be fflM


•bom a  member  of  the  assembly,  and  was  aj

pointed one of the  council. He served in the

Revolutionary  war  as  colonel,  and  distinguished


himself  in  several  actions.  In  1778  he  became
surveyor-general  and  presiding  judge  of  the  Rich-
mond county  court.  He  was  a  delegate  from
Georgia  to  the  Continental  congress  from  1780  till
1788,  and  from  1785  till  1788,  and  a  delegate  to
the  convention  that  framed  the  Federal  constitu-
tion in  1787.  In  1788  he  was  elected  one  of  the
first  two  senators  from  Georgia,  and  served  in  that
capacity  from  4  March,  1789.  till  2  .March.  1793.
Subsequently  he  was  iudpe  of  the  circuit  court  in
Georgia  from  1794  till  1797,  and  a  member  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the
state  of  Georgia.  In  July,  1799,  he  removed  to
New  York,  and  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature
from  1802  till  1805.  Later  he  became  United
States  commissioner  of  loans.

FICKLIN,  Joseph,  mathematician,  b.  in  Win-
chester, Ky.,  9  Sept.,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Masonic  college  in  Lexington,  Mo.,  in  1858,
and  was  principal  of  the  Trenton,  Mo.,  high
school  from  1854  till  1859.  Subsequently  he  was
elected  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Bloom-
ington,  111.,  female  college,  which  chair  he  held
until  i860,  and  a  similar  one  in  the  Christian
female  college  in  Columbia  during  1864-'o.  He
then  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  and
astronomy,  and  director  of  the  observatory  at  the
University  of  the  state  of  Missouri,  in  Columbia,
which  places  he  still  holds.  In  1874  he  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,  and  ten  years  later  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Wisconsin.  He  is  a
fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science,  and  a  member  of  the  American
astronomical  society.  Prof.  Ficklin  has  published
"The  Complete  Algebra  and  Key  "(New  Y<>rk,
1874);  "Algebraic  Problems  and  Key"  (1874);
"First  Lessons  in  Arithmetic"  (1881);  "  Kle-
mentary  Arithmetic"  (1881);  "Table-Book  and
Primary  Arithmetic  "  (1881) ;  "  Practical  Arith-
metic" (1881);  "Advanced  Arithmetic"  (1881);
"National  Arithmetic,  with  a  Key"  (1881);  and
"  Elements  of  Algebra  "  (1881).

FIELD,  A  it  he  hi  ns  G.,  physician,  b.  in  Onta-
rio county,  N.  Y.,  15  Nov.,  1829.  He  studied  medi-
cine, and  was  graduated  at  Starling  medical  col-
lege in  1854,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons,  New  York,  in  1864.  He  became  exam-
ining surgeon  for  pensions  in  1866,  and  held  that
office  for  many  years.  He  settled  first  in  Hills-
borough, Ohio,  and  then  in  Des  Moines,  Iowa,
where  he  devotes  himself  to  the  practice  of  medi-
cine. In  1876  he  was  a  member  of  the  Interna-
tional medical  congress,  and  he  has  been  president
of  the  Iowa  state  medical  society.  His  contribu-
tions to  medical  literature  have  been  large,  and  he
has  published  reports  and  addresses  delivered  be-
fore the  Iowa  ana  American  medical  societ

FIELD,  Benjamin,  politician,  b.  in  Dorset,
Vt.,  12  June,  1816;  d.  in  Albion,  N.  Y..  in
August,  1876.  He  early  settled  in  Albion,  where
he  became  a  stone-cutter  and  carver.  Later  he
obtained  contracts  for  building  railroads,  thereby
acquiring  wealth,  and  was  associated  with  George
M.  Pullman  in  the  construction  of  his  railway
sleeping-cars.  In  1854-'5  he  was  elected  to  the
New  York  state  senate,  and  in  1867  was  a  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention.  He  was  a  promi-
nent member  of  the  Republican  >latc  committee,


FIELD


FIELD


447


and  wm  well  known  as  a  jwrty  manager.  Aurotlng

the  Ur_  f  his  time  to  tin-  promotion  of  tin'

interests  of  public  ma  sod  t h<-  political  organ  iza-

which  he  wit-  «  member.

I  ll  ID.  licnjamin  Hazard,  philanthropist,  b.

in  Vorkt.iwn,  W  e-t< he-ter  I  May,  1814

He  wax educated  at  home and at North  Salem

ai-ailrtn  v,  came  to  New

Fork  In  W2.  ami  cn-

hwed  tin-  . .Hie-.-  (.f  hi-

umlf,  whom  he  -ii.--
ceeded  in  Im-ines*  in
I8M,  !!.•  retired  ni
1M7.V  Mr.  Plaid  has
Wen  connected  with
many  charities  in  ami
about  New  York.  Bi
was  one  of  the  mOOT*
porators  Of  the  Home
for  incurables,  has  Keen
its  president  from  the
bognurinc;  and  has
built  a  chapel  for  its
u.-e.  He  was  president
in  1SH«  of  the  his-
torical society,  an  in-
corporator of  the
American  BOJOUB  of
natural  history,  the  Sheltering  Arms,  and  the  So-
ciety for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  children,  and
is  president  (1887)  of  the  free  circulating  library
and  the  eye  and  ear  infirmary.  He  sup|M>rted  a
high  school  in  Yorktown,  N.  Y..  for  many  years,
and  has  l>een  interested  in  educational  matters.  In
1KM7  he  offered  to  endow  a  free  library  and  home
for  the jioor  in  Westchester  county.

FIELD,  David  Dudley,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boat
Guilford  (now  Madison),  Conn.,  20  May,  1781;  d.
in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  1">  April,  1S<>7.  lie  was  a
son  of  Capt.  Timothy  Field,  who  had  been  an
officer  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  subse-
quently settled  in  Guilford.  Young  Field  was
fitted  for  college  with  Jeremiah  Kvarts,  father  of
William  M.  Kvarts,  under  the  instruction  of  the
Bar.  John  Elliott  The  two  boys  roomed  to-
gether during  their  college  course,  and  were
graduated  at  Yale  in  1802.  Mr.  Field  then
studied  theology  with  the  Rev.  Charles  Kackus,  of
Sxnen*,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  by  Rm  a— o,-i-
ation  of  New  Haven  east,  in  September,  1H<1:{.
After  preaching  for  a  short  time  in  Soiners.  where
he  married  Submit  Dickinson,  he  accepted  a  call  to
the  Congregat  ional  church  in  Haddam.  Conn.,  and
was  ordained  on  11  April,  1804.  Here  he  remained
for  fourteen  years,  resigning  in  1818,  and  then  spent
five  months  on  a  missionary  tour  through  wort
ern  New  York.  On  his  journey  homeward  he
preached  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  where,  a  few
months  Inter,  he  was  to  succeed  the  Hev.  Stephen
West.  The  iournev  from  Haddam  was  made  in
wagons,  filled  with  his  pneofflolom.  and  in  August,
1819,  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the  church,  then
the  only  one  in  the  village. He  ministered  to  this

C irish  for  eighteen  years,  and  then  returned  to
addam,  and  remained  there  until  1844.  During
the  latter  rear  the  congregation  was  divided,  and
•ok  charge  of  the  new  church  in  Higgaiium
until  1851,  when  he  retired,  returning  to  Stocfc-
brfclge,  where  he  passed  his  remaining  dare,  Mr.
Field  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  lxitT  from
Williams.  In  1848  he  spent  some  months  in  Eu-
rope with  his  son  Stephen  He  had  a  natural
fondness  for  historical  research,  and  was  at  0M
time  \iie-pre-ideiit  of  the  ( 'oiinect icut  hi-torical
society ; also a corres|>onditig member of the


Ma*-.  tad iVtin-vlvauia  historical  socie-

ti<-. Besides i  iiioiim  and  historical

addresses,  he  published  "  lli-torv  of  the  <  iounl

Berkshire  of  the  County  of

Middleeei  "  <  IM'.i,  ;  •  History  of  Pittsfleld  "  (1844):
and  M80JB0al0fn| "f  t>e llrain.nl Familv" |
York. 1897) ,-ih- km David Dudley.'  lawyer,

b.  in  Haddam.  Conn.,  18  Feb..  IM»."i.  wa>  his  eldest
child,  and  was  graduated  at  William-  in  1896.
He  studied  law  first  in  Albany  with  Harmaiiu-
Bleeckcr,  but  after  a  few  mouth-  removed  (■>  |
York,  when-  he  completed  hi-  -tudie-.  Booi  after
Mr.  Field's  admission  to  the  bar.  in  1888,  he  be-
came a  junior  partner  in  the  law  firm  of  Henry
and  I).  Sslgwick.  with  which  he  studied.  From
then  until  1H85  he  was  continuously  engaged  in
the  active  practice  of  his  profession.  Mr.  Field
has  attained  apodal  promincnee  in  connection  with
his  labors  in  the  cause  of  law  reform.  As  early
as  1839  he  wrote  a  "  Latter  OB  the  Reform  of
the  Judiciary  System."  and  afterward  addressed
a  committee  of  the  New  York  legislature  on  the
subject.  In  1841  he  prepared  three  bills,  which
were  introduced,  but  the  judiciary  committee,  to
whom  they  were  referred,  failed  to  take  any  action
on  them.  In  1846  he  wrote  a  serie-  of  articles
on  "The  Reorganization  of  the  Judiciary."  which
were  widely  distributed  in  |>ainphlet-forin.  Hi-
influence  was  felt  in  the  ( 'on-titutional  convention
of  1840.  and  their  rejiort  called  for  a  general  code
and  the  "Reform  of  the  Practice."  Itefore  the
legislature  met  in  January,  1847.  he  publi-hed
"What  shall  be  done  with  the  Practice  of  the
Courts!  Shall  it  be  wholly  Reformed  f  Ques-
tions addressed  to  Lawyers."  In  September,  1K47.
he  was  appointed  commissioner  on  practice  and
pleadings,  and  as  such  took  part  in  the  prepara-
tion of  the  code  of  procedure.  The  commission
reported  the  first  installment  to  the  legislature  in
February,  and  it  was  enacted  in  April.  1848.  The
remainder  was  reported  in  four  sections  at  differ-
ent times  until  January.  1850,  when  thecompleted
"Codes  of  Civil  and  Criminal  Procedure  were
submitted  to  the  legislature.  Roth  these  codes
have  been  enacted  into  law.  The  radical  design
of  the  new  system  of  civil  procedure  was  to  ob-
literate the  distinction  between  the  forms  of  action
and  between  legal  and  equitable  suits,  so  that  all
the  rights  of  the  parties  in  relation  to  the  subjects
of  litigation  can  be  determined  in  one  notion,  in-
stead of  dividing  them  between  different  suits.
This  system  has  been  adopted  in  twenty-four  of
the  states  and  territories,  and  is  the  basis  of  the
legal  reform  established  by  the  new  judicature  act
in  England,  and  of  the  practice  in  several  of  the
English  colonies,  including  India.  Eighteen  of
the  states  and  territories  have  adopted  his  code
of  criminal  procedure.  For  some  years  following
the  enactment  of  these  laws  he  continued  topub-
li-h  numerous  |mtnphlcts.  including  the  "Law-
Reform  Tracts,"  also  frcniient  articles  in  the  jour-
nals, and  drafted  bills  that  were  introduced  into
the  legislature  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  the
completion  of  codification.  In  1857  Mr.  Field
was  appointed  by  the  state  of  New  York  head  of
a  commission  to  prepare  a  political  code,  a  penal
code,  and  a  civil  code.  These,  with  the  two  codes
of  procedure  previously  made,  were  designed  to
supersede  the  unwritten  or  common  law.  They
were  completed  in  1805.  and  OOftrad  the  entire
province  of  American  law,  and  presented  to
the  tteoplc  in  compact  form  the  whole  law  by
which  they  were  governed.  The  state  of  New
York  has,  as  yet,  adopted  only  the  penal  code.
although  other  states have  drawn largely  from


448


l-'IKLD


FIELD


the  civil  code  in  their  legislation,  ami  in  Cali-
fornia ami  Dakota  they  have  adopted  then  in
full.  In  I860  he  brought  before  the  Brit  Mi  as-
sociation for  the  promotion  of  social  science,  at
its  meeting  in  Manchester.  England,  a  proposal
for  a  general  revision  and  reform  of  the  law  of
nations,  similar  to  that  which  he  had  before  un-
dertaken in  regard  to  the  civil  and  criminal  law.
He  procured  the  appointment  of  a  committee,
consisting  of  eminent  jurists  of  different  countries,
charged  with  preparing  and  reporting  to  the  asso-
ciation the  outlines  of  an  international  code,  to  be
first  submitted  to  their  careful  revision  and  amend-
ment, and,  when  made  as  complete  as  possible,  to
be  presented  to  the  attention  of  the  different  gov-
ernments, in  the  hope  of  receiving  at  some  time
their  approval  and  adoption  as  the  recognized  law
of  nations.  The  distinguished  jurists  composing
this  committee  resided  in  different  countries,  and
hence  it  was  difficult  for  them  to  act  in  concert.  In
consequence,  Mr.  Field  took  the  whole  matter  upon
himself,  and  in  1873,  after  the  lapse  of  seven
years,  presented  to  the  Social  science  congress  his
"  Outlines  of  an  International  Code,"  which  at-
tracted the  attention  of  all  jurists,  and  has  been
translated  into  French,  Italian,  and  Chinese.  It
resulted  in  the  formation  of  an  association  for  the
reform  and  codification  of  the  laws  of  nations,  also
having  for  his  object  the  substitution  of  arbitra-
tion for  war  in  the  settlement  of  disputes  between
countries.  The  membership  includes  jurists,
economists,  legislators,  and  politicians,  and  of  this
organization  Mr.  Field  was  elected  first  president.
An  eminent  chancellor  of  England  said  that  "  Mr.
Dudley  Field,  of  New  York,  had  done  more  for
the  reform  of  laws  than  any  other  man  living."
Mr.  Field  has  taken  much  interest  in  politics.
Originally  a  Democrat,  he  voted  with  that  party,
although  he  persistently  opposed  its  pro-slavery
policy,  until  the  nomination  of  John  C.  Fremont.
in  1856,  whom  he  supported  in  the  presidential
canvass  of  that  year.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
a  staunch  adherent  of  the  administration,  and  was
active  with  voice,  pen,  and  purse  in  aid  of  his
country.  For  eight  weeks  in  1876  he  filled  the
unexpired  term  in  congress  of  Smith  Ely,  who  had
been  made  mayor  of  New  York  city.  He  now
acted  with  the  Democratic  party,  and  was  one  of
the  advocates  on  that  side  in  the  dispute  over  the
presidential  election.  He  has  delivered  numerous
addresses,  and  has  contributed  very  largely  to
current  literature  on  political  topics.  His
"  Sketches  over  the  Sea  "  appeared  in  the  "  Demo-
cratic Review  "  at  the  time  of  his  first  trip  abroad
in  1836,  and  he  published  "  Speeches,  Argu-
ments, and  Miscellaneous  Papers  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1886). — Another  son,  Stephen  Johnson,
jurist,  b.  in  Haddam,  Conn.,  4  Nov.,  1816,  was  not
three  years  old  when  his  father  removed  to  Stock-
bridge,  and  ten  years  later  accompanied  his  sister,
Emilia,  who  had  married  a  missionary,  to  Smvrna,
for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  ori-
ental languages.  On  his  return  ho  entered  Will-
iams, and  was  graduated  in  1837,  standing  first  in
his  class.  Subsequently  he  came  to  New  York,
and  began  the  study  of  law  in  the  office  of  his
brother,  David  Dudley.  After  his  admission  to
the  bar  he  became  a  partner  in  the  firm.  This
connection  was  severed  in  1848,  and  he  spent  some
time  in  European  travel.  In  November,  1849,
he  sailed  from  New  York  for  San  Francisco,  where
he  practised  his  profession.  A  few  weeks  later
he  was  among  those  who  founded  Marysville,  be-
coming its  first  alcalde,  and  continuing  as  such
until  the  organization  of  the  judiciary  under  the


^s^^i  tz^


constitution  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  a  mhiii-
bu  of  the  first  legislature  held  after  the  adnuarioo
<>f  California  into  the  Union,  served  on  its  judi-
ciary committee,  and  secured  the  passage  of  laws
concerning  the  judiciary,  and  regulating  civil  and
criminal  procedure  in  all  the  courts  of  the  state.
He  was  also  the  au-
thor of  the  law  that
gives  authority  to  the
regulations  and  cus-
toms of  miners  in  the
settlement  of  contro-
versies among  them,
thus  solving  a  per-
plexing problem.  At
the  close  of  the  ses-
sion he  returned  to
Marysville,  and  dur-
ing the  ensuing  six
years  devoted  him-
self to  his  profession,
gaining  an  extensive
practice.  In  1857  he
was  elected  judge  of
the  supreme  court
of  California  for  six
years,  beginning  with  January,  1858,  but,  on  the
occurrence  of  a  vacancy,  he  was  appointed  to  fill
it  in  October,  1857.  On  the  resignation  of  Chief-
Justice  David  S.  Terry,  in  September,  1859,  Judge
Field  succeeded  him,  and  continued  in  office  till  his
appointment  to  the  supreme  bench  of  the  United
States  by  President  Lincoln  in  1863.  Among  the
prominent  decisions  in  which  he  has  been  concerned
was  the  famous  test-oath  case,  in  which  he  gave  the
casting  vote,  and  wrote  the  opinion  of  the  court  an-
nulling the  validity  of  the  "  iron-clad  "  oath.  His
dissenting  opinions  in  the  legal-tender  cases,  in  the
confiscation  cases,  and  in  the  New  Orleans  slaughter-
house case,  have  also  attracted  attention.  Judge
Field  was  a  member  of  the  electoral  commission
in  1877,  and  voted  with  the  Democratic  minority
of  the  commission.  In  1880  his  name  was  placed
in  nomination  for  the  presidency  at  the  Cincinnati
convention,  and  he  received  sixty-five  votes  on  the
first  ballot.  He  was  appointed  by  the  governor  of
California,  in  1873,  one  of  a  commission  to  exam-
ine the  code  of  laws  of  that  state,  and  to  prepare
amendments  to  the  same  for  legislative  action.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams  in
1864,  and  in  1869  was  appointed  professor  of  law
in  the  University  of  California. — Another  son,
Cyrns  West,  merchant,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass..
30  Nov.,  1819,  received  his  education  in  his  native
village,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  came  to  New
York  and  obtained  a  situation  as  clerk  with  Alex-
ander T.  Stewart  and  Co.  Before  attaining  his
majority  he  began  the  manufacture  and  sale  of
paper,  and  in  the  course  of  a  dozen  years  was  at
the  head  of  a  prosperous  business.  In  1868  he
partially  retired  and  spent  six  months  travelling
in  South  America.  The  project  of  carrying  a  tele-
graph-line across  the  Atlantic  ocean  suggested  it-
self to  him  during  a  conversation  with  his  brother
Matthew,  in  which  aid  was  solicited  for  the  con-
struction of  a  telegraph-line  across  Newfoundland.
The  matter  was  presented  bv  him  to  Peter  Cooper,
Moses  Taylor,  Marshall  O.  Roberts,  and  Chandler
White,  who,  with  Mr.  Field,  agreed  to  contribute
large  amounts  of  money  to  the  enterprise,  which
was  at  once  organized  under  the  title  of  the  New
York,  Newfoundland,  and  London  telegraph  com-

[>any. The  exclusive  right  for  fifty  years  to  estab-
ish  a  telegraph  from  the  continent  of  America,
across  Newfoundland,  and  thence  J.o  Europe,  was


FIELD


FIELD


449


I  without  dels?  fn.iu  the  local  legislature
of  the  Wand.  Mr.  Field  thaooaforth  devoted  Ins
time  entirely  for  the  nasi  tiiirt..  the  ac-

complishment <>f  this  purpose.  llV  visited  Kn^-
land  more  than  twoscoro  timet,  eolieiting  Bnanetal
aid.  and  at  tin-  formation  of  the  Atlantic  telegraph
oompanj  subscribed  in  his  own  mum  for  one
fourth  of  lu capital  stock.  After  several  onona-
ci"«>fiii  .tT«.rt*  ttdv  made  to  lay  the  cable,  aomawh
ntcation  ra  Anally  established  In  1888.  lor  ■
few  weeks  messages  were  sent  from  one continent
t<>  tin-  other,  and  then  the  onbis  ceased  to  act.
During  the  civil  war  it  was  f< >u n<l  impossible  to
proceed  further  with  the  enterprise.  Meanwhile
Sir.  Field  attended  in  I86e  the  opening  or  the

.mil  as  the  repreeentatiTe of  the  New- York
ohejnber  of  oommerea,  end  public  intareel  la  the
lahifti spli  eoheme  was  kept  alive  in  Europe  im<l
America  by  his  efforts,  lie  made  repeated  visits
to  England, and  delivered  addresses  on  the  subject
on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  Finally,  in  186ft]
active  measures  were  renewed,  and  the  steamship

"Great  Eastern"  began  the  paying  <»ut  of  the
cable. After  1,800  miles  had  bean  laid  thaoablg

and  the  vessel  returned  to  England.  In
1866  another  expedition  started  with  a  new  eable,
and  on  "27  July  telegraphic  communication  was  es-
tablished between  the  two  continents,  and  has  not
sine  been  interrupted.  Congress  voted  unani-
monaly  to  preeenl  Mr.  Field  with  a  gold  medal
and  the thankl  of  the  nation,  while  the  prime  min-
ister of  Kngland  declared  that  only  the  fact  that

he  was  a  citizen  of
another  country
prevented  his  re-
ceiving high  hon-
ors from  the  Brit-
ish government.
John  Bright  pro-
nounced him  "'the
Columbus  of  mod-
ern times,  who,
by  his  cable,  had
moored  the  New-
World  alongside
Of  the  Old."  The
Paris  exposition
universelleof  1867
pi  re  him  the  grand
medal,  the  highest

prise  it  bad  to  be-
stow. He  also  re-
ceived the  thanks
of  the  city  of  New  York,  with  the  freedom  of  the
city  and  a  gold  snuff-box,  tin  thanks  of  the  Chaui-
■pf  of  commerce  i  f  N.w  York,  with  a  gold  medal,
the  thanks  of  the  state  of  Wisconsin,  with  a  gold
madai,  the  thanks  of  the  American  chuml>er  of
comim  r -f  Liverpool,  with  a  gold  medal,  a  deco-
ration from  Victor  Fmmanuel,  king  of  Italy,  an
entire  service  of  silver  from  the  late  Qeorge  Pi  a-
hody,  and  many  other  marks  of  appreciation  of  his
lervicec  from  different  parts  (,f  the  world,
one  interested  in  1*70  in  the  development

of  the  system  of  elevated  railways  In  (feu  Fork

city,  and  has  devoted  much  time  anil  capital  to
their  successful  establishment .  In  i860  '1  M  made
a  tour  around  the  world,  accompanied  by  his  wife,
and  since  Ins  return  has  obtained  concessions  from

ndwioh  islands  for  the  laying  of  u  cable  be*
twii-n  San  Francisco  and  those  islands,  with  a  view
toward  its  ultimate  extension  across  the Pacific
ocean. — Another  son,  Henry  Martyn,  elerj
b.  in  Stockbridge.  Mass.,  3  April.  gradu-

• Williams  in  IMS.  studied  theolog]
vol.  ti.  — 29


Windsor  ami  N.w  I  l.i\.  n.  Coim..  until  1842.  and
than  beoams  paet or  of  ■  Presbyterian  ehnrnk  n  St.
Louis.  Mo.,  when-  he  remained  for  Ave  years, in

1841  s  be  travelled  in  Europe,  and  whs  in  Paris
during  the  revolution  if)  February  of  the  latter
year,  and  also  m  Italy  during  the  similar  scenes  a
few  weeks  later.  Mis  observations  and  ex|M-riences
in  Home  were  published  in  a  pamphlet  entitled
"The  <;<mm1  and the Bad in the Kotuati  Catholic

church." (»u  his  return  to  the  United  States  he

became  acquainted  with  the  families  of  Irish  pa-
triots living  in  New  York,  ami  was  |.  d  I-.  study
the  history  of  Ireland  during  the  hitter  j.art  of  the
lsth  century.  In  oonseonenos  he  iiublished  "The
Irish  Confederates,  i  EUston  of  the  Behenfttn  of

17!»H"  (New  York,  ]s.-,l).  He  was  pastor  of  the
church m  West  Springfield.  Mass.,  in  lK'il-M.  and

then  removed  to  New  York  to  become  one  of  the

editors  of  ••The  Evangelist/1  Of  which  he  was  sub-
sequently proprietor.  He  has  jaiblished  "Summer
Pictures  from  Copenhagen  to  Venice"  (New  York,
1850)]  "History  of  the  Atlantic-  Telegraph"  <!-<
••  Prom  the  Lakes  of  Kfllarney  to  the  Golden  Horn"
[1878);  -From  Fgvpt  to  Japan  "  (1878) ; M  On  the

rt"(1888);  "Among  the  Holy  Hills"  (188
"Tin-  (Jr.-ek  Islands  and  Turkey  after  the  War"
il^s.o;  and "Blond thicker  than  Water: a  Few
1  »..\  s  smong  our  Bbnthern  Brethren  "  (1886)1

FIELD.  Henry  Mart vn,  physician, b.in  Brigh-
ton. Maaa.  I  I  let,  1887.  fie  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  18o5),  and  at  the  Collage  c.f  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York  in  1888.  After  serving  for
more  than  a  year  in  the  V.  S.  armv  as  acting  as-
sistant surgeon,  he  settled  in  New  York,  when  he
practised  for  four  years. In  1*07  he  removed  tec

Newton,  Mass.,  and  there  accpiired  a  large  general

fractice,  making  a  specialty  of  female  diseases.
le  was  elected  professor  of  therapeutics  in  Dart-
mouth medical  college  in  1872.  Dr.  Field  was  one
of  the  corporators  of  the  Boston  gynecological  so-
ciety. His  papers  on  his  specialty  arc  published  in
transactions  of  various  societic •>.

FIELD,  James  (iaven.  Utwyer,  1>.  in  Walnut,
Culpeper  co..  Ya..  "j i  Feb..  1886.  His  snccston
were  identical  with  those  of  the  Fields  <»f  New
York.  He  attended  for  a  time  aciisssioal  school,
and  became  a  teacher.  In  1848  he  went  to  Cali-
fornia, and  in  1880  was  elected  one  of  the  secre-
taries of  the  convention  that  framed  the  first  con-
stitution of  that  state.  In  the  same  year  he  re-
turned t0  Virginia,  and in 1*.Y2 was  admit  ted to

the  bar. He  was  attorney  for  the  commonwealth

in  his  native  county  from'  1860  till  I860.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in  the  Confederate
service,  and  lost  I  leg  at  the  battle  of  Slaughter's
Mountain.  Since  the  war  he  has  been  attorney-
general  of  the-  state-. Gen.  Field  is  a  Baptist, being

a  sellout  and  liberal  promoter  of  all  the  enterprises

in  which  that  denomination  is  engaged.

FIELD.  Joseph  M..  actor, b,  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1*10:  <1.  in  Mobile,  Ala..  80  Jan.  1888.

His  parents  were  Irish  exiles,  who  brought  him  to
the  United  State-s  at  an  early  age.  Hs  was  edu-
cated in  New  York  city,  and  Studied  law.  At  the
age  "f  twenty-six  he  married,  and  in  1*4:5  mads  his
first  sppsaraneesaan  actor  in  one  of  the  minor  New-
York  the-atres.  The  drama  soon  heraiM!  his  regu-
lar profession,  and  for  years  he  travelled  snd  per-
formed in  most  of  the  large  cities  ,,f  the  Union.
In  1H.V2  he  U-caine  manager  of  a  theatre-  in  St.
I/oiiis. Mo., when- he dramatized and produced

many  local  plays,  and  established  the  "Reveille,''
a  daily  newspaper,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the-  edi-
tors end  chie-f  proprietor. In  St.  Louis  be  wrots

manv humorous sketches for his brother's


450


FIELD


FIELD


Orleans  "  Picayune."  These  articles  were  signed
"Straws,"  and  Itecame  widely  quoted.  At  the  time
of  his  death  Field  was  proprietor  of  the  theatre  in
Mobile.  Ala.  He  published  "The  Drama  of  Poker-
ville"  (Philadelphia,  1847).— His  brother,  Matthew
C.,  journalist,  b.  in  London.  England,  in  1818;  d.
at  sea  in  1844,  was  brought  to  the  United  States
an  infant,  and.  after  a  course  of  education  in  the
common  schools  of  New  York  city,  entered  a  print*
ing-office,  where  he  made  his  way  into  journalism.
Field  occasionally  acted  in  Mobile,  New  Orleans,
and  other  southern  cities.  He  was  for  several
years  one  of  the  editors  of  the  New  Orleans  "  Pica-
yune," and  contributed  numerous  articles  in  prose
and  verse  to  southern  periodicals,  over  the  sig-
nature of  "Phazma." — Joseph's  daughter,  Kate,
lecturer,  b.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  about  1840,  was  edu-
cated in  Massachusetts  at  various  seminaries,  and
later  gave  especial  attention  to  musical  studies.
She  made  several  prolonged  visits  to  Europe,  and
during  her  stay  there  became  correspondent  of  the
New  York  "  Tribune,"  Philadelphia  "  Press,"  and
Chicago  "Tribune."  She  also  furnished  sketches
for  periodicals.  In  1874  Miss  Field  appeared  as
an  actress  at  Booth's  theatre,  New  York,  where
she  met  with  some  success ;  and  afterward  she  re-
newed her  dramatic  efforts  as  a  variety  performer
of  dance,  song,  and  recitation  entertainments.
From  1882  until  the  summer  of  1883  she  was  at
the  head  of  an  extensive  ladies'  "  Co-operative
Dress  Association  "  in  New  York,  which  resulted
in  a  disastrous  failure.  Of  late  years  Miss  Field
has  confined  her  attention  to  lecturing  on  Mor-
monism  and  other  topics  of  the  day.  Her  publi-
cations include  "  Planchette's  Diary"  (New  York,
1868);  "Adelaide  Ristori "  (1868) ;  "Mad  on  Pur-
pose," a  comedy  (1868);  "Pen  Photographs  from
Charles  Dickens's  Readings  "  (Boston,  1868) ;  "  Hap-
hazard" (1873);  "Ten  Davs  in  Spain"  (1875);  and
a  "History  of  Bell's  Telephone"  (London,  1878).

FIELD,  Martin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Leverett,  Frank-
lin CO.,  Mass.,  in  1773;  d.  in  Fayetteville,  Vt.,
in  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1798,
studied  law  at  Chester,  Vt.,  and  began  practice  at
Newfane,  Vt,  in  1800.  He  was  a  popular  and  suc-
cessful jury  lawyer,  and  for  ten  years  filled  the
office  of  state  attorney  for  Windham  county.  He
was  frequently  chosen  to  the  general  assembly,  and
also  sat  in  the  Constitutional  convention  of  Ver-
mont. After  practising  continuously  for  thirty
years,  he  was  compelled  to  retire  on  account  of
deafness.  He  then  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  geology  and  mineralogy,  collecting  a  fine  cabi-
net, which  has  since  been  presented  to  Middle! mry
college. He  also  wrote  essays  on  those  subjects.

FIELD,  Ma  ii  n>c  11  It  rati  hurst,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  26  March,  1822;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1841,  spent
two  years  in  foreign  travel,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847,  associating  himself  in
the  practice  of  his  profession  with  John  Jay.  He
again  visited  Europe  in  1848.  and  a  third  time  in
1854,  when  he  accepted  the  appointment  of  secre-
tary to  the  American  legation  in  Paris,  under  John
Y.  Mason.  He  subsequently  became  connected
with  the  Spanish  legation  under  Pierre  Soulc.  In
1855  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  American
commissioners  to  the  universal  exhibition  in  Paris.
In  1861  he  was  assigned  to  the  U.  S.  deputy  sub-
treasurership  in  the  city  of  New  York,  and  after-
ward served  as  assistant  secretary  of  the  treasury
in  Washington,  D.  C,  which  office  he  was  com-

Sslled  to  resign  in  1865,  through  failing  health,
e  was  four  years  collector  of  internal  revenue  for
the  6th  district  of  New  York,  from  which  he  retired,


in  1869,  to  resume  the  practice  of  law.  In  1873  he
was  appointed  judge  of  the  2d  district  court  of
New  York  citv  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  held  the  office
until  1874.  Judge  Field  was  in  earlv  life  a  Demo-
crat, but  on  the  second  election  of  President  Lin-
coln voted  with  the  Republicans.  He  is  the  author
of  "Adrian,  or  the  Clouds  of  the  Mind.*'  written
in  collaboration  with  the  English  novelist.  <l.  P.
R.  James  (New  York,  1852),  and  "Memoirs  of
Many  Men  and  Some  Women "  (1874).  He  also
published  a  small  volume  of  poems  (1869).  BDi
••  Memoirs,"  which  are  entertaining  reminiscences
of  his  sojourn  abroad,  were  widely  circulated.

FIELD,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in  Jefferson
county,  Kv.,  7  Nov.,  1805;  d.  in  Jefferson ville,
Clark  co.,  lnd..  28  Aug.,  1888.  His  father
in  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  emigrated  to  Ken-
tucky in  1784.  Nathaniel  was  educated  in  the  best
schools,  and  was  graduated  at  Transylvania  medi-
cal school,  Lexington,  Ky.  He  first  settled  in
northern  Alabama,  and  practised  there  three  years,
when  he  returned  to  Kentucky.  In  the  autumn  of
1829  he  removed  to  Jeffersonville,  lnd.,  where  he
afterward  resided.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature from  1838  till  1839.  In  the  spring  of  the
latter  year  he  organized  the  city  government  of
Jeffersonville,  under  a  charter  that  he  drafted  and
had  passed  by  the  legislature.  In  1830  he  estab-
lished the  first  Christian  (or  Campbellite)  church
in  that  city,  and  in  1847  the  Second  Advent  Chris-
tian church.  He  served  as  pastor  of  the  former
for  seventeen  years,  and  of  the  latter  for  forty
years,  without  compensation,  believing  it  to  be
wrong  to  earn  a  livelihood  by  preaching,  or  to
"make  merchandise  of  the  gospel."  He  voted
against  the  entire  township,  in  1834,  on  the  propo-
sition to  expel  the  free  negroes,  and  was  compelled
to  face  a  mob  in  consequence.  He  was  one  of  the
original  abolitionists  of  the  west,  and  emancipated
several  valuable  slaves  that  he  had  inherited.  He
held  a  debate,  in  1852,  with  Elder  Thomas  P.  Con-
nelly on  the  "State  of  the  Dead,"  and  the  argu-
ments were  published  in  book-form.  He  also  pub-
lished a  humorous  poem,  entitled  "Arts  of  Impos-
ture and  Deception  Peculiar  to  American  Society  "
(1858).  Dr.  Field  was  the  author  of  a  monograph
on  "  Asiatic  Cholera,"  contributed  many  essays  to
medical  journals,  and  prepared  in  manuscript  lect-
ures on  "  Capital  Punishment,"  "  The  Mosaic  Rec-
ord of  Creation,"  "  The  Age  of  the  Human  Race,"
and  "  The  Chronology  of  Fossils."

FIELD,  Richard  Stockton,  senator,  b.  in
White  Hill,  Burlington  co,  N.  J.,  31  Dec.,  1803 ;  d.
in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  25  May,  1870.  He  was  a  grand-
son of  Richard  Stockton,  one  of  the  signers  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1821,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his
uncle,  Richard  Stockton,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1825.  He  was  for  several  years  a  member  of
the  New  Jersey  legislature,  and"  in  1838  was  ap-
pointed attorney-general  of  the  state,  which  office
ne  resigned  in  1841.  He  was  a  prominent  member
of  the  convention  that,  in  1844,  met  to  adopt  the
present  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  Jersey,
and  in  1851  was  chosen  to  deliver  the  first  annual
address  before  an  association  composed  of  its  sur-
vivois.  From  1847  till  1855  he  was  professor  in
the  New  Jersey  law-school.  Ever  taking  a  strong
interest  in  educational  matters,  and  especially  in
the  common  schools  of  the  state,  he  was  in  the  lat-
ter year  made  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
the  state  normal-school,  then  just  organized,  and
thenceforward  until  his  death  he  wrote  all  its  an-
nual reports  to  the  legislature.  In  November,  1862,
he  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  for  the  un-


FIELD


4.11


1  term  <>f  John  K.  Thomjwnn,  who  «l ii-«l  in
office. Whiles  immUr  of  that  bodj  Ik-  delivered

mi  able  argument  on  the  discharge  of  state  prison*

cr*.  in  which ho  maintained  that the  right  bO  »u  —
MM thfl  writ  of  haltcas  corpus  resided  not  in  con-
grew,  hut in  the  president. On  ','1 .Ian..  1  -
was  appointed  by  President Lincoln U.  S.  district

for  the  district  of  N.  which  offlpc

I  until  Ins  death.  In  lHtMl  he  WSJ  a  delegate
to  tin-  Philadelphia  convention,  ami  throughout
fe  he  was  un  unflinching  advocate  of  the
Union  cause.  After  his  elevation  to  the  bench  he
livwl  in  comparative  ssolnsJon  in  his  luxurious
home  at  Princeton.  Judge  Field  was  a  man  of
varied  ami  profound  learning,  gentle,  courteous,
and  dignified,  and  of  a  charitable  disposition. He

•ely  identified  with  the  interests  of  his  alma
mater, which in  return  conferred niton him. in

MB8,  the  dear f  LL.  I>. Judge  Field,  at  the

time  of  his  decease,  wits  president  of  the  New  Jer-
sey historical  society,  and  for  many  years  a  valu
side  contributor  to  its  publications.  "The  Provin
cial  Courts  of  New  Jersey,"  etc,  forming  the  third
volume  of  the  "  ( 'ollections  "  ( l.N-l!l).  j,  probably  his
most  valuable  contribution  to  historical  research.
Anion;:  his  best-known  addresses,  all  of  which  have
bean  printed,  are  those  "On  the  Trial  of  the  K.v.
William  Tennent  for  Perjury  in  1742"  (1851);
••The  Power  of  Habit  "  (1806);  "  The  Constitution
not  a  CoinjMct  between  Sovereign  States"  (1861);
"<>n  the  Life  and  Character  of  Chief -Justice  Horn*
bl.iwcr  "  (1h«m)  ;  and  "  An  Oration  on  the  Life  and
Character  of  Abraham  Lincoln"  (1866).

FIKLD,  Samuel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Delaware
county,  l'a.,  \2  Aug.,  1828,  He  is  a  Philadelphia
merchant,  a  ruling  elder  of  the  Walnut  street
Presbyterian  church,  and  remarkable  for  his  ear-
nestness in  forwarding  everv  form  of  Christian  ac-
tivity. He  is  exceedingly  liberal,  and  scarcely  ever
fails  to  respond  to  any  proper  appeal  to  his  sympa-
thies. For  many  years  ne  has  In-longed  to  the
Presbyterian  board  of  education,  and  has  taken  a
leading  part  in  the  establishment  of  the  hospital
under  the  management  of  that  denomination.  The
organization  of  the  Presbyterian  home  for  widows
and  single  women  and  the  Presbyterian  orphanage
are  also  largely  due  to  his  earnest  and  judicious
efforts.  Mr.  Field  has  several  times  represented  his
presbytery  in  the  general  assembly.

FIKLD,  Thomas  W.,  educator,  b.  at  Onondaga
Hill,  N.  V.,  in  1890;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  V..J
1HM1. He removed  to  Williamsburg, N.  Y.,  in

•nl  engaged  in  teaching,  surveying,  and  the
cultivation  of  fruit  and  flowers.  In  1873  he  was
apj*>iiiti<l  superintendent  <>f  public  schools  in
Brooklyn,  N.  V..  which  office  he  held  at  the  time
of  his  death.  He  was  an  anient  student  and  col-
lector in  American  history  and  ethnology.  1 1<-
published  a  small  volume  of  poems;  "Pear  Cult-
ure" (1858);  "A  History  of  tho  Battle  of  Long
Wand"  ("  Memoirs  of  the  Long  Island  Historical

." vol.  ii., lsiiit); -Historic  and  Antiqua-

N-enes in Brooklyn and Vicinity "  (1868):

"An  Kssuy  toward  an  Indian  Bibliography  "  1 1^7:i>  j

and left  a  large  manuscript  volume  of  "Aphor-

seleeted  and  original.
FIELDIMf,  William  Stevens.  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Halifax,  24  Nov..  1848. He waa educated
in  his  native  city, and  has  been  connected  for  many
Tears  with  the  Halifax  "  Morning  Chronicle." At

rention  of  the  Liberal  party  held  in  Halifax
after  the  resignation  of  the  'I  hoiuson  government

5,  he  declined  the  | tort  folios  of  premier  and
provincial  secretary.  In  December  <>f  the  same
year  he  Urame  a  member  of  the  administration  of


i Pipes,  ami  on  thelatter"s  retirement  in  July,
1MH4,  reorganized tin-  administration,  becoming

premier  and  provincial  secretary. I
turned to  the  Nova  Scotia  house  of  asBemblv  in
1888,  and  was  re-elected  in
FIKLDS. James Thomas. nuMWsar. b. in

Portai ith.  N.  II..  81  Dec..  1817;  d.  in  B

April.  1881.  At  the  age  of  four  years  be  losl  hi*
father.  The  lad  was  educated  in  a  high  school  in
his  native  place,  and  in  1n:M  went  to  Boston  t

come  clerk  In  a  book  store. In  bis  eighteenth
he  read  the  annliweai  jnosjii  baforethe  Boston  mer-
cantile library  association. Skim  after  he  remind
the  age  of  twenty-one
he  became  a partner
in  the  publishing  firm
of Ticknor, I i •-•-«  1 \
Field-,  and  continued
a iiiciiiIht of it till
i*7<>.  when  he  retired.
From  188S  until  1*70
Mr. Field-,  was  edit-
or of the "  Atlantic
Monthly."  Mean-

while he  had  lectured
before  the  societies  of
Harvard  and  Dart-
inout  h.and  in  18<(7  re-
ceived from  the  latter
the  degree  of  LL.  D.
After the close of  O

his  publishing  career  ^-y^,^,  v  f7^&^.  *  S
Fields  lectured  sue-  C^O^h^^  yi*Z<t</
cessfully, chiefly on

literary-  subjects,  throughout  the  large  cities  of  the
northern  states.  He  had  seen  much  of  literary
soeiety,had  bean  intimate  with  many  eminent  men,
and  possessed  a  special  facultv  of  entertaining  and
instructing  his  audiences. He  made  four  visits  to

Europe—  in  1847*  1851, 1888,  and  1868.  His  pub-
lished volumes  include  "  Poems"  j  I'.oston.  1H-1U  ;  8d
ed.,  Cambridge,  1854);  "A  few  Venal  for  a  few
Friends"  (Boston,  ls.*»H);  "Yesterdays  with  Au-
thors" (1872);  "  Hawthorne"  (1878);  and  "  In  and
out  of  Doors  with  Charles  Dickens"  (1n7<>).  In
conjunction  with  Edwin  P.  Whipple  he  edited  the
"Family  Librarv  of  English  Poetry"  (1*77).— His
wife,  Annie  Adams,  has  published  "Under  the

Olive,"  poemi (Boston. 188DJL several pamphlets.

and  a  "Memoir  of  James  T.  Fields"  (1MN1).

FHU'EIRA,  Luiz,  Portuguese  missionary,  b.
in  Almodovar.  Portugal.  1688;  d.  in  Brazil  in  July.
104.'1.  He  belonged  tothe  Jesuit  order,  and  was  sent
on  the  Brazilian  mission.  He  was  the  companion
of  the  Jesuit  Pinto,  who.  while  preaching  thegos-
pH  among  the  Tavupcs.  a  triiN-  near  Pemambooo,

was  killed  by  these  cannibals.  Figueira  fortunate-
ly saoapad,  and  returned  to  Pernainbuco.  He  was
appointed  HipfJFFtif  of  the  college  Of  that  city,  and
afterward  made  head  of  all  the  Jesuit  missions  on
the  Amazon.  He  then  went  to  Portugal  with  the
object  of  finding  missionaries  to  share  his  labors,
and  was  returning  with  several  companion*  when,
just  as  his  «.|iip  was  entering  the  mouth  of  the
Amazon,  a  storm  arose,  and  he  was  wrecked  on  an
island  inhabited  by  the  A  mans.  These  barbarians
massacred  Figueira  with  thirteen  of  his  compan-
ions, and  devoured  their  bodies.  Figueira  wrote
"  Arte  da  (irammatica  da  Lingua  Brazilica"  (Lie>
Um,  |#B7k  The  library  of  the  Jesuit  college  in
Home  contains  French  translations  of  these  other
works  of  Figueira,  the  originals  of  which  are  lost  :
"Voyages  de  deoouYsrtcs  a  t ravers  lis  pays  des
Tayupes*1  and  ••  Btablissements  fondes  par  fe  pcre
Figueira  ches  les  sauvages  au  Maranham."


452


KIGUEKOA


FILLMORE


FIGIKROA,  Francisco,  Mexican  historian.  1>.
in  Toluoa  about  17:50;  d.  in  the  city  < if  Modooaboul
1800.  He  fiitiTftl  in  his  youth  the  Older  i>f  St.
Francis,  and  was  at  different  times  lecturer  and
rector  of  studies  of  the  College  of  Tlaltelolco,  su-
perior of  the  convent  in  Mexico,  and  provincial  of
New  Spain.  When  a  royal  decree  of  21  Feb.  1  ?!><>.
ordereu  the  viceroy  to  collect  and  send  to  Spain  all
the  documents  that  might  be  useful  for  compiling
the  history  of  Mexico,  the  task  was  intrusted  to
Figueroa,  and  in  less  than  three  years  he  collected
thirty-two  folio  manuscript  volumes  in  duplicate.
One  copy  was  sent  to  the  council  of  the  Indies,
and  exists  to-dav,  although  mutilated,  in  the  Span-
ish academy  of  history.  The  other  copy  remained
in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of  the  viceroyalty,
and  was  afterward  transferred  to  the  national  gen-
eral archives,  where  they  still  existed  in  1853,  but
at  present  their  resting-place  is  unknown.  They
include  diaries  of  missionaries  in  the  northern

Srovinces  (3  vols.) ;  a  "  History  of  the  Conquest  of
'ew  Galicia,"  by  Mota  Padilla  (2  vols. ;  afterward
published  by  the  Mexican  geographical  society);
the  Indian  songs  of  Nezahualcoyot  and  tales  of
Ixtlilcochitl,  "Cronica  Mexicana  por  Hernando
Alvarado  Tezozomoc,"  and  "  Historia  Chichimeca
por  Ixtlilcochitl "  (all  three  published  partly  in  a
translation  in  Kingsborough's  "  Antiquities  of
Mexico);  "Cronica  de  Michoacan  por  Fr.  Pablo
Beaumont,"  partly  published  in  Spanish,  French,
and  Italian  (3  vols.) ;  "  History  of  the  Missions  in
Old  California  "  (English  translation,  New  York) ;
and  "  Notes  on  New  California  "  (partly  published
in  French  and  English  translations).  Figueroa
was  also  the  author  of  several  theological  works,
most  of  the manuscripts  of  which  have  disap-

g?ared ;  but  one  of  them  is  still  preserved  in  the
iblioteca  Nacional  of  Mexico.
FIGUEROA,  Francisco  Acnfia  de  (fe-ga-ro-
ah),  Uruguayan  poet,  b.  in  Montevideo  in  1791 ;  d.
there,  6  Oct.,  1862.  In  1804  his  father  sent  him  to
Buenos  Ayres  to  study  at  the  college  of  San  Car-
los, but  the  invasion  of  that  city  in  1807  by  the
British  forces  obliged  him  to  return  to  his  native
city,  where  he  was  employed  as  a  subaltern  in  the
administration  under  his  father.  He  began  early
to  write  improvisations  and  numerous  small  poems,
but,  as  at  that  time  no  printing-office  existed  in
Montevideo,  none  of  his  works  of  that  period  have
been  published.  During  the  twenty-two  months'
siege  of  that  city  by  the  revolutionary  forces  in
1812— '14,  he  kept  in  verse  a  diary  of  daily  events,
which  was  afterward  published  under  the  title
"  Diario  Historico  Razonado  del  sitio  de  Montevi-
deo en  1812-'13  y  '14."  In  June,  1814,  when  Mon-
tevideo surrendered,  Figueroa  emigrated  to  Rio
Janeiro,  where  he  was  employed  as  secretary  of  the
Spanish  envoy.  In  1818,  after  the  conclusion  of
peace,  he  gave  up  his  idea  of  going  to  Spain,  and
returned  to  his  native  city.  He  was  again  em-
ployed in  the  administration,  and  in  1840  was  ap-
pointed director  of  the  national  library  and  mu-
seum, but  continued  to  occupy  his  leisure  by  writ-
ing poetry.  Marmier,  in  his  "  Lettres  sur  l'Ame-
riqueduSud"  (Paris,  1851),  compares  Figueroa
with  the  French  poet  Marot,  and  places  him
at  the  head  of  Spanish-American  poets.  Besides
his  historical  diary  mentioned  above,  he  pub-
lished "  Paraf  rases  de  los  Salmos  " ;  "  Paraf  rases
de  las  Lamentaciones  de  Jeremias  "  ;  and  "  Las  To-
raidas,"  sketches  of  Paraguayan  customs.  The
poems  "La  Negra,"  "El  Duelo  de  Montevideo,"
"  Ilimno  Nacional  del  Uruguay."  and  all  his
smaller  poems,  were  published  under  the  title  of
"  Mosaico  Poetico  "  (1857).


FILLEBROWN,  Thomas  Scott,  naval  officer,
b.  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  i:s  Aug.,  is:t»:  d.
in  New  York  city.  M8ep&,  lssl.  Be  wu  appointed
to  the  navy  from  Maine  as  a  midshipman,  19  Oct..
lsji :  was  promoted  to  passed  midshipman,  10  Aug..
1847 ;  became  lieutenant,  15  Sept.,  1866;  lieutenant-
commander,  16  July,  1862;  commander.  30  July,
1866  ;  captain,  6  Jan.,  1874 ;  and  commodore,  7  May,
1883.  He  was  present  in  all  the  operations  on  the
gulf  coast  during  the  Mexican  war.  and  took  part
in  the  North  Pacific  and  Paraguay  expeditions.
In  1863  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  steam-
boat "Chenango,"  and  while  proceeding  down  New
York  harbor  lost  four  officers  and  thirty  men
through  the  explosion  of  a  boiler.  He  also  com-
manded the  iron-clad  "  Passaic,"  operating  against
Fort  Sumter  in  May,  1864,  the  iron-clad  "Mon-
tauk,"  in  the  attack  on  Battery  Pringle,  Stono
river,  S.  C,  in  July  of  the  same  year,  and  the
steamer  "  Sonoma,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  blockad-
ing squadron,  in  1864-'5.  He  was  also  present  at
the  engagement  with  Confederate  batteries  in  Ta-
goda  river,  S.  C,  in  February,  1865.  At  the  close
of  the  war  he  was  assigned  to  special  duty  at  the
navy  department  in  Washington,  where  he  remained
until  just  before  his  last  illness.

FILLMORE,  Millard,  thirteenth  president  of
the  United  States,  b.  in  the  township  of  Locke
(now  Summerhill),  Cavuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  Feb.,  1800;
d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  7* March,  1874.  The  name  of
Fillmore  is  of  English  origin,  and  at  different  pe-
riods has  been  variously  written.  Including  the
son  of  the  ex-president,  the  family  can  be  traced
through  six  generations,  and,  as  has  been  said  of
that  of  Washington,  its  history  gives  proof  "  of  the
lineal  and  enduring  worth  of  race."  The  first  of
the  family  to  appear  in  the  New  World  was  a  cer-
tain John  Fillmore,  who,  in  a  conveyance  of  two
acres  of  land  dated  24  Nov.,  1704,  is  described  as  a
"  mariner  of  Ipswich."  Mass.  His  eldest  son,  of
the  same  name,  born  two  years  before  the  pur-
chase of  the  real  estate  in  Beverly,  also  became
a  sea-faring  man,  and  while  on  a  voyage  in  the
sloop  "  Dolphin,"  of  Cape  Ann,  was  captured  with
all  on  board  by  the  pirate  Capt.  John  Phillips.
For  nearly  nine  months  Fillmore  and  his  three
companions  in  captivity  were  compelled  to  serve
on  the  pirate  ship  and  to  submit,  during  that
long  period,  to  many  hardships  and  much  cruel
treatment.  After  watching  and  waiting  for  an
opportunity  to  obtain  their  freedom,  their  hour  at
length  came.  While  Fillmore  sent  an  axe  crashing
through  the  skull  of  Burrall,  the  boatswain,  the
captain  and  other  officers  were  despatched  by  his
companions,  and  the  ship  was  won.  They  sailed
her  into  Boston  harbor,  and  the  same  court  which
condemned  the  brigands  of  the  sea  presented  John
Fillmore  with  the  captain's  silver-hUted  sword  and
other  articles,  which  are  preserved  to  this  day  l>y
his  descendants.  The  sword  was  inherited  by  his
son,  Nathaniel,  and  was  made  good  use  of  in  both
the  French  and  Revolutionary  wars.  Lieut.  Fill-
more's second  son,  who  also  bore  the  name  Na-
thaniel, and  who  was  the  father  of  the  president,
went  with  his  voung  wife.  Phelx>  Millard,  to  what
at  the  close  of  the  past  century  was  the  "  far  weeL"
where  he  and  a  younger  brother  built  a  loe  cabin
in  the  wilderness,  and  there  his  second  son,  Millard,
was  born.  Nathaniel  Fillmore  was  one  of  "God
Almighty's  gentlemen,"  whose  creed  was  contained
in  two  words,  "do  right,"  and  who  lived  to  see  his
son  elevated  to  a  position  than  which  there  is  none
loftier  on  earth.  Of  the  president's  mother,  who
died  in  1831,  little  is  known  beyond  the  fad  that
she  was  a  sensible  and,  in  her  later  years,  a  sickly


-x/j ftcf li<c/ril)


• N  A  C"


PILLMORE


KIIJ..MOKK


108


nan;  with  i  ntnny  ottom  that  enabled  kit  to

endure  uncomplainingly  the  many  )itir< l^liijvs  of  a

frontier  life,  MM  that her  olooiag  «lav-»  wen-  glad-

the  frequent  visit*  of  Inr  second  son.  wlm

then  in  public  life,  with  every  |>ros|»«><-t  of  a

successful  professional  and  political  career.

From  a  brief  manuscript  autobiography  pre-
pared by  "worthy  Mr.  Fillmore."  as  Washington
trying  described  Urn,  we  learn  that,  owing  to  a  de-
fective title,  hi-*  father  lost  bit  property  "ii  what
was  called  the  "  military  tract.'  ami  removed  l"
another  |wirt  of  the  same  county,  imw  known  as
Nile-,  when  be  t«H>k  a  per|»ctual  [case  of  |:t0  acres,
wholly  unimproved  ami  flflwwd  with  heavv  tim-
ber. It  was  here  that the  future president tir-t

knew  anything  of  1  i f «*. working  for  nine  monthe

<>n  the  farm,  ami  attending  such  [>ritmt ivt>  schools
as  then  existed  in  that  neighborhood  for  the  other
three  months  of  the  year,  M  hail  an  Opportunity

of  forgetting  during  the  suinmer  what  he  no*
quired  in  the  winter,  for  in  those  davs  then-  were
no  newsjwpers  and  magazines  to  lie  found  in
pioneer-'  ealiins,  and  his  father's  library  con-i-l-
ed  of  hut  two  books—the  Hihle  and  a  OOUSO"
tion  of  hymn-.  He  never  saw  a  copy  of  "Shake-
speare" or  "  Roliinsou  Crusoe,"  a  history  of  the
I  nited  States,  or  even  a  map  of  his  own  country,
till  he  was  nineteen  years  of  age!  Nathaniel  Fill-
more's misfortunes  in  losing  his  land  through  a
defective  title,  and  again  in  taking  another  trait
of  exceedingly  poor  soil,  gave  him  a  distaste  for
farming,  and  made  him  desirous  that  his  sons
should  follow  other  oooupationa,  As  his  means
did  not  justify  him  or  them  in  aspiring  to  any
profession,  he  wished  them  to  learn  trades,  and
accordingly  Millard,  then  a  sturdy  youth  of  four-
teen, was  apprenticed  for  a  few  months  on  trial  to
the  business  of  carding  wool  and  dressing  cloth.
During  his  apprenticeship  he  was,  as  the  youngest.
treated  with  great  injustice,  and  on  one  occasion
hi-  employer,  for  some  expression  of  righteous  re-
sentment, threatened  to  chastise  him,  when  the
young  woodsman,  burning  with  indignation,  raised
the  axe  with  which  he  was  at  work  and  told  him
the  attempt  would  cost  him  his  life.  Most  fortu-
nately for  lx>th.  the  attempt  was  not  made,  and  at
the  close  of  his  term  he  shouldered  his  knapsack.
containing  a  few  clothes  and  a  supply  of  bread  ami
dried  venison, and  set  out  on  foot  and  alone  for  his
fat  Inr's  hi  >use,  a  distance  of  something  more  than  a
hundred  miles  through  the  primeval  forests.  Mr.
Fillmore  in  hi-  autobiography  remark-:  "I  think
that  this  injustice — which  was  no  more  than  other
apprentice-  have  suffered  and  will  suffer — had  a
marked  effect  on  my  character.  It  made  me  feel
for  the  weak  and  unprotected,  and  to  hate  the  in-
solent tyrant  in  every  station  of  life."

In  lsir»  the  youth  again  began  the  business  of
carding  and  cloth-dres-ing,  which  was  carried  on
frmn  Jane  to  December  of  each  year.  The  tir-t
book  that  he  purchased  or  owned  vas  ■  -mall  Bng-
lish  dictionary,  which  be  diligently  studied  while
attending  the  carding  machine.  In  lsi<»  beoou-
laired  the  design  of  In-coming  a  lawyer.  Fillmore,
who  had  yet  two  year-  of  hi-  apprenticeship  to
1  with  ids  employer  to  relinquish  his
for  the  last  year's  services,  and  promisee]  to
pay  thirty  dollars  for  his  time.  Making  an  arrange-
ment with  B  retired  country  lawyer,  by  which  he
was  to  receive  his  Itoard  in  payment  for  hi-  a  n
in  tl nice,  he  began  the  study  of  the  law,  a  part

Of  the  time  teaching  school,  and  -o  struggling  on.

ming almost  Insurmountable  difficulties,  tiil

at  length,  in  the  spring  of  \*'2-l,  he  was,  at  the
intercession  of several leading  members  of the


Buffalo  l»ar,  whose  confidence  he  had  won,  admitt<-d
as  an  attorney  by  the  court  of  common  pleas  of
Brfo  • nty.  although he had not completed the

oottm  of  study  usually  required. The  writer  has

recently  seen  the  dilapidated  one  Story  buildir,

Buffalo  where  Mr.  Fillmore  dosed  lii-  career  as  a

-i  lnMil-ma-ter.  and  has  also  BmiVOrSSd  with  one  of
his  pupil-  of  sixty-five  years  ago.  The  wisdom  of
bis  youth  and  early  manhood  ga\e  presage  of  all
that  Wan  Witnessed  and  admired  in  the  matiirii
hi- character.  Nature  laid  mi  him.  in  the  kindly
phase  Of  Wordsworth,  "the  -trong  hand  of  her
purity,"  and  even  then  he  was  remarked  for  that
-weet  courtesy  of  manner  which  accompanied  him
through  life.  Millard  Fillmore  began  practi
Aumra,  where  his  father  then  resided,  and  fortu-
nately won  his  fir-t  case  and  a  fee  of  four  dol-
lars. In  1H'J7  he  was  admitted  as  an  attorney,  ami
two  years  later  as  counsellor  of  the  supreme  court
of  the  state.  In  !«{()  he  removed  to  Buffalo,  and
after  a  brief  period  formed  a  partnership  with
Nathan  K.  Hall,  to  which  Siloinon  (J.  Haven  was
soon  afterward  admitted.

I?y  hard  study  and  the  closest  application,  com-
bined with  honesty  and  fidelity,  Mr.  Fillmore
soon  became  a  sound  and  successful  lawyer,  at-
taining a  highly  honorable  position  in  the  pro-
fession. The  law-firm  of  Fillmore,  Hall  \  Ha-
ven, which  continued  till  1H47,  was  perhaps  the
most  prominent  in  western  New  Fork,  and  was
usually  engaged  in  every  important  suit  occurring
in  that  portion  of  the  state.  In  IK'M,  while  still  in
Washington.  Mr.  Fillmore  made  an  arrangement
with  Henry  E.  Davie-  to  renew,  on  retiring  from
the  presidency,  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
New  York  in  partnership  with  that  gentleman,
who,  after  occupying  a  judge's  seat  in  the  court  of
appeals,  returned  to  the  bar.  Family  afflictions,
however,  combined  with  other  causes,  induced  the
ex-president  to  abandon  his  purpose.  There  were
doubtless  at  that  time  men  of  more  genius  and
greater  eloquence  at  the  bar  of  the  great  city  :  but
we  can  not  doubt  that  Mr.  Fillmore's  solid  legal
learning,  and  the  weight  of  his  |>ersonal  character,
would  have  won  for  him  the  highest  professional
honors  in  the  new  field  of  action.

Mr.  Fillmore's  political  career  began  and  ended
with  the  birth  and  extinction  of  the  great  Whig
party.  In  1828  he  was  elected  by  Brie  county  to
the  state  legislature  of  New  York,  serving  for  three
terms,  and  retiring  with  a  reputation  for  ability,
integrity,  and  a  conscientious  performance  of  his
public  duties.  He  di.-t ingui-hed  himself  by  his
advocacy  of  the  act  to  abolish  imprisonment  for
debt,  which  WSJ  passed  in  1H:U.  The  bill  was
drafted  by  Fillmore,  excepting  the  portions  rela-
tive to  proceeding!  in  court-  of  record,  which  were
drawn  by  .John  (X  Spenser.  In  1888  he  was  elected
to  oomnfian.  and.  after  earring  for  one  term,  re-
tired till  ls:{(!.  when  he  was  re-elected,  and  again
returned  in  1888 and  1*40,  declining  a  renomina-
tion  in  lH4'i.  In  the  87th  congress  Mr.  Fillmore,
as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  ways  and  mean-
— U  committee  performing  at  that  period  not  only
the  duties  now  devolving  upon  it.  but  those  also
which  belong  to  the  committee  on  appropriations
— had  herculean  labors  to  perform.  Day  after  day,
for  weeks  ami  months.  Fillmore  had  to  encounter
many  of  the  ablest debaters  of  the BOUSe,  but  on

all  oooasione  be  proved  himself  equal  to  the  emer-
gency. It  should  not  Ik-  forgotten  that,  in  the
opinion  of  .John  (^iiincy  Adams,  there  were  more
men  of  talent  ami  a  larger  aggregate  of  ability  in
that  congress  than  he  had  ever  known.  Although
Mr.  Fillmore  did  not  claim  to  barf  discovered  any


454


FILLMORE


FILLMOBE


original  system  of  revenue,  still  the  tariff  of  1842
was  a  new  creation,  and  he  is  most  justly  entitled
to  the  distinction  of  being  its  author.  It  operated
successfully,  giving  immediate  life  to  our  languish-
ing industries  and  national  credit.  At  the  same
time  Mr.  Fillmore,  with  great  labor,  prepared  a
digest  of  the  laws  authorizing  all  appropriations
reported  by  him  to  the  house  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  ways  and  means,  so  that  on  the  in-
stant he  could  produce  the  legal  authority  for
every  expenditure  which  he  recommended.  Sensi-
ble that  this  was  a  great  safeguard  against  im-
proper expenditures,  he  procured  the  passage  of  a
resolution  requiring  the  departments,  when  they
submitted  estimates  of  expenses,  to  accompany
them  with  a  reference  to  the  laws  authorizing  them
in  each  and  every  instance.  This  has  ever  since
been  the  practice  of  the  government.

Mr.  Fillmore  retired  from  congress  in  1843,  and
was  a  candidate  for  the  office  of  vice-president,
supported  by  his  own  and  several  of  the  western
states,  in  the  Whig  convention  that  met  at  Bal-
timore in  May,  1844.  In  the  following  September
he  was  nominated  by  acclamation  for  governor,
but  was  defeated  by  Silas  Wright,  his  illustrious
contemporary,  Henry  Clay,  being  vanquished  at
the  same  time  in  the  presidential  contest  by  James
K.  Polk.  In  1847  Fillmore  was  elected  comptroller
of  the  state  of  New  York,  an  office  which  then  in-
cluded many  duties  now  distributed  among  other
departments.  In  his  report  of  1  Jan.,  1849,  ne  sug-
gested that  a  national  bank,  with  the  stocks  of  the
United  States  as  the  sole  basis  upon  which  to  issue
its  currency,  might  be  established  and  carried  on,
so  as  to  prove  a  great  convenience  to  the  govern-
ment, with  perfect  safety  to  the  people.  This  idea
involves  the  essential  principle  of  our  present  sys-
tem of  national  banks.

In  June,  1848,  Millard  Fillmore  was  nominated
by  the  Whig  national  convention  for  vice-presi-
dent, with  Gen.  Taylor,  who  had  recently  won  mili-
tarv  renown  in  Mexico,  as  president,  and  was  in  the
following  November  elected,  making,  with  the  late
occupant  of  the  office,  seven  vice-presidents  of  the
United  States  from  New  York,  a  greater  number
than  has  been  yet  furnished  by  any  other  state.  In
February,  1849,  Fillmore  resigned  the  comptroller-
ship,  and  on  5  March  he  was  inaugurated  as  vice-
president.  In  1826  Calhoun,  of  South  Carolina,
then  vice-president,  established  the  rule  that  that
officer  haa  no  authority  to  call  senators  to  order.
Daring  the  heated  controversies  in  the  sessions  of
1849-'50,  occasioned  by  the  application  of  Califor-
nia for  admission  into  the  Union,  the  vexed  ques-
tion of  slavery  in  the  new  territories,  and  that  of
the  rendition  of  fugitive  slaves,  in  which  the  most
acrimonious  language  was  used,  Mr.  Fillmore,  in  a
forcible  speech  to  the  senate,  announced  his  deter-
mination to  maintain  order,  and  that,  should  oc-
casion require,  he  should  resume  the  usage  of  his
predecessors  upon  that  point.  This  announcement
met  with  the  unanimous  approval  of  the  senate,
which  directed  the  vice-president's  remarks  to  be
entered  in  full  on  its  journal.  He  presided  during
the  exciting  controversy  on  Clav's  "  omnibus  bill  '
with  his  usual  impartiality,  and  so  perfectly  even
did  he  hold  the  scales  that  no  one  knew  which
policy  he  approved  excepting  the  president,  to
whom  he  privately  stated  that,  should  he  be  re-

Siuired  to  deposit  a  casting  vote,  it  would  be  in
avor  of  Henry  Clay's  bill.  More  than  seven
months  of  the  session  had  been  exhausted  in  angry
controversy,  when,  on  9  July,  1850,  the  country  was
startled  by  the  news  of  President  Taylor's  death.
He  passed  away  in  the  second  year  of  his  presi-


dency, suddenly  and  ni<»-t  unexpectedly,  of  a  vio-
lent fever,  wliicli  was  brought  on  by  long  exporam
to  the  excessive  heat  of  a  fourth  of  July  sun,  while
he  was  attending  the  public  ceremonies  of  the  day.
It  was  a  critical  moment  in  the  history  of  our
country  when  Millard  Fillmore  was  on  Wednesday.
10  July,  1850,  made  president  of  the  United  States.
With  great  propriety  he  reduced  the  ceremony  of
his  inauguration  to  an  official  act  to  be  marked  by
solemnity  without  joy ;  and  so  with  an  absence  of
the  usual  heralding  of  trumpet  and  shawm,  he  was
unostentatiously  sworn  into  his  great  office  in  the
hall  of  representatives,  in  the  presence  of  both
houses.  The  chief  justice  of  the  circuit  court  of
the  District  of  Columbia — the  venerable  William
Cranch,  appointed  fifty  years  before  by  President
John  Adams — administered  the  oath,  which  being
done,  the  new  president  bowed  and  retired,  and  the
ceremony  was  at  an  end.  Mr.  Fillmore  was  then
in  the  prime  of  life,  possessing  that  which  to  the
heathen  philosopher  seemed  the  greatest  of  all
blessings — a  sound  mind  in  a  sound  body.  The
accompanying  vignette  portrait  was  taken  at  this
time,  while  the  large  steel  engraving  is  from  a  pic-
ture made  some  twenty  years  later.  Of  Fillmore's
keen  appreciation  of  the  responsibility  devolving  on
him  we  have  the  evidence  of  letters  written  at  that
time,  in  which  he
says  he  should  des-

Eair  but  for  his
umble  reliance  on
God  to  help  him  in
the  honest,  fear-
less, and  faithful
discharge  of  his
great  duties.  Presi-
dent Taylor's  cabi-
net immediately  re-
signed, and  a  new
and  exceedingly
able  one  was  select-
ed by  Mr.  Fill-
more, with  Daniel
Webster  as  secre-
tary of  state ;
Thomas  Corwin,
secretary  of  the  treasury ;  William  A.  Graham,  sec-
retary of  the  navy ;  Charles  M.  Conrad,  secretary  of
war ;  Alexander  II.  H.  Stuart,  secretary  of  the  in-
terior ;  John  J.  Crittenden,  attorney-general ;  and
Nathan  K.  Hall,  postmaster-general.  Of  these.  M  i .
Webster  died,  and  Messrs.  Graham  and  Hall  retired
in  1852,  and  were  respectively  replaced  by  Edward
Everett,  John  P.  Kennedy,  and  Samuel  D.  Hub-
bard. Stuart,  of  Virginia,  is  now  the  sole  sur-
vivor of  the  illustrious  men  who  aided  Mr.  Fill-
more in  guiding  the  ship  of  state  during  the  most
appalling  political  tempest,  save  one,  which  ever
visited  this  fair  land.  It  is  not  the  writer's  wi>h
to  reawaken  party  feelings  or  party  prejudice  or
to  recall  those  great  questions  of  pith  and  mo-
ment which  so  seriously  disturbed  congress  and
the  country  in  the  first  days  of  Fillmore  s  admin-
istration, but  vet,  even  in  so  cursory  a  glance  as
we  are  now  taking  of  his  career,  some  comment
would  seem  to  be  called  for  in  respect  to  those  pub-
lic acts  connected  with  slavery  which  appear  to
have  most  unreasonably  and  unjustly  lost  him  the
support  of  a  large  proportion  of  his  party  in  the
northern  states.  Whatever  the  wisdom  of  Mr.
Fillmore's  course  may  have  been,  it  is  impossible  to
doubt  his  patriotism  or  his  honest  belief  that  he
was  acting  in  accordance  with  his  oath  to  obey  the
constitution  of  his  country.  The  president's
dream  was  peace — to  preserve  without  hatred  and


^^tC^C^Oj  JE&iwJ


PILLMORE


FILL.MoKi:


45B


without  war  tranquillity  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  <*f  our  broad  land,  and  if  in  indulging
this  delusive  dream  hi  amd,  it  vas  surely  mi  error
ttiat  leaned  t<>  virtue's  >ni.-.  Than  ii  i  legend
••that  be  eerves  his  party  i«<-t  whoservnshisoovn-
try  [*•>[."  In  Mr.  Hllmore's  action  it  is  confident-
ly believed  that  he  though!  not  <>(  party  or  of  jmt-
sonal  interests,  i>ut  only  of  his  hoondeodat|  to  his

BOantry  ami  her  saored  <  •institution.

One  of  tin-  president's  curliest  official  acts  was  to
•end  a  military  force  to  N  to  protect  that

torj  from  invasion  by  Texas  on  account  of  its
dJaputed  boundary.  Then  followed  the|>ussage  by
a  large  majority  of  tin-  oelebrated  oompromiai
meaaures,  inclmiing  the  fmjitiTn  slem  law.  The
president  referred  to  the  attorney-general  thequcs-
t ion  of  it-  i '•■nstitutioiiality,  ami  that  officer  in  a
written  opinion  decided  that  it  was  constitutional.
Fillmore  and  the  strong  cabinet  that  behadoaUad
around  him  concurred  unanimously  in  this  opinion,
and  the  act  was  signed,  together  with  theothereoaa*
promise  measures.  The  fugitive-slave  law  wa
oeedingly  obnoxious  to  a  large  portion  of  the  Whig
party  of  the  north,  as  well  as  to  the  anti-slavery
men,  and  its  execution  was  resisted.  Slaves  iii
several  instances  were  rescued  from  the  custody  of
the  United  States  marshals,  and  a  few  citizens  of
Christiana,  in  Pennsylvania,  were  killed.  Although
it  was  admitted  that  Fillmore's  administration  as
a  whole  was  able,  useful,  and  patriotic,  although
his  purity  as  a  public  man  was  above  suspicion,  and
no  other  act  of  his  administration  coulu  be  called
unpopular,  still,  by  the  signing  and  attempted  en-
forcement of  the  fugitive-slave  law  and  some  of  its
unfortunate  provisions, of  which  even  Mr.  WVbster
did  not  approve,  the  president,  as  has  been  already
stated,  lost  the  friendship  Hnd  support  of  a  large
portion  of  his  party  in  the  north.

Mr.  Fillmore  s administration  l>cingina  political
minority  in  both  houses  of  congress,  many  wise
and  admirable  measures  recommended  by  him  failed
of  adoption:  nevertheless  we  are  indebted  to  him
for  cheap  postage ;  for  the  extension  of  the  national
capitol.  the  corner-stone  of  which  he  laid  4  July,
Iflfl]  :  for  the  Perry  treaty,  opening  the  ports  of
Japan,  and  for  various  valuable  exploring  expedi-
tions. When  South  Carolina  in  one  of  her  indig-
nant utterances  took  Mr.  Fillmore  to  task  for  send-
ing a  fleet  to  Charleston  harbor,  and  he  was  offi-
cially ipiestioned  as  to  his  object  and  authority,  the
answer  came  promptly  and  to  the  purpose,  "  My  au-
thority of  the  constitution  of  the  I  nited  States,
which  has  made  the  president  commander-in-chief
of  the  army  and  navy,  and  who  recogtuzes  no  re-
sponsibility for  his  official  action  to  the  governor
of  South  Carolina."  With  stern  measures  he  re-
pressed filibustering,  and  with  equal  firmness  ex-
acted from  other  countries  respect  for  our  flag.
Mr.  Fillmore  carried  out  strictly  the  doctrine  of
non-intervention  in  the  affairs  of  foreign  nations.
and  frankly  stated  his  policy  to  the  highly-gifted
Kossuth,  who  won  all  hearts  by  his  surpassing
eloquence.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  was
clearly  shown  how  little  the  administration  sym-
Ithized  with  Austria  by  the  celebrated  letter  ad-
to  her  ambassador.  Hulseniann.  by  Panic!
W  •  Iwter,  who  died  soon  after.  His  successor  as
secretary  of  state  was  Kdward  Everett,  whose  brief
term  of  office  was  distinguished  by  his  letter
declining  the  proposition  for  a  treaty  by  which
Knglaud.  France,  and  the United Stal

in  then  and  for  the  future  all  intention  to  ob-
tain  possession  of  Culw.  In  his  last  meeaage, haw-
ever,  the  p:  sprcssed  an  opinion  against
the  incorjK)rat ion  <>f  the  island  with  this  I'nioii.


Nothing  in Mr. Fillmore's presidential career
was,  during  the  closing  years  of  his  Ufa,  regarded

by  himself  with  greater  satisfaction  than the  BM>

firessed  portion  of  his  hut  message  of  6  Dec.,  1888.
t  was  suppressed  by  the  advice  of  the  cabinet,
all  of  whom  concurred  in  the  belief  that,  if
in,  it  would  pn-cipitatc  an  armed  collision,  ami  he
readily  aoowaioea  in  their  rieWBi  it  related  to  tin-
great  |x>litical  problem  of  the  period  — the  balance
of  power  between  the  fire  and  tin-  -lave  states.
He  fully  and  clearly  appreciated  the  magnitude
of  the  then  approaching  crisis  and  in  the  docu-
ment now  under  consideration  proposed  a  judi-
cious scheme  of  rescuing  the  country  from  tin-
horrors  of  a  civil  war,  which  soon  after  desolated
so  large  a  portion  of  the  land.  J  lis  perfectly  prac-
ticable plan  was  one  of  African  colonization,  some-
what similar  to  one  seriously  entertained  by  his
successor,  Mr.  Lincoln.  Had  President  Fillmore's
scheme  lieen  adopted,  it  is  quite  possible  that  it
would  have  Uen  successful,  and  that  our  coun-
try might  have  been  blessed  with  |>eace  and  pros-
perity, in  lieu  of  the  late  war  with  its  loss  of  half  a
million  of  precious  lives  and  a  debt  of  more  than
double  the  amount  of  the  estimated  cost  of  his
plan  of  colonization.  Mr.  Fillmore  retired  from
the  presidency,  4  March,  1888,  leaving  the  country
at  peace  with  other  lands  and  w  ithin  her  own  bor-
ders, and  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  high  decree  of
prosj)ority  in  all  the  various  departments  of  indus-
try. In  his  cabinet  there  had  never  been  a  dissent-
ing voice  in  regard  to  any  important  measure  of
his  administration,  and,  upon  his  retiring  from  of-
fice, a  letter  was  addressed  to  him  by  all  its  mem-
bers, expressing  their  united  appreciation  of  his
ability,  nis  integrity,  and  his  single-hearted  and
sincere  devotion  to  the  public  service.

The  surviving  member  of  Fillmore's  cabinet,
who  also  sat  in  the  27th  congress  with  him.  in  a
communication,  with  which  he  has  favored  the
writer,  says :  *  Mr.  Fillmore  was  a  man  of  decided
opinions,  but  he  was  always  open  to  conviction.
nil  aim  was  truth,  and  whenever  he  was  convinced
by  reasoning  that  his  first  impressions  were  wrong,
he  had  the  moral  courage  to  surrender  them.  But,
when  he  had  carefully  examined  a  question  and
had  satisfied  himself  that  he  was  right,  no  power
on  earth  could  induce  him  to  swerve  from  what  he
believed  to  be  the  line  of  duty.  .  .  .  There  were
many  things  about  Mr.  Fillmore,  aside  from  his
public  character,  which  often  filled  me  with  sur-
prise. While  he  enjoyed  none  of  the  advantages
of  early  association  with  cultivated  society,  he  pos-
sessed a  grace  and  polish  of  manner  which  fitted
him  for  the  most  refined  circles  of  the  nietro|>olis.
Ton  saw,  too,  at  a  glance,  that  then'  was  nothing
in  it  which  was  assumed,  but  that  it  was  the  natu-
ral outward  expression  of  inward  refinement  and
dignity  of  character.  1  have  witnessed,  on  several
occasions,  the  display  by  him  of  attributes  appar-
ently of  the  most  opposite  character.  When  as-
sailed in  congress  he  exhibited  a  manly  self-reli-
ance and  a  lofty  courage  which  commanded  the
admiration  of  every  s|>cctator,  and  yet  m>  one  ever
manifested  deeper  sensibility,  or  more  tender  sym-
pathy, with  a  friend  in  affliction.  .  .  .  He  seemed
to  have  the  peculiar  faculty  of  adapting  himself  to
every  position  in  which  he  was  called  to  serve  his
country.  When  he  was  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee of  ways  and  means.  ineinl>ers  of  congress  .  \-
Ereeaed  their  sense  of  his  fitness  by  d.vlaring  that
e  was  born  to  fill  it.  When  he  «ej  elected  vice-
firesident.  it  WBS  predicted  that  ht  would  fail  as
he  presiding  officer  of  the  senate,  yet  he  acquitted
himself  in  this  new  and  untried  jtosition  in  such  a


456


FILLMORE


FILLMoliF.


manner  as  to  command  the  applause  of  senators.
And  when  advanced  to  the  tttghafl  office  of  our
country,  he  so  fulfilled  Ins  duties  as  to  draw  forth
the  commendation  of  the  ablest  men  of  the  oppo-
site party.  .  .  .  For  the  last  two  years  of  my  offi-
cial  association  with  Mr.  Fillmore,"  adds  Mr.  Stu-
art, "our  relations,  both  personal  and  political,
were  of  an  intimate  and  confidential  character.
He  knew  that  I  was  his  steadfast  friend,  and  he
reciprocated  the  feeling.  He  talked  with  me  freely
and  without  reserve  about  men  and  measures,  and
I  take  pleasure  in  saying  that  in  all  my  intercourse
with  him  I  never  knew  him  to  utter  a  sentiment
or  do  an  act  which,  in  my  judgment,  would  have
been  unworthy  of  Washington.

His  gifted  contemporary,  Henry  Clay,  thought
highly  of  Fillmore's  moderation  and  wisdom,  said
his  administration  was  an  able  and  honorable  one.
and  on  his  death-bed  recommended  his  nomination
for  the  presidency  (by  the  Baltimore  convention  of
1852),  as  being  a  statesman  of  large  civil  experi-
ence, and  one  in  whose  career  there  was  nothing
inconsistent  with  the  highest  purity  and  patriot-
ism. After  leaving  Washington  for  the  last  time,
Webster  said  to  a  Friend  that  Fillmore's  adminis-
tration— leaving  out  of  the  question  his  share  of  its
work — was  the  ablest  the  country  had  possessed
for  many  years.  The  same  great  statesman,  in  his
speech  at"  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  the
capitol  extension,  said  :  "  President  Fillmore,  it  is
your  singularly  good  fortune  to  perform  an  act
such  as  that  which  the  earliest  of  your  predeces-
sors performed  fifty-eight  years  ago.  You  stand
where  he  stood ;  you  lay  your  hand  on  the  corner-
stone he  laid.  Changed,  changed  is  everything
around.  The  same  sun,  indeed,  shone  upon  his
head  which  shines  upon  yours.  The  same  broad
river  rolled  at  his  feet,  and  now  bathes  his  last
resting-place,  which  now  rolls  at  yours.  But  the
site  of  this  city  was  then  mainly  an  open  field.
Streets  and  avenues  have  since  been  laid  out  and
completed,  squares  and  public  grounds  inclosed
and  ornamented,  until  the  city,  which  bears  his
name,  although  comparatively  inconsiderable  in
numbers  and  wealth,  has  become  quite  fit  to  be
the  seat  of  government  of  a  great  and  united
people.  Sir,  may  the  consequences  of  the  duty
which  you  perform  so  auspiciously  to-day  equal
those  which  flowed  from  his  act.  Nor  this  only :
may  the  principles  of  your  administration  and
the  wisdom  of  your  political  conduct  be  such  that
the  world  of  the  present  day  and  all  history  here-
after may  be  at  no  loss  to  perceive  what  example
you  made  your  study."

It  should  be  stated  as  a  part  of  Mr.  Fillmore's
public  record  that  he  was  a  candidate  for  nomina-
tion as  president  at  the  Whig  convention  of  1852 ;
but  although  his  policy,  the  fugitive-slave  law  in-
cluded, was  approved  by  a  vote  of  227  against  60,
he  could  not  command  20  votes  from  the  free
states.  Four  years  later,  while  at  Rome,  he  re-
ceived the  news  of  his  nomination  for  the  presi-
dency by  the  American  party.  He  accepted  the
nomination,  but  before  the  close  of  the  campaign
it  became  evident  that  the  real  struggle  was  be-
tween the  Republicans  and  Democrats.  Many,
with  whom  Fillmore  was  the  first  choice  for  presi-
dent, cast  their  votes  for  Gen.  Fremont  or  James
Buchanan,  believing  that  there  was  no  hope  of  his
election,  and,  although  he  received  the  support  of
large  numbers  in  all  the  states,  .Maryland  alone
gave  him  her  electoral  vote.  In  the  summer  of
1864  Col.  Ogle  Tayloe,  of  Washington,  wrote  to
Mr.  Fillmore  on  the  subject  of  the  presidential
nomination,  and  his  response  was :"  I  can  assure


you  in  all  sincerity  that  I  have  no  dmkn  ever  to
occupy  that  exalted  station  igain,  and  mon
cially  at  a  time  like  this.'1  Apropos  erf  letters,  the
writer  has  had  the  privilege  of  perusing  a  collec-
tion of  confidential  correspondence  written  by
President  Fillmore  during  a  score  of  years  whilb
in  public  life;  and,  after  a  most  careful  examina-
tion, has  failed  to  find  a  single  passage  that  would
not  stand  the  light  of  day,  not  a  word  of  ignoble
office-seeking,  no  paltry  tricks  to  gain  notoriety,
no  base  designs  of  fattening  upon  public  plunder.
Having  thus  glanced  at  the  professional  and
political  career  of  Mr.  Fillmore,  it  now  only  re-
mains to  allude  very  briefly  to  his  private  life  from
1853  onward.  "  The  circles  of  our  felicities  make
short  arches."  Win.  shall  question  the  wise  axiom
of  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  the  brave  old  knight  ol
Norwich,  a  favorite  author  with  the  president  1
Three  weeks  after  the  close  of  his  administration
be  sustained  a  severe  affliction  in  the  loss  of  his
wife.  Abigail  Powers,  the  daughter  of  a  clergyman,
whom  he  married  5  Feb.,  1826,  and  who  was  em-

[•hat ieal  1  y  her  husband's  " right-hand."  She  had
ong  been  a  sufferer  from  ill  health  and  was  look-
ing forward  most  eagerly  to  a  return  to  her  old
home,  when  she  was  taken  away  to  those  temples
not  made  with  hands.  Irving  says  that  she  received
her  death-warrant  while  standing  by  his  side  on
the  cold  marble  terrace  of  the  capitol,  listening  to
the  inaugural  address  of  Mr.  Fillmore's  successor.
To  this  Christian  lady  the  White  House  is  in-
debted for  the  books  which  to-day  make  the  library
one  of  the  most  attractive  rooms  in  the  presiden-
tial mansion.  In  the  following  year  their  only
daughter,  who  had
grown  to  woman-
hood, also  passed
away,  leaving  a
memory  precious  to
all  who  had  the
privilege  of  her  ac-
quaintance. His
home  now  lonely
from  the  loss  of  those
who  spread  around
it  sunshine  and  hap-
piness, induced  Mr.
Fillmore  to  carry
out  a  long-cherished
project  of  visiting
the  Old  World,  and
in  May.  1855,  he
sailed  in  the  steamer
"Atlantic."  During  his  visit  to  England  he  re-
ceived numerous  and  gratifying  attentions  from
the  queen  and  her  cabinet  ministers,  and  was  prof-
fered the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  by  the  University  of
Oxford,  through  its  chancellor,  the  late  Earl  of
Derbv.  This  honor  he  however  declined,  as  did
Charles  Francis  Adams  a  few  years  later.

We  can  not  dwell  as  we  could  wish  on  Mr.  Fill-
more's patriotic  attitude  during  the  early  years  of
the  late  war;  of  his  warm  interest  in  all  the  chari-
table Christian  work  of  the  city  in  which  he  passed
nearly  half  a  century  ;  of  his  establishing  the  Buf-
falo historical  society :  how,  as  the  first  citizen  of
Buffalo,  he  was  called  upon  to  welcome  distin-
guished visitors,  including  Mr.  Lincoln,  when  on
his  way  to  Washington  in  1861,  and  frequent  lv  to
preside  over  conventions  and  other  public  gather-
ings, for  the  control  of  which  he  was  so  admirably
qualified  l>y  his  thorough  parliamentary  abilities,
his  widely  extended  knowledge,  his  broad  views,
and  a  personal  urbanity  which  nothing  could  dis-
turb ;  of  the  method  and  exactness,  the  pr<


I'd*


isS^*<-<**^S ai/x-^£&-**^^


FILLMORE


FIMES VILLALPANDO


an


and  punctuality,  with  which  he  conducted  hi-  pri-
vate affair-,  a-  111  earlier  yean  Ik-  had  performed
feasional  and  pubUe  duties ;  of  mmt h«-r  \  i-ii
bo  Europe  in is,'>«>.  «■•<• ponied  bj  hi*  aeoond

wife, la!" 'line ('.

Mcintosh, who

survived him  fur

seven yen  i

his  riianijiT  of  Ufa

[n  dignified  retire
in. hi.  snrrooajded

by  all  tli.
fort  im<l  luxuries
of  a  Im-jiui  if ul
ami  WOU  appoint »
'il  mansion,  in-
eluding  a  loin
library,  and  with
an attached wife

to  share  fail  happy

home  (flat  liccoin-
| •:•  living  illustra-
tion). Jn  a  letter
written  to  his
friend  Mr.  Corco-
ran, of  Washing-
ton.  but  a  few
wr.ks  before  the
inevitable  hour  came,  he  remarks:  "I  am  happy
to  say  that  my  health  b  perfect  I  eat.  drink,  and
sleep  as  well  to  ever,  and  take  a  deep  but  silent  in-
ri  in  public  atTairs,  and  if  Mrs.  Fillmore's  health
can  l>e  restored.  I  should  feel  that  I  was  in  the  en-
joyment of  an  earthly  paradise."  The  ex-president
accepted  an  invitation  to  meet  the  surviving  iiiein-
ben  of  his  cabinet  and  a  few  other  valued  friends
at  the  residence  of  M r.  ( 'orcoran.  The  month  of
January,  1874,  was  designated  as  the  date  of  the
meeting,  but  WOJ  afterward  changed  to  April,  by
Mr.  Fillmore's  request.  Before  that  time  he  was
no  longer  among  the  living.  After  a  short  illness,
at  ten  minutes  past  eleven  o'clock,  on  Sunday  even-
ing. H  March,  Millard  Fillmore
••  (rave  his  honors  to  the  world  again.

His  Messed  part  to  heaven,  and  slept  in  peace."
lb-  was  gathered  to  his  fathers  at  the  ri|>e  age  of
aeventy-four  years,  and  passed  away  without  the
knowledge  that  his  former  partner,  Judge  Hall,
with  whom  he  had  been  so  long  and  so  closely
united  in  the  bonds  of  friendship,  as  well  as  in
professional  and  political  life,  had  also,  a  few  days
previous,  rested  from  his  labors,  and  was  then  ly-
ing in  the  Forest  Lawn  cemetery,  where  the  ex-
president  now  sleeps  by  his  Bide.

Among  the  chief  magistrates  of  our  country
there  appear  more  brilliant  names  than  Fillmore's,
yet  none  who  more  wisely  led  on  the  nation  to
progress  and  prosperity,  making  her  name  great
and  preserving  |>eace  in  most  perilottl  times,  with-
out invoking  the  power  of  the  sword,  or  one  who
could  more  truthfully  say.  "These  hands  are  clean."
Without  being  a  genius  "like  Webster  or  Hamilton,
he  was  a  safe  and  sagacious  statesman.  He  pos-
•eased  a  mind  so  nicely  adjusted  and  well  balanced
that  he  was  fitted  for  the  fulfilment  of  any  duty
which  he  was  called  to  perform.  He  was  always
ready  to  rive  up  everything  but  conviction  when
convinced.  A  single  public  ad  honestly  and
imflinchinglj  performed  ooel  bin  his  popeuarity.
Posterity,  looking  from  a  distance,  will  perhaps  l>e
more  just.  All  his  acts,  whether  daily  and  I
mon  or  deliberate  and  wdl-oonsidered,  were  marked
with  modesty,  justice,  and  sincerity.  What  Speak-
.  of  Sir  Robert  Weipots  was  equally
true  of  President  Fillmore.  •■  lie  vas  the  beet  man


from  the  goodness  of  his  heart,  to  live  with  and
under,  of  any  great  man  1  ever  knew."  His  was
an  eminently  kindly  nature,  and  the  last  time  the
writer  s«w  him.  in  1H7.J.  he  was  relieving,  with  a
liln-nil  hand,  the  necessities  of  an  old  and  unfor-
tunate friend.  He  was  a  sound,  practical  Chris-
tian "without  knowing  it,"  as  I'ojm-  remarked  of
a  contemporary.  His  ieatpOT  was  perfect,  and  it
ie doubtful  if  he  lelt  an  enemy  on  earth.  Fred-
erick the  Great  announced  with  energy  that  "  Peter
the  First  of  Russia,  to  govern  his  nation,  worked
ii|m»ii  it  like  aquafortis  opon  iron."  Fillmore,  to
win  his  way,  like  Lincoln  andOarfield,  from  almo-t
hojH'less  poverty  to  one  of  the  most  eminent  posi-
tions of  the  World,  shewed  equal  determination,
oftentimes  working  for  weeks  and  months  together,
till  long  past  midnight,  which  happily  his  iKiwers
of  physical  endurance  permitted  BUB  to  do  with
iinpunit  v.  and  affording  a  fine  illustration  of  the
proud  boast  of  our  country,  that  its  loftiest  honors
are  the  legitimate  objects  of  ambition  to  the  hum-
blest in  the  land,  as  well  as  to  those  favored  bv  the
gifts  of  fortune  and  high  birth.  SceChamlierlain's
••  Biography  of  Millard  Fillmore"  (Buffalo.  U
Benton's  "Abridgment  of  the  Debates  of  Con-
gress from  1780  to  1850,"  vol.  xvi.  (New  York,
l881);  Thompson's  "The  Presidents  and  their
Administrations  "(Indiaua]M>lis.  1S7;{);  V..n  Hoist's
"Constitutional  and  Political  Historv  of  the  Tint-
ed States,"  vol.  iv.  (Chicago,  l*s

FILSON,  John,  explorer,  b.  in  Cheater  county.
Pa.,  in  1747:  d.  in  Ohio,  in  October,  17HH.  He  was
an  early  explorer  of  the  western  country,  and  lie-
fore  he  was  thirty-seven  had  traversed  the  territory
now  occupied  by  the  states  of  West  Virginia.  Ken-
tucky, Ohio.  Illinois.  Indiana,  Tennessee,  Missis-
sippi, and  Louisiana.  After  spending  several  years
in  Kentucky  collecting  information  for  a  history
of  the  country,  he  purchased  from  Mathias  Den-
man  a  one-third  interest  in  the  site  of  Cincinnati,
which  he  called  Losantivillc,  a  name  formed  bv
Filson  from  the  Latin  "os,"  mouth,  the  Greek
"anti."  opposite,  and  the  French  "ville,"  city.
from  its  ponitJon  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Licking
river.  While  exploring  the  country  between  this
place  and  the  (ireat  Miami,  he  disappeared,  1  Oct,
17KM,  having  been  killed,  it  is  snpposed,  by  hostile
Indians.  After  his  disappearance  his  interest  in  the
site  of  Cincinnati  was  transferred  by  his  partners,
Deninan  and  Patterson,  to  bras]  Ludlow,  and  his
heirs  never  reaped  any  lienefit  from  the  subsequent
increase  in  the  value  of  the  land.  Mr.  Filson  was
the  author  of  "The  Discovery,  Settlement,  and
Present  State  of  Kentuckc"  (Wilmington.  Del..
1784;  London.  1788;  Paris,  1783);  "A  Map  of
Kentucky''  (Philadelphia.  17S4);  and  "A  Topo-
graphical Description  of  the  Western  Territory  of
North  America,'  in  association  with  George  Im-
lay  (17!>:5).  He  also  left  in  manuscript  "  A  Diary  of
a  Journey  from  Philadelphia  to  Vincennes,  Iud..  in
17S.V;  "An  Account  of  a  Trip  by  Land  from
Vincennes,  Ind.,  to  Louisville.  Ky..  in  1788  "i  "A
Journal  of  Two  Voyages  by  Water  from  Vincennes
to  Louisville,"  and  an  account  of  an  attempted
voyage  in  17W.  See  "Life  and  Writings  of  John
Filson,"  by  \i.  T.  Durrett  (Louisville,  11

Fl.MF.s  TILLALPANDO,  AmJbraaie  de(fee-

nieM.  count  of  |{icla.  captain-general  of  Cuba.  b.  in
Zaragoza.  Spain,  in  1780J  <i.  in  Madrid  in  17*0.  He
entered  the  army,  and  in  17<»(»  represented  Spain
at the  court of Itussia. In  July.  17M.  after  the

Iieace  between  Kngland  and  Spain  was  signed  at
'aris,  the  count  of  Hiela  took  noawawiOB  of  the
island  of  Culm,  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  Spain,
as  governor  and captain-general. He filled this


468


FINCH


KINDLE  Y


high  office  until  September,  1766,  and  during  his
■hod  administration  repaired  the  fortiflcationa of
the  city  <>f  Havana,  laid  the  foundations  of  the
great  fortress  known  as  "  La  Cabafla,"  organized
the  department  of  finances,  the  police,  the  militia,
the  hospitals,  and  in  1764  founded  "  La  Gaceta  de
l.i  Havana."  One  of  the  most  important  streets  in
Havana  is  called  for  him  "  Calle  ue  Ricla."

FINCH,  Francis  Miles,  poet,  b.  in  Ithaca,
N.  Y..  !>  June,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1849.  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Ithaca.  In  1881  he  was  elected  an  associate  judge
of  the  court  of  appeals  of  the  state  of  New  York.
On  the  establishment  of  Cornell  university,  he  was
chosen  secretary  of  its  board  of  trustees.  In  July,
1N5:{,  lie  read  a  poem  at  the  centennial  celebration
of  the  Linonian  society  of  Yale,  in  which  several
lyrics  were  introduced,  including  one  on  Nathan
Hale,  the  patriot  spy  of  the  Revolution.  This  at
once  achieved  wide  popularity.  He  has  also  writ-
ten other  well-known  lyrics,  including  "  The  Blue
ami  the  Gray,"  and  a  college  smoking-song,  begin-
ning "  Floating  awav  like  the  fountain's  spray. '

FINCK,  Henry  Theophilus,  journalist,  b.  in
Bethel.  Shelby  00.,  Mo.,  22  Sept.,  1854.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1876,  and  in  1877-8  was
a  resident  graduate  at  Cambridge,  as  student  of
sociology.  The  Harris  fellowship  having  been
awarded  to  him,  he  studied  physiological  psycholo-
gy at  Berlin,  Heidelberg,  and  Vienna  from  1878  till
1881.  He  is  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  York
*'  Evening  Post "  and  "  Nation,"  his  chief  writings
being  musical  criticisms,  which  are  characterized
bv  a  strong  leaning  toward  the  Wagnerian  school.
lie  has  published  a  philosophical  work  entitled
"  Romantic  Love  ana  Personal  Beauty "  (New
York  and  London,  1887),  and  a  collection  of  mu-
sical essays  entitled  "  Wagner  and  other  Musi-
cians" (1887).  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals
papers  on  the  "  Development  of  the  Color  Sense  "
and  the  "  Gastronomic  Value  of  Odors."

FINDLAY,  William,  governor  of  Pennsylva-
nia, b.  in  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  20  June,  1768 ;  d.  in
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  12  Nov.,  1846.  After  receiving  a
common-school  education,  he  became  a  farmer,  and
early  took  part  in  politics  as  a  Democrat.  His  first
office  was  that  of  brigade-inspector  of  militia. He

was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1797
and  1803,  and  in
1807-17  was  state
treasurer.  He  was
governor  from  1817
till  1820,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  an
unsuccessful  candi-
date for  re-election.
Party  spirit  ran  high
during  his  adminis-
tration, and  in  1817
his  opponents  se-
cured the  appoint-
ment of  a  committee
to  investigate  the
late  treasurer's  con-
duct of  his  office.
This  investigation,
though  Gov.  Find-
lay  offered  no  witness  in  his  behalf,  resulted  in  a
report  that  his  conduct  had  been  "not  only  faith-
ful, but  meritorious  and  beneficial  to  the  state."
The  building  of  the  state  capitol  was  begun  during
Gov.  Findlay's  administration,  and  its  corner-.-tonc
was  laid  by  him.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate in  182i,  and  served  one  term,  and  in  1N27-40


was  treasurer  <>f  the  V.  S.  mint  at  Philadelphia. —
His  brother  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Mercersburg,
Pa.,  about  177.~> :  <1.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28  Dec.,
1888,  removed  to  Cincinnati  in  1793,  was  a  mem*
ber  of  the  territorial  legislative  council  in  1798,
and  after  the  admission  of  Ohio  to  the  Union  was
often  in  the  legislature.  He  served  under  Gen.
William  Hull  at  Detroit  in  the  war  of  1812  as
colonel  of  the  2d  Ohio  regiment.  He  was  U.  S.
receiver  of  public  moneys  for  the  Cincinnati  dis-
trict from  the  first  establishment  of  public  land
offices  till  1824,  and  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a
Jackson  Democrat,  and  served  four  terms,  1825-'33.
He  was  the  unsuccessful  Democratic  candidate  for
governor  of  Ohio  in  1834. — Another  brother,  John,
d.  in  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  5  Nov.,  1838,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  from  Pennsylvania  in  1821-'7. —
William's  son,  John  King,  jurist,  b.  near  Mercers-
burg, Pa.,  12  May,  1803 ;  d.  in  Spring  Lake,  N.  J.,
13  Sept.,  1885,  was  graduated  at  the  u.  S.  military
academy  in  1824,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.
He  was  assistant  prof essor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,
and  geology  at  West  Point  from  29  Aug.  till  4
Nov.,  1824,  of  geography,  history,  and  ethics  till  17
April,  1825,  and  was  on  topographical  duty  till  13
May,  1828,  when  he  resigned,  and  in  1831  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Pennsylvania  bar.  He  was  recorder
of  Lancaster  in  1841-'5,  judge  of  the  Philadelphia
district  court  in  1845-'51,  and  president  of  the  3d
judicial  district  of  Pennsylvania  in  1857-62.  After
this  he  practised  his  profession  in  Philadelphia.
Judge  Findlay  was  a  captain  of  militia  in  l840-'5
and  1852-'6.  He  published  an  enlarged  edition  of
Archbold's  "Law  of  Nisi  Prius"  (2  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1852).  —  John  King's  nephew,  John  Yan
Lear,  b.  near  Williamsport,  Md.,  21  Dec.,  1839,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1858,  and  became  a
lawyer  in  Baltimore.  He  has  been  collector  of  in-
ternal revenue  there,  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  orator  for  his  state  on  "  Maryland  day  "  at  the
Centennial  exhibition  in  1876,  and  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1883  till  1887.

FINDLEY,  Thomas  Maskell,  educator,  b.  in
West  Mahoning,  Pa.,  29  Sept.,  1847.  He  was
graduated  at  Monmouth  college,  Illinois,  in  1874,
and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1879,  hav-
ing previously  taught  for  two  years.  He  was  or-
dained pastor  cf  the  Presbyterian  church  at  In-
dianola,  Iowa,  22  June,  1880,  and  on  10  Oct.,
1883,  was  appointed  president  of  the  University  of
southern  Dakota,  at  Pierre,  which  he  had  founded
and  organized.  In  1885  he  became  pastor  of  the
9th  Presbyterian  church.  St.  Paul,  Minn.  Some
of  Mr.  Findley's  articles  contributed  to  the  news-
paper press  have  been  widely  copied.

FINDLEY,  William,  politician,  b.  in  the  north
of  Ireland  about  1750;  d.  in  Unity  township,  West-
moreland co.,  Pa.,  5  April,  1821.  He  came  to
Pennsylvania  in  early  life,  served  in  the  Revolu-
tion, and  at  its  close  removed  to  the  western  part
of  the  state,  where  he  soon  became  active  in  poli-
tics. He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  and  of  the
State  convention  that  adopted  the  Federal  consti-
tution, which  he  actively  opposed  as  a  step  toward
centralization.  He  was  eleven  times  elected  tq  con-
gress, serving  in  1791-9 and  1803-'17.  Mr.  Findh-y
was  an  earnest  supporter  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  and
a  fluent  speaker.  He  published  a  "Review  of  the
Funding  System  "  (1794);  "History  of  the  In>ur-
rection  of  the  Four  Western  Counties  of  Pennsyl-
vania" (Philadelphia,  1796);  and  several  pamphlets
on  matters  of  political  interest.

FINDLEY.  William  Thornton,  clergyman,  b.
in  West  Middletown.  Pa.,  '2  .lime.  1*14.  He  re-
moved with  his  parents  to  Ohio  in  1824,  was  gradu-


IIM.


PINK


109


Bjfad ai Franklin college,  Ohio,  in \KW.  and
licensed to  preach in tin- Associate Reformed

chun  h  «'ii  Ifl  June  "f  f lint  year. -He  boj  held  peft-

i  'hillicothe,  Springfield,  and  Xenia,  <  Brio,

and Newark,  N.  .1..  and In  lited the

"PamUy  Treasure,"  pubUahed  in  Cincinnati He

ubliahed  about  twenty  sermons. —  His  brother,

s.iiuiifl.  educator,  1>.  in  West  Middlctown,  I';.

graduated  at  Franklin  college,  Ohio,
in  IMS,  studied  at  Allegheny,  I'a.,  theologioeJ
nary,  and  on  12  OcU,  1*42.  was  ordained  as  a
gyman  <>f  tin-  Associate  Reformed  church.  Ha
was  principal  of  Edinburg  academy,  Wooater,
<»hio,  in  ik-W-'s.  of  Chillioothe  female  ooUogc  in
I  :t.  president  of  Madison  «-oll«-v:<*.  Antrim,
Ohio,  in  1858-'6,  and  pastor  of  n  Presbyterian
church  in  l*it t «l>uri^.  I'a.,  in  1807-*61,  editing  at
the  lame  time,  for  two  years,  the  "  Pennsylvania
Teacher."  He  was  professor  of  logic  and  rhetoric
in  the  Western  university  of  Pennsylvania  in
)si.l-':l,  taught  in  ISM-'."),  was  profeCQOC  in  the
Western  military  academy,  Dayton,  Ohio,  in  1865-
'70,  anil  has  held  various  pastorates.  Dr.  Findley
it  a  corresponding  memlwr  of  the  American  en-
tomological society,  and  has  published  "  Rambles
among  the  Insects"  (Philadelphia.  1M7H).

FINK,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  citv.  2<i
An-.  1794;  d.  in  Dgdenatmnr,  N.  V..  4  Jan..  1867.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1801).  studied  in
the  Litchfield.  Conn.,  law-school,  and  liegan  prac-
tice in  ogdcnshurg.  N.  V..  in  1816,  He  was  county
treasurer  in  1821- <B8.  first  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  St.  Lawrence  county  in  1  N24-':I7,
and  again  from  1844  till  the  aliolition  of  the  court
in  1*47.  having  in  the  mean  time  been  elected  to
cMUigtvss  us  a  Democrat,  and  served  MM  term  in
1  l*il>— '4 1 .  He  was  state  senator  in  1848,  and  after
that  time  occupied  several  local  offices  of  trust,  till
age  and  failing  eyesight  prevented  Ids  taking  an
active  part  in  public  affairs.  Judge  Fine  was  an
active  member  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  a
prominent  delegate  to  its  general  assembly.  He
published  a  volume  of  "  Lectures  on  Law*' (1852).

FINK,  Albert,  civil  engineer,  b.  near  Frank-
fort -on-t  he  Main.  Germany,  27  Oct.,  1827.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Polytechnic  institute.  Darmstadt,
in  1*4*.  where  he  studied  architecture,  and  emi-
grated to  this  country  in  1H49.  He  soon  found
employment  as  draughtsman  in  the  service  of  the
Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and  beoamc  chief
office  assistant  of  Benjamin  H.  LatroU".  In  this
capacity  he  had  the  superintendence  of  the  design
and  construction  of  buildings  and  bridges.  That
portion  of  the  road  between  Cumberland  and
Wheeling  being  then  in  process  of  construction.
.Mr.  Fink  designed  and  tuperrieed  the  building  of
the  first  important  iron  bridges  in  this  country,
that  over  the  Monongahela  river  and  the  viaduct
over  Trey  Bun.  After  this  portion  of  the  road  was
completed,  the  section  from  Qrafton  to  Parkershurg
was  begun,  and  many  of  the  bridges  and  tunnel*
were  built  under  his  supervision.  During  this
time  Mr.  Fink  was  also  consulting  engineer  of  the
Norfolk  and  Petersburg  railway,  then  building,  and
designed  the  bridge  at  Norfolk.  In  lN."i7  he  left
the  service  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  road,  and
fcaSBJM  assistant to  Ceo. McLeod,  chief  engineer

of  the  Lonisrille  and  Nashville  road. While  eon*

nected  with  the  latter  corporation  he  built  the
Green  river  bridge,  that  over  the  Cumberland  at
v-  He,  and  the  great  bridge  orer  the  Ohio  at
Lonisrille.  During  the  civd  war  he  served  as
chief  engineer  and  superintendent  of  the  road  and
machinery  department.  During  this  |>criiMl  bridges
-t roved,  connections  severed,  and  the  op-


erating farm  kept  constantly  01  the  alert  to  guard
disaster  and  repair  the  gaps.  The  money
loss  involved  by  these  depredations,  the  damage
OMaad  by  which  Mr.  Fink  was  called  Upon  to  make
giMMl,  was  estimated  at  not  less  than  *.o"20.4oO.  In
MB  he  was  made  general  manager,  and  in  1H7«i
■hated  vice-president.  The  tluamial  crisis  ,,f  is;:;
led  him  to  study  the

qneetioa  of  the  cost

of  transportation,
ami  he  subsequent-
ly issued  two  pam-
phlets on  the  siil  -
ject.  About  the  same
time  the  growing
evils  of  unrestrained
railway  coni|K'tition

breed  npon  his
mind  the  Deoeesfty

for  a  remedy,  and

suggested  the  jM.ssi-

bility of  oo-opera*

tion  instead  of  war-
fare on  the  part  of
rival  oorporationa.
This  led  him  t<»  de-
vice his  plan  for  the  creation  of  the  Southern  rail-
way and  steamship  association,  which  was  adopt-
ed. In  October,  1*7">.  Mr.  Fink  resigned  the  of-
fice of  vice-president  and  general  manager  of  the
Louisville  and  Nashville  road,  ami  undertook  the
organization  and  management  of  Ihf) ahOTQ  named
association,  with  the  title  of  "general  commis-
sioner." In  June.  1H77.  he  set  out  <>n  a  visit  to
his  native  land.  Arrived  in  New  York,  he  was
waited  on  by  Messrs.  Vanderbilt,  Jewett,  Scott,
and  Garrett,  presidents  of  the  four  great  trunk-
lines  of  railway,  who  requested  that  he  should  re-
main in  that  city  ami  attempt  the  organization  of
a  "iMMd"  of  the  west-bound  traffic  of  these  roads,
on  the  plan  of  a  division  of  tonnage,  which  he  had
succeeded  in  putting  into  operation  in  the  south.
Mr.  Fink  accordingly  accented  the  commissioner
ship  of  the  trunk-lines,  and  has  been  able  to  effect
a  complete  revolution  in  the  traffic  management
of  the  more  important  American  railways,

FINK.  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in  Little  Falls,  N.
V..  18  Dec.  1817;  d.  in  184!>.  He  studied  medi-
cine in  Albany,  but  became  B  merchant,  and  after-
ward studied  painting  with  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,
and  later  in  Europe.  He  painted  many  excel-
lent genre  pictures,  tin-  most  notable  of  which  are
••The  Artist's  Studio,"'  "The  Shipwrecked  Marin-
er." and  "The  Negro  Wood-Sawyer."

FINK,  Michael  (in  religion.  Loon  Maria).  EL
('.  bishop,  h.  in  TrifsterU-rg.  Bavaria,  in  i
lie  studied  in  the  Latin  school  and  gymnasium  of
Batishftn.  and  came  t<<  the  United  States  in  186&
He  joined  the  order  of  St.  Benedict  shortly  after-
ward, and  made  his  piiiftansnii  in  the  abbey  of  St.
Vincent.  Westmoreland  county,  I'a..  in  1864  Be
finished  his  theological  studies  in  1867, and  was
ordained  priest.  He  was  then  stationed  at  lielle-
fonte.  I'a..  and  at  Newark.  N.  J.  He  was  ne\t
sent  to  Covington.  Ky..  where  he  established  a  con-
vent of  Benedictine  nuns,  and  butt  a  enures.  He
then  went  to  Chicago  as  imstor  of  St,  Joseph's
church,  and  his  missionary  labors  were  so  success-
ful that  the  church  could  not  contain  the  numbers
who  came  to  hear  him.  whereupon  he  built  a  new
and  costly  one.  with  schools  attached  to  it.  He  was
next  appointed  prior  of  the  Benedictine  monastery
\ichison.  Kan.,  and  also  vicar-general  of  the
rioar  apoatolate  of  Kansas.  He  beoajaa  coadjutor
hishop  in 1x71,  and  was  transferred  to  the  newly


4(50


FINLEY


FIN  I.  FY


erected  see  of  Leavenworth  in  1877.  Under  his
eare  ilit-  number  of  his  oo-religkmisti  in  that  dio-
cese Increased  from  35,000  to  8O.000.

FINLET,  Jesse  Johnson,  m Bator,  b.  in  Wilson
county,  Ti-mi.,  18  Nov.,  l s i v>.  He  was  educated  at
Lebanon,  Tenn.,  ami  in  1836-'7  was  captain  of  a
company  of  mounted  volunteers  from  Tennessee
that  served  in  the  Seminole  war  in  Florida.  On
lii>  return  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1838,  and  in  1840  removed  to  Mississippi  county,
Arkansas,  where  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate
in  1841.  The  following  year  he  resigned  and  went
to  Memphis,  Tenn.,  where  he  practised  law.  Ib-
was  elected  mayor  in  1845,  and  after  the  expiration
of  his  term  of  office  in  1846  removed  to  Marianna,
Jackson  co.,  Fla.  In  1850  he  was  elected  to  the
state  senate, and  in  1852  was  presidential  elector  on
the  Whig  ticket.  In  1853  he  was  appointed  judge
of  the  western  circuit  of  Florida  to  fill  a  vacancy,
and  was  subsequently  elected  to  the  same  office  for
two  terms  without  opposition. He  was  appointed

i'udge  of  the  Confederate  court  for  the  district  of
Florida  in  1861,  but  resigned  in  March,  1862,  and
volunteered  as  a  private in  the  army. He  was

Eromoted  successively  to  captain,  colonel,  and
rigadier-general.  At  the  close  of  the  war  Judge
Finley  went  to  Lake  City,  Fla.,  and  in  1871  re-
moved to  Jacksonville  in  the  same  state.  He  was
then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Conservative  Demo-
crat, and  served  in  1875-'9.  In  1880  he  was  nomi-
nated against  his  wishes  and  took  his  seat,  but  was
subsequently  unseated  by  the  rival  candidate.  In
March,  1887,  he  was  selected  by  the  governor  to
supply  the  vacancy  in  the  United  States  senate
that  had  been  occasioned  by  the  expiration  of  the
term  of  Charles  W.  Jones,  until  a  cnoice  could  be
made  by  the  legislature.

FINLEY,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Brownsburg,  Rock-
bridge co.,  Va.,  11  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in  Richmond,
Ind.,  23  Dec,  1866.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  removed  about  1818  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
and  in  1823  to  Richmond,  Ind.  He  was  one  of  the
editors  and  proprietors  of  the  Richmond  "  Palla-
dium "  in  1831-4,  a  member  of  the  legislature  for
three  years,  and  enrolling  clerk  of  the  state  senate
for  an  equal  period.  He  was  clerk  of  the  Wayne
county  courts  in  1838-'45,  and  mayor  of  Richmond
from  1852  till  his  death.  Mr.  Finley's  poems  were
collected  in  a  volume  entitled  "  The  Hoosier's  Nest
and  Other  Poems"  (Cincinnati,  1865).  The  best
known  of  these  is  "  Bachelor's  Hall."

FINLEY,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  in  1772 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  3  Oct.,  1817.  His
father,  James  Finley,  came  to  this  country  from
Scotland  in  1769.  Robert  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1787,  and  taught  until  1793,  when  he  be-
came a  tutor  in  the  college,  studying  theology  at
the  same  time.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  on  16
Sept.,  1794,  and  on  16  June,  1795,  was  ordained

Sastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Baskingridge,
r.  J.,  where  he  also  conducted  a  successful  school.
In  1815  he  suggested  the  formation  of  Bible-classes
throughout  the  church,  and  his  plan  was  reoom-
mended  by  the  general  assembly.  He  had  been  for
some  time  interested  in  plans  for  improving  the
condition  of  the  free  negroes,  and,  having  con-
versed and  corresponded  with  many  prominent
men  in  regard  to  the  colonization  scheme,  went  to
Washington  in  1816  to  secure  for  it  government
sanction.  The  result  of  his  efforts  was  the  forma-
tion, on  28  Dec.,  1816,  of  the  American  coloniza-
tion society,  and  in  January,  1817,  he  established
an  auxiliary  society  in  New  Jersey.  In  July,  1817,
he  became  president  of  Franklin  college,  Athens,
Ga. He  was  a  trustee  of  Princeton  from  1806  till


lie  resigned,  in  1817.  on  liis  departure  for  Georgia,
and,  in  accepting  his  resignation,  the  college  gave
him  the  degree  <»f  1>.  D.  Or.  Finley  was  a  man  of
deohdon  and  energy,  and  held  high  rank  as  a
preacher.  Besides  several  sermons,  he  published
"  Thoughts  on  the  Colonization  of  the  Free  Blacks,"
a  pamphlet  that  had  much  to  do  with  awakening

Eublic  attention  to  his  enterprise  (1816). — His  son,
[obert  Smith,  clergyman,  b.  in  Baskingridge,
N.  J.,  9  May,  1*04;  d.  in  Talladega,  Ala..  2  July.
1860,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1821,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Cincinnati,
but  abandoned  his  profession  for  the  ministry,  and
was  ordained  as  a  Presbyterian  clergyman  in  1842.
He  was  for  some  time  a  missionary  among  the
slaves  near  Natchez,  Miss.,  and  edited  for  six  years,
in  St.  Louis,  the  "Liberian  Advocate,"  a  journal
devoted  to  his  father's  scheme  of  colonization.  He
was  pastor  at  Metuchen,  N.  J.,  in  1850-'8,  and  in
the  latter  year  became  principal  of  the  Presbyte-
rian female  institute  at  Talladega,  Ala.

FINLEY,  Robert  W.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bucks
county,  Pa.,  9  June,  1750;  d.  in  Germantown,
Ohio,  8  Dec,  1840.  His  mother,  who  had  some  ac-
quaintance with  medicine,  opened  a  hospital  for
wounded  soldiers  during  the  Revolutionary  war,
and  ministered  to  them  with  her  own  hand.  Rob-
ert received  a  classical  and  theological  education  at
Princeton,  being  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Presbyte-
rian, and  in  1777  volunteered  to  go  as  a  missionary
to  the  new  settlements  in  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia.
During  this  time  Mr.  Finley,  who  was  an  earnest
patriot,  was  often  with  Gen.  Marion  in  his  expedi-
tions, and  narrowly  escaped  death  at  the  hands  of
Tories  in  the  partisan  warfare  then  raging  in  that
district.  He  removed  to  Virginia  about  1784,  two
years  later  to  Ohio,  and  in  1788  to  Kentucky,  where,
after  suffering  from  the  depredations  of  wolves  and
savages,  he  finally  settled  in  Bourbon  county.
Here,  besides  preaching  to  two  congregations,  he
conducted  a  classical  school,  said  to  nave  been  the
first  in  Kentucky.  He  removed  to  a  place  near
Chillicothe,  Ohio,  in  1796,  and  in  1808  became  a
Methodist,  joining  the  Ohio  conference  as  an  itin-
erant preacher  about  1812.  He  labored  for  years
with  great  success,  and,  when  almost  eighty  years
old,' set  off  on  horseback,  as  a  missionary,  for  Sault
Ste.  Marie,  where  he  formed  a  circuit  and  appointed
a  camp-meeting. — His  son,  James  Bradley,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  North  Carolina,  1  July,  1781 ;  d.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  6  Sept.,  1856,  was  educated  by  his
father,  entered  the  Ohio  Methodist  conference  in
1809,  and  in  1816-'21  was  presiding  elder  of  the
Steubenville,  Ohio,  and  Lebanon  districts.  He  was
a  missionary  to  the  Wyandot  Indians  in  1821-7,
and  retained  the  superintendency  of  the  mission
till  1829,  subsequently  continuing  in  the  itinerant
ministry  till  1845,  when  he  became  chaplain  of  the
Ohio  penitentiary.  He  retained  this  office  till
1849,  and  then  acted  as  conference  missionary  and
pastor  in  southern  Ohio  till  his  death.  His  princi-
pal publications  are  "History  of  the  Wyandot
Mission  "  (Cincinnati,  1840) ;  "  Memorials  of  Prison
Life"  (1850);  "Autobiography,"  edited  bv  I.Vv.
W.  P.  Strickland  (1853);  "Sketches  of  Western
Methodism"  (1854);  and  "Personal  Reminiscences
illustrative  of  Indian  Life  "(1857). — Another  son,
John  P.,  educator,  b.  in  South  Carolina,  13  June,
L  8  May.  1825,  removed  with  his  parents
to  th\i  west,  was  educated  by  his  father,  and  in
1810-'22  taught  in  schools  and  academies  in  Ohio,
and  also  preached  with  success.  He  was  given  the
chair  of  languages  in  Augusta  college,  Ky..  in  188%
and  in  1888  became  an  itinerant  minister  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church.


P1XLEY


PINXEY


461


i  i  \  i  i  \ .  x.ini u<  i.  Bdnoator,  i».  in  Cbnnj

rnagh.  Ireland,  in  1715;  d.  in  Philadelphia.

July,  l ~,iu\, lh-  pnrenta,  who  arere  <>f  Scottish  ex-

tnulioii,  gave  linn  it  good  education  in  bit  native
oountrv,  and  in  1884  he  came  t"  Philadelphia  and
Itodtod  for  tin-  mini-try,  which  In-  had  fnun  child-
bood  determined  to  enter.  I  £ «-  was  licensed  to  preach

1  ig ..  1 7 » * ».  ordained  by  1 1 » « -  New  Brunswick
prsebyl  :..  1748, ana  in  \14-i  was  •M-nt  to

ntilford.  Conn.. "  with  allowance  that  la*  also  preach
for  other  places  therealxxit  when  Providence  may
<i|n  ii  .i  door  f<»r  him."  Taking'  advantage  of  tin-
prmf— *' ■"  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  preach  to
the  •'second  society  "  in  New  lla\en:  hut.  as  this
society  was  not  recognized  by  the  authorities,  hfl
was  arrested,  under  a  law  forbidding  itinerants  to
preach  in  any  |wirish  without  the  regular  pastor's
•OMSnt,  indicted  hy  the  grand  jury,  tried,  and  -<n-
tonesd  to  bs  carried  out  of  the  colony  as  a  vagrant.
In  June.  1744,  Mr.  Finley  settled  as  jiastor  of  a
chunh  at  Nottingham.  Md.,  where  he  remained
seventeen  years  conducting  an  academy,  which  ac-
quired great  reputation,  and  at  which  he  prepared
many  young  men  for  the  mini-try.  In  July.  17<M.
he  was  chosen to  the  presidency  of  Princeton,  to

I  Samuel  I>avies,  and  tin-  college  pros|>ered
under  his  care.  In  17IM  the  Cnivcrsity  of  Glasgow
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I).,  the  first  instance  in
which  this  honor  was  conferred  on  an  American
Presbyterian  clergyman.  Dr.  Finley  corresponded
largely  with  eminent  men  in  this  country  and  Ku-
rope,  and,  though  he  published  nothing  but  ser-
mon-., was  esteemed  an  able  writer. His  discourse

"On  the  Death  of  President  Darks  '  < l T«» l >  was

afterward  prefixed  to  an  edition  of  the  hitter's
works.— Hfi  nephew,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  West-
moreland county,  Pa..  1">  April,  1758;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  8  April,  1829,  was  educated  by  his
uncle.  President  Finley,  and  settled  in  Martins-
burg.  Va.  He  Barred  with  distinction  in  the  Vir-
ginia cavalry  during  the  Revolution,  and  rose  to
the  rank  of  major.  The  last  three  years  of  the  war
he  spent  a-  a  prisoner  on  Long  Island.  Gen.  Wash-
ington, whose  personal  friend  he  was,  appointed
him  receiver  or  public  moneys  in  the  northwest,
and  he  went,  about  1796,  to' what  is  now  Chilli-
cothe.  Ohio,  where  he  had  been  given  large  tracts
of  government  land  for  his  services  in  the  Revolu-
tion, During  the  war  of  1818-18  he  served  as  a
general  of  militia,  raising  and  commanding  a  troop
of  light-horse  against  the  border  Indians,  who  were
SOttSMered  allies  of  the  British. — His  brother,
John,  also  a  major  in  the  Continental  army,  after-
ward bseams  an  Indian  trader,  and  in  1767,  two
years  before  Daniel  Boone  went  to  Kentucky,  made
a  tour  through  that  region,  and  brought  back  such

S "owing  accounts  that  Boone  was  induced  to  settle
ere.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  tattlers  in  the
"Blue  Licks"  of  Kentucky. — Clement  Alcxan-
ii  of  the  voimger  Samuel.  BttrgSOtt,  b.  in
Ncwviile,  Cumberland  «•"..  Pa..  11  Mav.  17!»7:  d.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  K  S>pt..  1*7!!.  was  educated  at
Dkkinson  college.  Pa.,  and  received  his  medical  de-

•Mi  the  Dnhrersitj  of  Pennsylvania  in  i*t*.

He  entered the  army  on 10  Aug.  of  that year  as

surgeon's  mate  of  the  1st  infantry,  became  assistant

n,  1  June.  18*21, and  surgeon,  with  the  rank  of

major.  13  July,  IHJfcJ. He  was  medical  director  in

the field, with tiell. Jesilp, (Jell. Scott, and (Jell.

Taylor,  in  the  Black  Hawk.  Seminole, and  Mexican
wars,  and  spent  nearly  afghl  years  on  the  frontier
<>f  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  ami  Florida.  Dr.  PfafWJ
was  with  the  commands  that  established  Fort
Leavenworth,  Fort  Gibson,  and  Jefferson  Bar-
Make,  and  in  1854  accompanied  Gen.  Henry  Dxlge  |


on  one  of  the  earliest  eX|Msiitions  to  the  Rocky
mountains.  He  was  made  -ur-e.  n-gcncral  of  the
annv.  1".  May.  1851,  and  on  M  April,  1858.  M

tire«l  from  active  Barries  on  his  own  application.

He  was brevet  ted hngad ier-geiieml  on Vi  Man  h.

"for  long  and  faithful  Barrioe,"  and  in  iw7»>
was  granted  the  retired  pay  of  a  full  brigadier-
general.— -Clement  Alexander's  niece,  Martha,  au-
thor, b.  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio.  88  April.  1888.  w.-nt
with her  father, I>r.  James H. Finlcv.  to  ('ircle-

ville,  Ohio,  aboni  1888,  ami  in  1888  to8onth  Bend,

Ind.,  when'  she  nn  OnltuSled.  After  his  death  in
May.  1881,  she  (aught  for  several  years,  writing  for
the  press  in  the  evenings  and  holidays.  Ibr  tir-t
effort  was  a  short  newspapcr-storv  published  in
New  York  in  1K">4.  Miss  Finley  lelt  Indiana  in
1858,  and  li\ed  in  Philadelphia  most  of  the  time
till  lM7«i,  when  she  removed  to  Klkton,  Md. Under

the  pen-name  of  "  Martha  Fnrquharson  "  (tbeGmHe

translation  of  her  surname),  she  has  written  "  El-ic
Dinsmore"  (New  York,  1H(|X),  with  ssratnl  sequels,
the  last  of  which  is  •*  Elsie's  Kith  and  Kin  "  (188
"( kaolin;  "r.  The  ( Ihildren  of  the  VaUeys"  (Phila-
delphia, is<;!»);  "An  Old-Paehiooed  Ifc'.y"  (Phila-
delphia, 1M71).  with  its  scouel,  -Our  Fred"  (New
York,  1M74):  "Wanted, a  Pedigree w  (Philadelphia,
1872);  "The  Mildred  Series"  (<J  rofe,  New  V,,rk.
1878-'86);  "The  Thorn  in  the  Nest,"  a  novel  (New
York,  1886);  and  about  sixty  volumes  of  Sunday-
school  books,  including  the"  "Do-Good  Lihrarv"
(!*  vols..  Philadelphia,  1868)  and  the  "  Pewit's  Nest
Scries"  (12  vols.,  1876).

FINN,  Henry  J.,  actor,  b.  in  New  York  city  in
1782;  d.  on  Long  Island  sound.  13  Jan.,  1840. "  He
received  his  early  education  at  schools  in  New  Jer-
sey, and  studied  at  Princeton.  Thereafter  he  began
the  study  of  law  in  New  York  city.  He  appeared
on  several  occasions  under  an  assumed  name,  as  an
actor  of  small  parts,  at  the  old  Park  theatre.  At
this  time  his  father  died,  and,  as  his  mother  was
impoverished,  she  and  her  son  set  sail  for  England.
In  London,  Finn  at  first  was  a  teacher,  cultivated  a
taste  for  painting,  and  joined  a  company  of  travel-
ling players.  Eventually  his  ability  procured  him
an  engagement  at  the  London  Havmarkct  theatre.
In  1811  he  appeared  in  Montreal,  and  thereafter
played  at  other  places,  being  in  Savannah,  (la.,  in
1818-'20.  During  the  latter  year  he  was  for  a  brief
period  co-editor  of  the  "Georgian.''  In  ls-Jl  the
actor  went  again  to  London,  occasionally  playing
in  dramas  at  the  Surrey  theatre. and  practising  the
art  of  miniature  painting  for  a  livelihood.  In  1888
he  once  more  returned  to  his  native  land.  He  ap-
peared as  an  actor  in  Boston,  when'  for  years  he
was  a  manager  and  performer.  In  Bo-ton  he  set
up.  successfully,  for  a  wit  and  punster  in  the  man-
ner of  Thomas  Hood,  and  relinquished  hemic  parts
for  comic  and  eccentric  characters.  Among  them
new  assumptions  were  Paul  Pry,  Billy  Black,
Mawworm.  and  Dr.  Pangloss.  For  ten  years  after-
ward his  time  was  devoted  to  starring  tours  in  large
cities,  and  monoLogM  variety  entertainment-  in
smaller  places.  ||r  accumulated  a  handsome  OOttV
pstonoa  Returning  toward  his  Newport  home,
where  he  was  proprietor  of  I  straw-hat  factory,  he
was  lost  on  the  -learner  "  Lexington."  which  was
burned  on  Long  Island  sound.  He  left  a  widow
and  twelve  children.  Finn  wrote  several  dramas
that  were  succ.— fully  produced  but  never  pub-
lished. His  "Comic  Annuals"  were  fa\oral>|\  n--
Oaired,  but  their  witticisms,  puns,  and  sayings,
being  largely  imitative,  have  perished.

1  inn  I  \.  Charles  (irandison,  clergyman,  b.
in  Warren,  Litchfield  oosCooju,  88  Aug.,  1788;  d.
in  OberJfn,  Ohio,  18  Aug..  1878. He  removed  with


462


HNOTTI


FISH


^ <£  ^^y


his  father  to  Oneida  enmity.  X.  V.,  in  1794,  and
when  nl«>nt  twenty  years  old  engaged  in  teaching
in  New  Jcrsov.  He  began  to  study  law  in  Jefferson
county.  N.  V.,  in  1818,  but,  haying  been  converted
in  1SJ1.  studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
the  Presbyterian  church  in  1804,  and  nogan  t<>
labor  as  an  evangelist.  He  nut  with  great  raceew
in  Utica,  Troy,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  and  New
York.  On  his  second  visit  to  the  last  city,  in  1832,
the  Chatham  st net
theatre  was  bought
and  made  into  a
church  for  him,  and
the  New  York  "Evan-
gelist" established  as
an  advocate  of  the
revival.  His  labors
here  resulted  in  the
establishmentof  seven
"  free  Presbyterian  "
churches,  and  in  1834
he  became  pastor  of
the  Broadway  Taber-
nacle, which  had  been
built  especially  for
him.  Mr.  Finney  ac-
cepted, in  1835,  the
professorship  of  theology  at  Oberlin,  which  had  just
been  founded  by  his  friends,  and  retained  it  until
his  death.  Here  he  assisted  in  establishing  the
"  Oberlin  Evangelist,"  and  afterward  the  "  Oberlin
Quarterly."  He  also  became  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  in  Oberlin  in  1837,  but  continued
at  intervals  to  preach  in  New  York  and  elsewhere.
He  spent  three  years  in  England  as  a  revivalist,  in
1849-'51  and  1858-'60,  adding  to  his  reputation  for
eloquence,  and  in  1851-'66  was  president  of  Ober-
lin. Prof.  Finney  relied  greatly  on  doctrinal  preach-
ing in  his  revivals,  as  opposed  to  animal  excitement,
and  his  sermons  were  plain,  logical,  and  direct.
He  was  an  Abolitionist,  an  anti-mason,  and  an
advocate  of  total  abstinence.  His  chief  works  are
"  Lectures  on  Revivals,"  which  have  been  trans-
lated into  several  foreign  languages  (Boston,  1835 ;
13th  ed.,  1840 :  enlarged  ed.,  Oberlin,  1868) ;  "  Lec-
tures to  Professing  Christians "  (Oberlin,  1836) ;
"  Sermons  on  Important  Subjects "  (New  York,
1839) ;  and  "  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology  "
(2  vols.,  Oberlin,  1847 ;  London,  1851).  After  his
death  were  published  his  "  Memoirs,"  written  bv
himself  (New  York,  1876).

FINOTTI,  Joseph  M.,  author,  b.  in  Ferrara,
Italy,  in  1817 ;  d.  in  Denver,  Col.,  in  1879.  He
studied  with  a  view  of  entering  the  Austrian  army,
but  afterward  changed  his  plans  and  entered  the
Jesuit  college,  Rome.  He  joined  the  Jesuit  order,
and,  on  the  completion  of  his  theological  studies,
came  to  the  United  States  in  1845.  He  was  or-
dained priest,  and  stationed  at  St.  Mary's  church,
Alexandria,  Va.,  where  he  had  charge  of  an  ex-
tensive mission  both  in  Virginia  and  in  Maryland.
He  built  St.  Ignatius's  church,  in  Prince  George
county,  Md.  He  left  the  Jesuit  society  in  1852.
and  went  to  Boston,  where  he  became  a  member  of
the  bishop's  household  and  literary  editor  of  the
Boston  "  Pilot."  He  was  also  pastor  of  the  Brook-
line  and  other  missions,  and  established  the  Catho-
lic cemetery  of  Holyrood.  His  health  failing,  he
was  sent  to  St.  Mary  s  seminary,  Cincinnati,  whence
he  went  to  Omaha,  and  finally  to  Central  Cit  |
in  1877,  and  had  charge  of  that  parish  up  to  the
time  of  his  death.  His  principal  works  are  a
"French  Grammar,"  published  in  Italy;  "A  Month
of  Mary"  (1853);  "Life  of  Blessed*  Paul  of  the
Cross  "  (1860) ;  "  Italy  in  the  Fifteenth  Century  "  ;


'•I)iarvofaSoldier"(lsi;i,:  -The  French  Zouave"
( is(i:{) ;  ••  Herman  the  Pianist "  (18(>.!) ;  ••  The  Spirit
<»f  St.  Francis  of  Sales"  (1866);  "Works  of  the
lo\.  Arthur  O'Lcary":  and  •  Life  of  Blessed
Peter  Claver."  His  most  important  work,  never
completed,  was  his  ••  Bibliographia  Catholics  Ame-
ricana." lie  published  one  volume  of  it  in  1*72.

FIRM,  Joseph  L.,  inventor,  l>.  in  William*-
bug,  N.  V..  19  March,  1837.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  schools,  served  an  apprenticeship  in  the
press-room  of  Harper  Brothers,  and  in  lofl
engaged  in  the  Frank  Leslie  publishing  house.
Since  that  date  his  connection  with  the  house  has
been  continuous.  He  has  devoted  much  time  to
improvements  in  printing  machinery,  and  invented
and  secured  patents  on  perfecting  presses,  web
perfecting  presses,  and  paper-folders.  He  is  also
the  inventor  of  a  process  of  printing  on  glass  from
electrotype  plates,  in  colors  or  otherwise.

FIRMIN,  (Hies,  author,  b.  in  Suffolk  county.
England,  in  1615 ;  d.  in  Ridgwell,  Essex,  England,
in  April,  1697.  He  entered  Cambridge  university
in  1629,  but  left  before  taking  his  degree.  In  1632
he  came  to  New  England  in  company  with  John
Wilson,  but  returned  to  England  before  October
1633.  In  1637  he  again  crossed  the  sea,  and  was
employed,  with  John  Higginson,  to  take  Dotal  of
the  proceedings  of  the  synod  in  that  year.  He
settled  at  Ipswich,  where  he  practised  medicine.
He  married  the  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Nathaniel
Ward,  and  was  clerk  of  the  writs  at  Ipswich  in
1641-2.  He  sailed  for  England  in  1644,  but  was
wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Spain,  and  did  not  reach
his  destination  till  the  following  summer.  In  1646
he  lived  at  Colchester,  Essex,  and  in  1651  was
settled  as  pastor  at  Shalford.  He  was  dismissed
by  the  congregation  there  in  1662,  and  afterward
practised  medicine  and  preached  at  Ridgwell.  He
was  the  author  of  many  published  sermons  and
theological  treatises.  His  most  important  work  was
"  The  Real  Christian  "  (1670),  several  times  reprint-
ed in  England  and  once  in  Boston,  Mass.  See  a
memoir  by  John  W.  Dean  (Boston,  1866).

FISH,  Asa  Israel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  in  February,  1820  ;  d.  there,  5  May,  1879.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1842,  studied  law  at
the  law-school  there,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Philadelphia  in  1846,  and  began  practice  in  that
city.  From  1853  till  1862  he  was  one  of  the  edi-
tors of  the  "  American  Law  Register."  Among  his
many  contributions  to  legal  literature  are  notes  to
"  Troubat  and  Haly's  Practice,"  "  Tidd's  Practice,"
"  Selwyn's  Nisi  Prius,"  and  "  Williams  on  Execu-
tors arid  Administrators."  He  was  well  known  as
a  Shakespearian  scholar.

FISH,  Benjamin,  engineer,  b.  near  Trenton,
N.  J.,  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  22  June,  1880.  In
1813,  during  the  war  with  England,  he  was  em-
ployed in  transporting  commissary  and  ordnance
stores  for  the  government.  During  the  construc-
tion of  the  first  railroads  in  the  United  States  he
undertook  to  connect  New  York  and  Philadelphia
by  rail.  It  is  related  concerning  his  management
of  the  line  that  his  rule  was  to  wait  one  hour  for  a
train,  and  then  send  out  a  locomotive  to  look  for
it,  and  that  once,  when  asked  by  a  conductor  how
long  he  should  wait,  his  answer  was,  "Wait,  sir,
till  you  learn  something."  Mr.  Fish  was  largely
interested  in  various  railroad  and  canal  enter-
prises. He  represented  the  town  of  Nottingham
in  the  New  Jersey  legislature  in  1833.

FISH,  Henry  Clay,  clergyman,  b.  in  Halifax,
Vt.,  27  Jan.,  1820;  d.  in  Newark,  X.J.,2  Oct..  1^77.
His  father  was  a  Baptist  clergyman. Tl
studied  at  an  academy,  taught  fqr  two yean  in


FISH


fish


!<;:*


Massachusetts,  and  then  entered  tin-  I'nioii  theo-
miliary  in  New  Vi.rk,  whan  he  WM  gradu-
ated in  1845.  On  the  following  day  1m  was  ordained

■r  <>f  tin- Baptist  <liiinli  lit Somen  die,  N.  J..

ami  niii.ijn.il  than  till  January,  1881,  when  be  nv

I  i'ii  the  pastorate  of  the  l-t  Baptist  church  In

irk. \.  J. In 1KV<  (Ik-  degree  "f D.  I),  was

rr.<l  upon  him  l>>  the  University  of  Kocln-stcr,

i\  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  hi

tfrelj  supported  the  National  government,  tpnad

the  flag  of  the  United  States  on his  altar,  ami

caused (In- National  anthems  to  bo  sung  in  his

ohorofa  servioes. <>n  l  Jane,  1864,  he  was  drafted

in(o  the  military  service,  and,  determining  at  ohm

to  go  to  (Ik-  field,  Ik-  notified  tli«-  officers  <>f  the

ohnroh  t<>  that  affect. Be  was  persuaded  with  great

difficulty  to  relinquish  his  purpose,  sad  allow  ■

substitute  to  U'  s«-iit in his  stead. He  was  ■  man

of  gn-at  industry,  and  was  actively  engaged  in  ad-
vancing the  interests  of  education  and  BrissJOML
II.  also  did  much  by  his  writings  t<»  popularise  life
insurance.  Beside  a  large  number  <>f  tracts  ami
sermons,  he  was  the  author  of  "Primitive  Piety
cl."  a  prize  essav  (1855;  Dutch  translation,
Utrecht,  ISM);  ••The  Price  of  Soul  Liberty, and
Who  Paid  it  "(lMtSO);  "Harrv's  Conversion  "(>.
"Harry's  Conflicts"  (187*);  -  I  laud-book  of Ete-

Tiva!  and -Bible Lands Illustrated "

i  i^T'ii.  Among  his  numerous  compilations,  abound-
ing with  annotations,  are  -  History  and  Repository
of  Pulpit  Eloquence"  (1850):  "  Pulpit  Eloquence

of  the  Nineteenth  Century"  (1*57);  u Select  Dis-
courses translated  from  the  French  and  German"
(1858);  and  "  Heaven  in  Song"  (1874).

FISH.  Mcl.iuthoii  Williams,  physician,  b.  in
Kort  right,  Delaware  eo„  M.  V..  90  March,  1828.  He
was  educated  in  the  Wosleyan  seminary  at  Albion,
Mich.,  studied  medicine  in  the  Rush  medical  col-
lege. Chicago,  111.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1854,
travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  Asia.  Africa,  and
America,  and  in  185«  went  to  Shanghai.  China.
where  he  filled  for  three  years  the  office  of  inspec-
tor of  the  imperial  customs.  He  was  also  for  a
time  U.  S.  vice-consul  in  that  city.  In  1862,  after
residing  six  years  in  China,  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  entered  the  national  artnv,  in
which  he  served  as  regimental,  brigade,  and  di-
vision surgeon  till  the  end  of  the  war.  He  then
settled  in  Oakland.  Cal..  where  he  became  in  1872
professor  of  physiology  in  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  California.

FISH.  Nicholas,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  (it v.
28  Auk.,  1758 :  d.  there,  20  June,  1838.  He  entered
the  College  of  New  Jersey  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  hut
Mn  left  and  began  the' study  of  law  in  the  office
of  John  Morm  Scott.  In  the  spring  of  177t»  he
was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  tien.  Scott;  on  21
June  of  that  year,  major  of  brigade  under  the  same
"i,  -,»i  N,,v.,  major  of  theSd  New  York  regi-
ment, and  at  t he  dose  of  the  war  was  a  lieutenant-
colonel.  He  was  in  both  battles  of  Saratoga,  in
is  a  division  Inspector  under  Steuben,  com-
manded a  body  of  light-infantry  a(  the  battle  <>f
Monmouth,  served  in  Sullivan's  expedition  against
(he  Indian-  in  1  77!>.  was  attached  to  the  light-in-
fant rv  under  Lafayette  in  1780,  and  in  17*1  took
■i active  pari  with  his  regiment  in  tl notations

-ulted  in  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis.  He
was  major  of  the  detachment  under  Hamilton
which  gallantly  stormed  a  British  redoubt  at  York-

town. Col. Fish  was  an  excellent disciplil
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  and
possessed  in  a  high  degree  the  confidence  •  ■:
Bafton, He  was  aopouted  adjutant-general  of  the
state  of  New  York  in  April.  17W.  an  office  which


he  held  many  MM He  was  a  supervisor  of  the

■ma  under  Washington  in  19947 and  »n  alder-
man of New York city fn.in INK!  !.. 1*17. He
married Miss Stuvvesant a descendant of the
Dutch  colonial  governor  of  New  Amsterdam. Col.
Pish was  an  active BSJSJsbsr  of many  of the  U--
nevolent. literary, and religious institutions of
his  native  city,  and  Itecamc  president  of  the '
York  s,Mi.ty  of  the  Cincinnati  in  1 7t  •  7 Hi-  son,
Haiuilton. statesman, b. in New fork <i
AttSL l^OH,  was graduated  at Colombia in 1887,
studied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  18SQ.
He  was  for  several  years  a  commissioner  of  d<
In politics he  was  a  Whig,  and was the  defeated
candidate  of  that |>arty  for  the  state  assembly  in
1834. In \*4'2 he was elected a representative
in  congress from  the  sixth  district Of  New  York
over  John  Mi  Ke.in,  the  Democratic  candidate,  and
I  one  term. In lHpi  he  was  a  candidate  for
lieutenant-governor. The  Whig  candidate  lot  -
enior,  John  Young,  was  elected,  hut  Mr.  Fish,  who
had  incurred  the  hostility  of  the  anti-renters  by  Ins
warm  denunciation  of  their  principles,  was  defeated.
Mis successful competitor. Addison (iardiner.  a
Democrat  who  had  received  thassjnpoffi  of  the  anti-
renters,  resigned  the  oAee  in  1847  on  becoming  a
judge  of  the  court  of  ap|M-als,  and  Mr.  Pish  was
elected  in  his  place. In  1848  he  was  chosen  gov-
ernor liv  Bjboni  30,000  majority,  the  fyppjug  can-
didates being  John A.  Dix  and BeUPCfl H.  Wal-
worth. In lKol he  was  elected U.  S.  senator  in
place  of  Daniel  S.  Dickinson. In  the  senate  he  op-
posed the  repeal
of  the Missouri
compromise,  ami
acted with the
Republican  party
from its forma-
tion to  the  end  of
his  term,  though
he  was  not  espe-
cially prominent
in the party.
When his sena-
torial term ex-
pired in 185?  he
went to Kurope
with his  family,
and  remained  till
shortly  before  the
In-ginning  of  the
civil  war. On  his
return  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  campaign  that
resulted  in  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln. In
January,  1H(!2,  in  conjunction  with  Bishop  Ames,  he
was  appointed  by  Sec,  Stanton  a  commissioner  to
visit  the  r.  s.  soldiers  imprisoned  at  Richmond  and
elsewhere."  to  relieve  their  necessities  and  provide
for  their  comfort." The  Confederate  govenuncni
declined  to  admit  the  commissioners  within  their
lines,  hut  intimated  a  readiness  to  negotiate  for  a
general  exchange  of  prisoners. The  result  was  an
agreement  for  an  equal  exchange,  which  was  carried
out  siilistantially  to  the  endof  the  war. In  1808  he
aided  in  the  election  of  (Jen.  Giant,  was  appointed
secretary  of  state  by  him  in  March.  lsii'.i.  and  was

reappointed  at  the  bssdnning  of  his  sseond  term  in

March.  1878,  serving  from  11  March.  I860,  to  12
March,  1*77.  He  introduced  a  system  of  exami-
nations of  applicants for  consulates,  to  test  (heir

knowledge  of  subjects  oonneetsd  with  their  duties.

OB  I  Feb.,  1S71,  the  president  appointed  him  one
of  the  coiiunissiuiK-rs  on  the  part  of  the  United
States  to  negotiate  the  treaty  of  Washington,
which was  signed  by  him  on  8  May  oi  thai


^^^5^4


464


KISIIIU'RX


FISHER


He effected  a  settlement  of  the  long-standing
northwestern  boundary  dispute,  giving  tin-  island

of  San  .Iiian  to  the  United  States,  and  successfully
resisted  an  effort  by  Great  Britain  to  change  the
terms  of  the  extradition  treaty  by  municipal  legis-
lation. In  the  settlement  of  the  Alabama  ques-
tion he  procured  the  acceptance  of  a  doctrine  by
the  Geneva  tribunal,  securing  the  United  Slates
against  claims  for  indirect  damages  arising  out  of
Fenian  raids,  or  Cuban  filibustering  expeditions.
In  November,  1873,  he  negotiated  with  Admiral
Polo,  Spanish  minister  at  Washington,  the  settle-
ment of  the  "Virginius"  question.  He  was  for
some  years  president  of  the  New  York  historical
society,  and  was  president-general  of  the  New  York
society  of  the  Cincinnati. — Hamilton's  son,  Nicho-
las, b.  in  New  York  city,  17  Feb.,  1846,  was
f graduated  at  Columbia  in  1867,  and  at  Harvard
aw-school  in  1869.  He  was  appointed  assistant
secretary  of  the  United  States  legation  at  Berlin
on  1  .Tulv,  1871,  and  became  secretary  of  the  lega-
tion in  July,  1874.  He  was  afterward  appointed
minister  to  Switzerland  and  Belgium.

FISHBURN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  1760;  d.
in  Walterborough,  S.  C,  3  Nov.,  1819.  He  was  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne,  to  whom  he
was  aide-de-camp  at  the  capture  of  Stony  Point,
and  afterward  attained  the  rank  of  major-general.
He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
the  constitution  of  South  Carolina,  and  subse-
quently a  member  of  the  legislature.

FISHER,  Alexander  Metcalf,  educator,  b.  in
Franklin,  Mass.,  in  1794;  d.  22  April,  1822.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1813,  spent  one  year  in
the  divinity-school,  and  was  a  tutor  in  the  college
from  1815  till  1817,  when  he  became  professor  of
mathematics,  natural  philosophy,  and  astronomy.
This  chair  he  held  untd  his  death  by  drowning  in
the  shipwreck  of  the  "  Albion  "  off  the  Irish  coast.
He  contributed  papers  on  mathematics  and  physics
to  Silliman's  "  Journal  of  Science."

FISHER,  Alvan,  artist,  b.  in  Needham,  Mass.,
9  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,  16  Feb.,  1863.
He  was  intended  for  a  mercantile  career,  but  began
the  study  of  painting  at  the  age  of  eighteen  with
an  ornamental  painter  named  Pennyraan.  In  1814
he  began  as  a  portrait-painter,  and  soon  afterward
undertook  barn-yard  scenes,  winter  landscapes,  and
cattle-pieces.  In  1825  he  went  to  Paris  to  study.
He  subsequently  returned  to  portrait  -  painting,
which  he  practised  for  many  years  in  Boston.  One
of  his  best  works  is  a  portrait  of  Spurzheim,  paint-
ed after  death,  from  recollection,  in  1832.

FISHER,  Charles,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Fredericton,  New  Brunswick,  in  September,  1808 ;
d.  there,  8  Dec,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  King's
college,  New  Brunswick,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  He  was  elected  to  parliament
in  1837,  and  in  March,  1865,  was  rejected  for  advo-
cating a  union  of  the  British  provinces.  He  was
re-elected  soon  afterward,  was  a  member  of  the
executive  council  in  1848-'51,  and  was  appointed
in  1852  a  commissioner  to  codify  the  provincial
statutes.  He  was  attorney-general  in  1854-'61,  and
in  April,  1866.  He  was  a  delegate,  on  the  question
of  union,  in  1864,  and  again  in  1866,  to  London,
where  its  terras  were  arranged ;  and  in  July,  1865,
was  a  delegate  to  the  Trade  convention  at  Detroit.

FISHER,  Charles  Harris,  physician,  b.  in
Killinglv,  Windham  co.,  Conn.,  30  June,  1822.  He
obtained  a  classical  education  by  his  own  exertions,
and  studied  medicine  under  Alfred  C.  Post,  of
New  York,  in  the  University  medical  college  in
New  York  city,  at  Harvard,  and  the  medical
department  of  Dartmouth  college,  where  he  was


graduated  in  1848.  He  established  himself  at
Scituate.  H.  I.,  giving  special  attention  to  SUrgeSt
and  uterine  diseases, ana.  after  practising  there  for
thirty  years,  removed  to  Providence.  He  wrvod  in
the  state  senate  in  18li!»-'?0  and  1877-'!),  became  a
member  of  the  state  board  of  education  in  I8?ft
and  the  BUM  year  was  appointed  chairman  of  the
Rhode  Island  fish  commission.  He  was  also  presi-
dent of  a  bank  for  many  years,  and  has  been  chair-
man of  various  library  and  benevolent  associat  ions,
and  superintendent  of  public  schools,  (in  the
establishment  of  the  state  board  of  health,  in  1*7*.
he  was  appointed  a  member,  and  became  secretary.
in  1880  ne  was  made  state  registrar  and  commis-
sioner of  public  health  on  the  creation  of  those
offices.  He  prepared  the  annual  reports  of  the  vital
statistics  of  Rhode  Island  from  1878  to  1885,  and
those  of  the  state  board  of  health  since  1879.

FISHER,  Clara,  actress,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1811.  She  first  appeared  in  burlesque
plays  in  London  at  the  age  of  six,  and  thereafter,
for  about  five  years,  acted  in  the  principal  theatres
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  In  1822  sne  returned
to  Drury  Lane  theatre,  London,  performing  the
characters  of  boys  and  soubrettes.  In  1828  MiflB
Fisher  came  to  the  United  States  and  made  her
appearance  at  the  New  York  Park  theatre  in  oper-
ettas, burlesques,  and  extravaganzas,  most  of  her
characters  being  in  extreme  contrasts,  and  requir-
ing rapid  changes  of  costume.  With  the  many  she
was  particularly  successful  in  the  delivery  of  Scot-
tish neroic  song.  Her  "  Hurrah  for  the  Bonnets
of  Blue  "  and  "  All  the  Blue  Bonnets  are  over  the
Border  "  were  great  favorites.  Of  her  ballads, "  The
Dashing  White  Sergeant,"  "Buy  a  Broom,"  "Since
then  I'm  doomed,"  and  "  Home,  Sweet  Home."  be-
came universally  popular.  In  this  manner,  for
several  years,  Miss  Fisher  travelled  throughout
the  Union  with  great  popularity.  Children  were
named  for  her,  and  young  ladies  affected  her  lisp
and  manner.  Eventually,  however,  her  budget  of
songs  was  too  often  rehearsed,  her  half  dozen  plays
were  worn  to  weariness,  and  she  had  nothing  new
to  offer.  In  1834  she  was  married  to  James  C.
Maeder,  an  Irish  musician,  and  then  betook  herself
to  playing  parts  in  the  legitimate  drama  with  only
qualified  success.  At  the  instigation  of  her  hus-
band, she  ventured  to  appear  in  opera,  but  beside
skilled  vocalists  her  voice  showed  great  imperfec-
tion, both  as  to  quality  and  education,  and  sne  was
soon  compelled  to  retire.  Her  last  appearance  on
the  stage  was  in  1851,  in  New  York  city.  It  is
difficult  to  account  for  the  " Clara  Fisher  craze"
of  1830,  for  it  was  founded  on  limited  dramatic
ability  and  moderate  personal  attractions.  Hers
were  only  the  comparatively  small  accomplish-
ments of  ballad  singing,  romping,  and  dancing,  in
plavs  that  were  adapted  to  her  capability.

FISHER,  David,  politician,  born  in  Somerset
county,  Pa.,  3  Dec.,  1794;  d.  near  Mt.  Holly,  Cler-
mont co.,  Pa.,  7  May,  1886.  He  removed  to  Ohio,
where  he  grew  up  a  pioneer  farmer,  and  received
but  a  scanty  education.  He  became  a  lay  preacher
and  a  newspaper  contributor,  and  in  1842  entered
the  Ohio  house  of  representatives.  In  1846  he  was
elected  as  a  Whig  to  the  National  house  of  repre-
sentatives, serving  from  6  Dec.,  1847,  till  3  March,
1849.  He  was  an  anient  protectionist  in  politics,
and  was  noted  as  a  philanthropist.

FISHER,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Char-
lotte.  Me.,  ti  Feb.,  1815;  d.  in' Canton,  N.  V..  II
Feb.,  1879.  He  became  a  Universalist  clergyman,
and  in  1858  was  chosen  to  be  the  first  president  of
the  theological  school  connected  with  St.  Lawrence
university,  at  Canton,  N.  Y. lly  published  "  The


I  M1KH


PISH  EH


480


tian  Salvation:  a  Dine  ussion  with  .1.  II.  Wal-
ili-n  "i  I '...'ton.  1hi!!)i \  ranhy  of  Dr.  Fisher "

wu published  in  Boston  in  1*80.

I  |s|||  i:.  Frances  ('..author,  l».  in  Salisbury,
she  is  the  eldest  daughter  <>f  Col.  char
Fisher,  «i>"  was  killM  at  the  battle  of  Hull  Hun.

first  novel, "Valerie Aylmer" (New York,  !
written  f..r  amusement,  under  tin-  pen-name  "f
"Christian Rcid," proved eminently successful,
afterward  published,  in  serial  form.  in"Ap-
pletons'  Journal," a  novel  entitled  "  Morton  House,"
■  rv  of  southern  life  of  thirty  years  ago  (1H?1).
lit  her  works  are :  "Mabel  LeeM(187l)!  "Ebb
•  Nina'-. Atonement  " (1878): "A
Daughter  of  Bohemia "(1878);  "Carmen's  Inherit-
ance^' (Philadelphia, 1873); -A Gentle Belle"
rk, ls?.S) : "Hearts  ami Hands"  (1875);
Question  of  Honor "  (  1n?.*>)  ;  ••  Land  of  the  Sky  "
\fter  Manv  Davs"  (1H77);  "Honny  Kate"
\ Summer Idvl" (1878): "Hearts ,,f
Steel"  (1882):  "Armine*  (1884);  "Roelyn'i  For-
rone"  (1885);  and  "  Miss  Churchill "  (188*:

FISHKH.  tienrge  Jackson,  physician,  l>. in
North  Castle.  Westchester  co.,  N.  ^  .,  27  Nov.,  1H2.*».
Hi- was  descended from  an  old Hutch family  of
Westchester  county,  N.  V..  and  studied  medicine
with  Dr.  Nelson  Nivison,  and  in  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  New  York,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1S4'.». He  lx>gan  practice  in  Mecklen-
burg. N.  Y.,  and  removed  to  Sing  Sing  in  1851,
where  In-  was  physician  and  surgeon  to  the  stale
prison  in  1858-4. He  was  l\  S.  examining  surgeon
for  twenty  years,  and  in  1874  was  president  of  the
York  state  medical  society, lie  is  the  author
of  ••  Biographical  Sketches  of  Deceased  Physicians
of  Westchest.-r  County"  (New  York.  1861*);  "<>n
Animal  Substances  Employed  as  Medicines  by  the
indents"  ( 1  H»i2 ) ;  "  Dinlotcratology,  an  Essay  on
Compound Human Monsters," printed in*  the
'Transactions"  of  the  New  York  state  medical
iety  (1865-'8);  "On  the  Influence  of  Maternal
lental  Emotion  in  the  Production  of  Monsters"
•Teratology'-  (1M7.">):  -A  Brief  History  of
Discovery  of  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood"
1877);  "Sketches  of  some  of  the  Old  Masters  of  |
Anatomy,  Surgery,  and  Medicine"  (1880-'3);  and
"History  of  Surgery,"  in  the  "International  En-
raedia  of  Surgery  "  (1886).
FISHKH. Henrge Park, theologian, b. in
Wrentham,  Mass.,  10  Aug..  1*"27. He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1847, and  studied  theology  in  the
irrinity-school  of  Yale,  and in that at Andover,
Mass. In  1H.V.2  he  visited  Germany,  where  he  con-
tinued his  theological  studies. On  his  return  from
Europe  he  was  appointed  professor  of  divinity  in
Yale,  and  ordaineu  pastor  of  the  college  church,
He  filled  this  office  till  1801,  when

•selected  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in
Yale  divinity-school.  Harvard  gave  him  the  de-
cree of  I>.  D.  in  1886.  II.  has  been  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  tl New  Englander,"  and  became  one

ts  editors  in  1  h<M{.  He  has  also  published  mi-
nis articles  in  reviews  in  this  country  and
I  Britain.  In  1865  he  issued  |  volume  en-
titled M  Essays  on  the  Supernatural  Origin  of
stianity,  with  special  reference  to  the  Theo-

f  Henan,  Strauss,  and  the  Tubingen School"

rged  e<l..  1*71). He  pubUahed  a  "life  of

imin  Silliinan"  in  lHiWi;  ••  The  History  of  the
rch  in  Yale  College";  and  "  Discourses  on  the

W.  Taylor  and  .!.  W.  liibbs." II,
■•nil,  in  1871,  a  course  of  lectures  at  the  Howell

lute,  Boston,  on  the  Reformation,  and  from
resulted  ■  volume  on  the  "History  of  the

ination"  (ls7:{). In  1*77  he  delivered  twi

TOL.  II. 80


|]  isetum  on  the  "His.-  of  Christinnitv.  and
Historical  Environment." His  later  works  are
••The  Beginnings  of  Christianity,  with  a  View  of
the State  of the Konian W'-.rld at the Birth of
Christ  "  | :  ,ith  and  Rationalism"  (lh

"DtonsSMM  in  Bsjtory  and  Tins i|i iyV  "  <|hmO);
"The  Christian  Religion"  (1882);  "The  Grounds
Of  Theisticand  Christian  Belief  "(1888);  and  "Out-
lines .if  Cniviisjil  Historv  "  ib-

FISH  Fit.  John  Charlton.  <  anadian  journalist,
l>.  prolmhly  in  England;  d.  at  sea  in  September,
184*.  After  founding  and  editing  the  New  York
"  Alliion."  he  went  to  Canada  in  USl  to  take  charge
of  the  "Official  (ia/ette,"  published  at  Quebec.  In
1881  he  was  re<|uestod  to  cease  pulilishing  his  jm >1  it i-
cal  articles,  its  they  did  not  accord  with  the  \
of  the  party  then  hi  pesjSSff  in  8ml  Britain,  and
thereafter  t)u-  "tiazette"  was  reduced  to  a  mere
ollicial sheet. He edited the "QuSbM Mcrcurv  "

for  a  few  years,  and  in  1K41  began  the  -Conserva-
tive," a  weekly  paper.  Hi  was  at  one  time  presi-
dent of  the  Qpebae  literarv  and  historical  SOcfetj.

FISH  Fit.  John  Ms,  physician,  b.  in  17!«»:  d.
'.\  March.  1H."><).  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1820.  studied  medicine,  and  received  his  degree
from  Harvard  in  IMS,  He  aided  in  organizing  the
Perkins  institution  for  the  Mind  in  Boston.  Mass.,
having  first  visited  BorojM  to  inform  himself  of
the  methods  of  instructing  the  blind  that  were
practised  there.  He  participated  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  institution,  and  was  also  visiting  phy-
sician to  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital.  He
was  the  author  of  a  "Description  of  the  Distinct,
Confluent,  and  Inoculated  Small-pox,  Varioloid
I  >isease.  (  tow-pox,  and  ( 'hicken-pox (Boston,  1W4).

FISHER,  Jonathan,  clergyman.  I>.  in  New
Braintree.  Mass.,  7  Oct..  1768;  d*.  in  Blue  Hill.  Me..
22  Sept.,  1847.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Hevolutionary
officer  who  died  in  the  service,  was  educated  by
his  uncle,  Joseph  Avery,  the  minister  of  Holden,
Mass.,  and  developed  a  remarkable  aptitude  for
handicraft  work.  He  began  late  to  prepare  for
college,  and  was  graduated  with  honor  at  Harvard
in  17!>2.  He  then  studied  theology  at  Cambridge,
acquiring  unusual  familiarity  with  the  Hebrew
language,  and  was  installed  as  the  Congregational
minister  at  Blue  Hill  in  1796.  While  in  college
he  devised  a  phonetic  alphabet  and  system  of
Stenography,  which  be  used!  in  writing  his  sermons.
He  pursued  for  years  the  compilation  of  a  Hebrew
lexicon  OH  the  plan  developed  at  the  same  time  by
other  philologists,  whose  publications  caused  him
to  abandon  the  project  of  publishing  his  work,

He  painted  portraits,  and  engraved  00  wood  the
illustrationstoa  work  that  he  published  OB  "Script-
ure Animals."  He  also  published  a  volume  of
"  Miscellaneous  Poem-,"  chiefly  on  biblical  sul,j,

FISHER,  Joshua,  physician,  b.  in  Dcdham.
Mass..  17  May,  174*;  d.  in  Beverly.  Mass.,  15
March,  IXW.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
l?tW>.  studied  medicine. and  began  practice.  When
hostilities  with  Oreat  Britain  began  in  1775  he
volunteered  as  surgeon  OB  a  privateer,  and  was
captured,  but  escaped  to  France,  again  entering
the  service.  After  the  war  he  settled  in  practice
at  Beverly,  Mass..  and  attained  a  high  reputation
in  his  profession.  He  was  an  ardent  student  of
nature,  and  at  his  death  bequsathsd  $20.tX)0  to
found  at  Harvard  a  professorship  of  natural  his-
tory, comprehending  the  three  kingdoms— animal,
table,  and  mineral — or  a  part  of  them. He  was

r resident of the Massachusetts medical
Ie  published  aMDiseoursi  on  Narcotics''  <180oS.
A Brief  Memoir  of  Joshua  Fisher,  M.  D.,
by  I)r.  Walter  ('banning.


466


FISH  Kit


FISHER


FISHES,  Joshua  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  Feb.,  1,807;  d.  then,  81  Jan.,  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1N25,  studied  law,
an<l  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1829,
but  never  practised.  Mr.  Fisher  was  one  of  the
incorporators  of  tin-  Pennsylvania  institution  for
the  instruction  of  the  blind,  the  second  of  its  kind
in  America.  He  remained  one  of  its  trustees  until
his  death,  was  president  for  one  year,  and  rendered
important  services  to  the  institution  by  his  exami-
nation  of  the  systems  of  instruction  in  Bozopc
during  three  foreign  tours,  and  the  reports  of  his
conclusions.  Early  in  life  he  became  interested  in
historical  studies,  particularly  those  relating  to
America  and  to  Pennsylvania,  and  was  one  of  the
earliest  and  most  industrious  members  of  the  His-
torical society  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1829,  when
only  twenty-two  years  old,  he  delivered  before  the
society  "  An  Account  of  the  Karly  Poets  and  Poetry
of  Pennsylvania,"  which  was  published  in  the
"Memoirs"  of  the  society.  His  contributions  to
the  society  were  numerous  and  valuable.  The  most
important  was  his  address  on  the  "  Private  Life
and  Domestic  Habits  of  William  Penn"  (1886).
Mr.  Fisher  was  one  of  the  earliest  advocates  of
minority  representation,  and,  with  perhaps  one  ex-
ception, the  first  American  writer  on  that  subject.
He  published  "  The  Degradation  of  our  Represent-
ative System  and  its  Reform,"  proposing  a  plan
of  reform  different  from  those  of  all  other  writers,
which  attracted  much  attention  among  students  of
the  subject  in  this  countrv  and  in  Europe  (1863) ;
"Reform  of  Municipal  Elections"  (1866);  and
"  Nomination  of  Candidates"  (1868).

FISHER,  Michael  Montgomery,  educator,  b.
near  Rockville,  Ind.,  8  Oct.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Hanover  college,  Ind.,  in  1855,  and  was
chosen  professor  of  Latin  at  Westminster  college,
Fulton,  Mo.  In  1860  he  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  Fulton,  at  the  same
time  retaining  his  professorship.  In  1870  he
founded  Independence  female  college.  He  was
also  the  founder  of  Bellewood  female  college,  near
Louisville,  Ky.  In  1874  he  returned  to  Westminster
college,  and  in  1877  became  professor  of  Latin  in
the  University  of  Missouri.  He  has  published
"  The  Three  Pronunciations  of  Latin  "  (St.  Louis,
1878;  3d  ed.,  New  York,  1884),  and  is  also  the
author  of  an  historical  work  on  "  Education,"  and  is
now  (1887)  engaged  on  a  series  of  Latin  text-books.

FISHER,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  8  July,  1742 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  20  Dec.,
1812.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer  of  Dedham,
and  was  an  uncle  of  Fisher  Ames.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1763,  and  employed  as  a  mis-
sionary teacher  in  Nova  Scotia  about  the  begin-
ning of  the  Revolutionary  war.  In  1777  he  was
ordained  by  Dr.  Robert  Lowth,  the  bishop  of  Lon-
don, and  had  charge  of  the  churches  at  Annapolis
and  Granville,  Nova  Scotia,  from  1778  till  1782,
when  he  returned  to  Massachusetts.  He  was  im-
mediately invited  to  the  rectorship  of  St.  Peter's
church  in  Salem,  and  installed  there  after  taking
the  oath  of  allegiance. He  was  prominent  in  or-

fanizing  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  New
Ingland.  A  volume  of  his  sermons  was  published
after  his  death,  edited  by  his  friend  and  parishioner,
Judge  Joseph  Story  (1818).

FISHER,  Philip,  clergyman,  b.  in  Madrid,
Spain,  at  the  close  of  the  16th  century :  d.  in  Mary-
land in  1652.  Although  he  was  known  on  the
records  of  the  Jesuit  society  and  in  Maryland  as
Philip  Fisher,  his  real  name  appears  to  have  been
Thomas  Copley.  He  was  descended  from  an  old
English  Roman  Catholic  family. When  Lord  Balti-


more applied  to  the  provincial  of  the  Jesuits  in
Kngland  for  missionaries,  on  Ix'half  of  the  Roman
CatnoHo  settlers,  father  Hiker  furnished  the  means
by  which  the  first  missionaries  were  sent  out  and
maintained.  He  came  to  Maryland,  8  Aug..  Hi:;?,
accompanied  by  Father  Thomas  Knollea.  lle.was
appointed  superior  of  the  mission,  and  obtained
for  it  several  thousand  acres  of  land  under  Lota
Baltimore's  conditions  of  plantation.  These  lands
were  cleared  and  put  under  cultivation  by  h>s  di-
rection, and  for  two  centuries  met  the  cost  of
maintaining  worship  in  these  parts  of  Maryland.
In  1639  his  term  as  superior  expired,  and  he  was
stationed  at  the  chapel  of  St.  Mary's,  the  capital  of
the  colony,  but  resumed  his  office  in  1642.  During
the  rebellion  of  Clavborne  he  fell  into  the  hands
of  Ingle,  Clayborne'8  lieutenant,  who  treated  him
as  a  criminal,  and  put  him  in  irons.  After  being
confined  for  some  time,  he  was  sent  to  Kngland,
where  he  was  indicted  under  a  statute  which  made
it  death  for  a  priest  ordained  abroad  to  come  into
Kngland.  He  pleaded  that  he  had  not  come  of
his  own  will,  and  the  judges  directed  an  acquittal.
He  was,  however,  kept  in  prison  for  some  time.
and  on  his  release  was  sentenced  to  perpetual  ban-
ishment. On  the  suppression  of  Clayborne's  rebel-
lion he  returned  to  America,  landed  on  the  coast  of
Virginia  in  January,  1648,  and  made  his  way  with
difficulty  to  St  Mary's.  The  rest  of  his  life  was
spent  among  his  Indian  converts.

FISHER,  Redwood  S.,  statistician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1782;  d.  there,  17  May,  la^i.  He
was  a  merchant  of  Philadelphia,  but  removed  to
New  York  city,  edited  a  daily  newspaper,  and  took
an  active  part  in  public  affairs.  He  published
several  volumes  on  political  economy  and  statisti-
cal subjects,  one  of  which  is  "  The  Progress  of  the
United  States  of  America  from  the  Earliest  Pe-
riods, Geographical,  Statistical,  and  Historical "
(New  York,  1854).  He  also  edited  a  "  Gazetteer  of
the  United  States"  (New  York).

FISHER,  Samuel  Reed,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
ristown,  Pa.,  2  June,  1810;  d.  in  Tiffin,  Ohio,  5
June,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college
in  1834,  licensed  to  preach  in  1836  by  the  synod
of  the  Reformed  church,  and  in  1840,  after  preach-
ing four  years  at  Kmraettsburg,  Md.,  became  con-
nected with  the  publication  office  of  the  Reformed
church,  which  had  just  been  established  at  Cham-
bersburg,  Pa.  During  the  same  year  he  became
associated  with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Schneck  in  the  editor-
ship of  the  "Reformed  Church  Messenger,"  and
was  chosen  stated  clerk  of  the  church.  From  1845
he  had  the  special  management  of  the  publication
interests  of  the  church,  was  most  of  the  time  sole
editor  of  the  "  Messenger,"  and  held  the  office  of
stated  clerk  until  his  death.  Besides  several  ser-
mons preached  on  special  occasions,  Dr.  Fiahef
prepared  and  published  the  following  works :  "  Kx-
ercises  on  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  "  (ChambeW
burg,  Pa.,  1844);  "Heidelberg  Catechism  Simpli-
fied" (1850);  "The  Rum-Plague,"  a  temperance
story,  translated  from  the  German  of  Zschokhe
(New  York.  1853);  and  "The  Family  Assistant*
(1855).  His  death  occurred  while  he  was  in  at-
tendance at  the  general  synod  of  the  church.

FISHER,  Samuel  Ware,  educator,  b,  in  Mor-
ristown,  N.  J.,  5  April,  1814;  d.  at  College  Hill.
near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  18  Jan.,  1874.  His  father
was  a  Presbyterian  pastor  at  Morristown.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1835,  and  he  entered
Princeton  theological  seminary,  but  after  two
years  went  to  the  Union  theological  seminar
York  city,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1839.  I
leaving  the  seminary  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate


FISIIEH


KISK


un


be  Presbyterian  ohuroh  in  Weal  Bloomfield.

i Montclalr, N.  .1. llf  was pastor  there for
ami  a  half  years,  and  then  for  four  yean  in
Albany,  where  he  achieved  a  high,  reputation  as  a
itor. From  Albany  be  was  called  hi

Incinnati,  an  a  successor  to  Bar.  Dr.  Lyman
Becchcr.  'Phis  pastorate  he  always  considered  the
m« '-t  effective  work  <>f  hi-  ministry,  hul  resigned
in  |v>  ti.  acctjit the  prc-idcucy  ..f Hamilton  c<»|-

.  Clinton,  N.  V.  fieri?  hi-  scholarship,  his  elo-
quence, ami  his  executive  ability  effected  a  more
liberal  endowment  ami  increased  efficiency. In

•  inUr.  lsilT.  finding  his  pulpit  work  mop-  00O-
gcuial.  Dr.  Fisher  resigned  and  accepted  a  call  from

Westminster  Presbyterian  ohurob  in  (Jtioa, hut

m  May,  1870,  he  was  stricken  with  paralysis. From

tin-  first  attack  he  recovered,  but  did  noJ  regain  the

full  use  of  his  speech,  and  therefore  resigned  his

torate  in  1871,  and  was  able  to  partially  resume

luties,  but  a  second  attack  compelled  hi-  rat-

iiion  of  all  active  duties,  and  he  removed  to
Cincinnati.  He  was  the  author  of  "Three  (irei(t
Temptations  of  Young  Men,  with  several  Lectures
addressed  to  Business  and  Professional  Men  "(Cin-
cinnati, 1852).  Only  a  few  of  his  sermons,  orations,
and  addresses  were  published.  A  volume  of  "Oc-
casional Sermons  and  Addresses  "  appeared  in  New
York  in  18(50,  and  a  course  of  sermons  on  the  "  Life
of  Christ  "  at  Utica  after  his  death. — His  nephew,
B  niiel  Sparks,  lawyer,  b.  in  St.  Joseph  county,
Mich..  11  April,  1882;  drowned  in  the  Susquehan-
na river,  in  Luzerne  county.  Pa,,  14  Aug.,  1874,
studied  law  in  Philadelphia,  went  to  Cincinnati  iti
1854,  and  was  for  many  years  engaged  there  in  the
managing  of  patent  cases.  Ho  was  colonel  of  the
Ohio  national  guard,  and  during  the  last  four
months  of  the  civil  war,  was  in  active  service  as
acting  brigadier-general  on  the  eastern  shore  of
Virginia.  In  ls<>!the  was  appointed  by  President
Grant  commissioner  of  the  patent-office,  but  re-
signed early  in  1871,  to  devote  his  attention  to  pri-
husiness.  II.  was  following  up  the  Susque-
hanna on  a  pleasure  journey  with  bis  son  wnen
both  were  drowned.  Ho  published  six  volumes  of
*  Reports  <>f  Cases  Arising  under  Letters- Patent
for  Inventions  in  the  Circuit  Courts  of  the  United
"  (Cincinnati,  18<J8-'74).
FISHER,  Theodore  Willis,  physician,  b.  in
Westboro,  Mass.,  29  May.  is:}?.  lie  was  gradu-
ated in  medicine  at  Harvard  in  1861,  was  in  that
year  resident  physician  of  the  city  institutions  in
Boston  harbor,  a  surgeon  in  the  volunteer  army  in
1862- '8,  and  from  1WM  to  1870  assistant  superin-
tendent of  the  Boston  lunatic  hospital.  He  then
established  himself  in  practice  in  Boston,  making

ecialty  of  mental  diseases,  and  became  exam-
ining physician  for  the  Ix.ard  of  directors  for  pub-
lic institutions, and  a  frequent  exj>ert  in  the  courts
In  cases  of  insanity.  In  1881  he  became  superin-
tendent of  the  Boston  lunatic  hospital.  Since  1884
he  has  been  clinical  instructor  In  mental  diseases
in  Harvard.  He  prepared  a  report  to  the  state
board  of  health  on  the  '•  Ventilation  of  Steam  Cars  "
in  1*?.",.  contributed  "  Reports  on  Progress  in  Men-
tal Diseases"  to  the  Boston  "  Medical  and  Surgical
Journal "  annually  from  lH?:t  to  is??.  I>esides  an
article  on  "Aphasia,  or  the  Physiology  of  Speech,"
and  other  pajn-rs  published  in  journals  devoted  t<>

[lecialty.  He  also  published  a  popular  treatise
called  ••  Plain  Talks  about  Insanity"  (IN7*2).

I  ISHER,  Thomas,  author,  h.  in  Philadelphia,

.'1  Jan.,  1801  :  d.  there.  12  Feb.,  1856. He  en-

1  upon  commercial  pursuits,  and  at  the  same
time  was  an  active  member  of  the  Academv  of
natural  sciences. He  published  "  Dial  of  the  Sea-


'  (Philadelphia,  IMQj  -Song  tj  the  Sea-
Shells,"  and  other  poems  (1*50);  and  "Mathe-
matics Simplified  ami  mad.-  Attractive  "  (1858).

I  ISHER,  William  Hark,  painter,  b.  In  Bos-
ton. Ma—..  I")  Dee.,  1K4I.  He  i-  of  Iri-h  |wn-ntage.
He  first  studied  at  the  Lowell  Institute,  Boston,
then  with  George  Innes.  and  in  1 804  at  Paris  in  the
Life  school  and  with  Qleyre.  After  painting  for
some  years  in  Bo-ton.  Ma.—.,  Mr.  Fisher  went  to
London,  where  h.<  ha-  exhibited  in  the  Royal  ft
emy.  He  ha-  painted  land*ca|>es  from  studies  in
the  neighborhood  of  Pari-,  al-o  genre  paintings
and  cattle-pieces,  including  "Noon"  (1879);  "<>u
the  Cam"  [1876);  and  "The  Meadow

FISK,  Clinton  Bowcn.  lawver,  b.  in  York.
Livingston  <<>.,  N.  Y..  s  I >,-.•.,  ih28.  His  pai
removeil  to  Michigan  in  hi-  infancy.  After  |  suc-
cessful career  as  merchant,  miller,  mid  banker
in  Michigan,  he  removed  to  St.  Ijouis  in  ]
Karly  in  the  war  he  liceame  colonel  of  the  '■'-'•<[
Missouri  regiment  in  the  National  army,  was  pro-
moted to  M  brigadier-general  in  1NJ2,  and  (.rev-
etted major-general  of  volunteer-  in  1MB,  After
the  war  he  was  assistant  comini-sioner  umler  (Jen.
0.  0.  Howard  in  the  management  of  the  Freed  man's
bureau  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee.  He  afterward
removed  to  New  Jer-cy.  (i.n.  Fi-k  actively  sided
in  estal.li-hing  Fisk  univer-ity.  Nashville.  Term.,  in
1865,  and  it  was  named  for  him.  He  ha-  ban  iden-
tified with  its  financial  and  educational  interests,
and  is  president  of  its  board  0J  trustees.  He  is
also  a  trustee  of  Dickinson  college,  of  Drew  theo-
logical seminarv,  and  also  of  Albion  college,  Mich.
He  is  trustee  of  the  American  missionary  associa-
tion, and  also  a  member  of  the  book  committee  of
the  M.  E.  church.  He  has  rendered  conspicuous
service  to  Methodism  in  his  efforts  toward  a  re-
union of  the  northern  and  southern  blanches,  of
the  church.  He  has  also  been  identified  with  the
temperance  movement,  and  was  the  Prohibition
candidate  for  the  governorship  of  New  Jersey  in
1886.  Since  1874  he  has  been  president  of  "the
board  of  Indian  commissioners.

FISh,  Ezra,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shelburne,  Mass.,
10  Jan.,  1785;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa., 5  Dec,  1KW.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  lK<Kt,  studied
theology,  and  wee  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Pres-
byterian church  on  19  April,  1818.  He  was  then
ordained  as  an  evangelist,  and  entered  on  mission
work  in  Georgia  and  Philadelphia.  He  became
in  1813  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Uo-
shen,  N.  V.,  where  he  remained  twenty  years.  In
May,  18*3,  Dr.  Fisk  was  elected  to  the  professor-
ship of  ecclesiastical  history  and  church  govern-
ment in  the  Western  theological  seminary,  and
was  on  his  way  to  enter  on  the  duties  of  the  office
when  he  died.  He  published  an  oration,  delivered
at  Williams  college  in  1825  ;  a  lecture  on  the  "  In-
ability of  Sinners"  (Philadelphia.  1882),  etc

FISK,  James,  jurist,  b.  aboot  1 7(12  :  <1.  in  Swan-
ton,  Vt.,  1  Dec.,  1H44.  He  was  self-educated,
studied  law,  and  rose  to  eminence  in  the  profes-
sion. He  was  a  member  of  the  lower  house  of
congress  from  1805  till  1809,  and  served  from  1811
till  1815.  He  was  appointed  by  President  Madison
judge  of  the  territory  of  Indiana  in  1812,  but
declined  the  office  after  confirmation  in  1815-'16.
lb-  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court  of
Vermont,  and  in  1817  was  chosen  l\  S.  senator,
but  resigned  after  one  year's  service,  and  subse-
quently was  collector  of  customs  for  eight  years  in
the  district  of  Vermont. — His  son.  Wilbur,  edu-
cator. l>.  in  Bratt labors,  Vt.,  :tl  Aug.,  1?S>2;  d.  in
Middletown.  Conn..  U  Fei...  1880,  tsj  graduated  at
Brown  in  1815,  and  studied  law,  but,  after  a  long


4(58


FISK


PISKE


and  NriOQI  illness,  abandoned  1 1 1 •  -  profession  and
entered  t In-  itinerant  ministry  in  ISIS,  when  he  was
licensed  as  a  local  preacher  in  the  Methodist  Kois-
copal  church.  He  took  high  rank  as  a  pulpit
orator,  was  pastor  for  two  years  in  Craflslmry,  \  t.,
and  in  1819  removed  to  Charlestown,  Ma-
the  conference  of  1810  he  was  admitted  into  full
membership,  ordained  as  a  deacon  in  1888,  and
from  I*-,':*  till  1887  was  presiding  el<ler  of  the  Ver-
mont district,  which  then  comprised  the  whole  of
Vermont  east  of  the  Green  mountains.  He  was
placed  upon  the  superannuated  list,  but  was  re-
quested, in  so  far  as  health  would  allow,  to  act
as  agent  for  Newmarket  academy,  at  that  time
the  only  Methodist  institution  in  New  England.
While  here,  he  was  chosen  to  make  the  address  of
welcome  to  Lafayette  in  1824.  He  was  also  a
delegate  to  the  general  conference  in  that  year,
and  was  chosen  to  write  the  address  to  the  British
conference.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  Vermont  legis-
lature in  1826,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  and
Srincipal  of  the  Wesleyan  academy  in  Wilbraham,
lass.,  1826-'31,  and  a  delegate  to  the  general  con-
ference of  1828,  when  he  was  elected  bishop  of  the
Canada  conference,  but  declined.  In  1829  he  also
refused  the  presidency  of  La  Grange  college.
Alabama,  and  a  professorship  in  the  University  of
Alabama.  In  1830  he  was  chosen  first  president
of  the  Wesleyan  university,  in  whose  organization
he  had  materially  aided.  The  duties  of  that  office
were  entered  upon  in  1831 ;  the  institution  under
his  direction  became  the  most  influential  of  any
in  the  Methodist  denomination  in  America.  At
the  general  conference  of  1832  his  appeals  in  be-
half of  Indian  missions  resulted  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Oregon  mission,  and  he  was  at  this
time  instrumental  in  founding  Williamstown  acad-
emy. For  years  he  was  useful  to  educational  inter-
ests at  large  by  recommending  or  furnishing  pro-
fessors and  presidents  to  the  rapidly  multiplying
colleges  of  the  far  west.  In  search  of  health,  he
passed  the  winter  of  1835-'6  in  Italy,  and  the  sum-
mer of  1836  in  England,  when  he  also  represented
the  M.  E.  church  of  the  Wesleyan  conference  as  a
delegate.  He  was  elected  bishop  of  that  church
in  1836,  but  declined.  In  1839  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  education  of  Connecticut.  He
was  said  to  be  unsurpassed  in  eloquence  and  fervor
as  a  preacher,  and  was  often  compared  to  Fen6-
lon,  being  endowed  with  like  moral  and  mental
traits.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Augusta  college,  Kentucky,  in  1829,  and  by
Brown  in  1835.  His  published  works  are :  "  In-
augural Address  "  (New  York,  1831) ;  "  Calvinistic
Controversy  "  (1837) ;  "  Travels  in  Europe  "  (1838) ;
"Sermons  and  Lectures  on  Universalism :  Reply
to  Pierpont  on  the  Atonement,  and  other  Theo-
logical and  Educational  Works  and  Sermons."  His
account  of  his  European  travels  had  a  wide  cir-
culation and  was  greatly  admired.  His  "  Life  and
Writings"  were  published  by  the  Rev.  Joseph
Holdich,  D.  I).  (New  York,  1842).

FISK,  Pliny,  missionarv,  b.  in  Shelburne,
Mass.,  24  June,  1792;  d.  in  Beirut,  Syria,  23  Oct.,
1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in
1814,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1818.
He  was  appointed,  with  Levi  Parsons,  by  the
American  board,  to  the  Palestine  mission  in  1818,
and  sailed  from  Boston  for  Smyrna,  3  Nov.,  1819.
After  travelling  extensively  in  Greece.  Egypt.  Pales-
tine,  and  Syria,  he  joined,  in  May,  1825,  the  mission
already  established  at  Beirflt,  and  died  there  of  fe-
ver in  the  following  October.  Mr.  Fisk  was  emi-
nently fitted  to  be  a  missionary  in  the  east,  as  he
preacned  in  Italian,  French,  Greek,  and  Arabic.  On


the  day  of  his  death  beoompleted  an  "English  and
Arabic  Dictionary,"  and  wrote  numerous  papers
for  the  "  Missionary  Herald."  A  life  of  Pliny  Fisk
was  published  by  Alrin  Bond  (Boston,  1S2S)! — His
niece,  Fidelia,  missionary.  l>.  in  Shelburne.  Mass.,
1  May,  1816;  d.  there,  9  Aug.,  1864,  was  graduated
at  .Mount  Holvoke  seminary  in  ls:{<).  and  subse-
quently taught  there.  In  1843  she  resigned  her
post  and  went  to  Persia  as  a  missionary  among  the
Ncstorians,  where  she  labored  fifteen  years,  much
of  the  time  as  teacher  in  a  female  seminary.  She
was  the  first  principal  of  the  seminary  at  <  hroomiafc
In  1858  she  returned  to  the  United  States  with
broken  health.  She  published  "  Memorial  of
Mount  Holyoke  Seminary  "  and  "  Woman  and  her
Saviour  in  Persia,"  and  at  the  time  of  her  death
was  engaged  in  writing  "Recollections  of  Mary
Lyon"  (Boston,  1866).  See  a  memoir  of  Miss
Fisk,  by  the  Rev.  Daniel  T.  Fiske,  D.  D.,  entitled
" Faith  working  bv  Love"  (1868).

FISK,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Shelburne,  Mass.,
23  July,  1828;  d.  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  22  May,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1848,  was
in  Andover  theological  seminary  from  1850  till
1852,  was  tutor  at  Amherst  from  1852  till  1855,
then  travelled  a  year  in  Europe  and  the  east,  and
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Madi-
son, Conn.,  in  1857.  He  entered  the  National  army
as  a  private  in  the  14th  Connecticut  regiment  in
1862,  became  captain,  was  for  some  time  a  prisoner
in  Richmond,  distinguished  himself  in  several  bat-
tles, and  fell  at  the  head  of  his  company  on  the
second  day  of  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness.  6  May,
dying  in  the  hospital.  His  letters  from  Europe
and  the  east,  first  published  in  the  Springfield
"  Republican "  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Dunn
Browne,"  appeared  in  a  volume  in  1857.  His  "  Ex-
periences in  the  Army,"  under  the  same  assumed
name,  were  published  in  1866.

FISKE,  Daniel  Willard,  scholar,  b.  in  Ellis-
burg,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  Nov.,  1831.  When
very  young  he  disclosed  an  uncommon  aptitude  for
the  acquisition  of  languages,  and  a  precocious  in-
terest in  both  literature  and  politics.  He  pursued
his  school  education  at  Cazenovia  seminary  and  at
Hamilton  college,  but  left  that  institution  in  his
sophomore  year  to  go  abroad  and  study  the  Scan-
dinavian languages.  At  Copenhagen  he  enjoyed
the  friendship  of  Prof.  Rain,  the  distinguished
Danish  archaeologist.  With  little  aid  except  BOM
occasional  correspondence  with  the  New  York
"  Tribune,"  he  sustained  himself  during  1849-'52,
passing  two  years  in  the  University  of  Upsala,  giv-
ing lessons  in  English  and  lecturing  on  American
literature,  and  speaking  Swedish  so  well  that  he
commonly  passed  with  the  students  for  a  Swede.
In  1852  he  returned  to  New  York  and  took  a  place
in  the  Astor  library,  where  he  remained  as  assist*
ant  until  1859,  still  pursuing  his  studies  in  lan-
guages, and  in  making  a  collection  of  Icelandic
books,  which  soon  became  the  most  considerable  in
this  country.  So  enthusiastically  had  he  directed
his  attention  to  that  enlightened  island  that  it  was
said  that  few  natives  were  more  familiar  with  its

feography,  history,  politics,  and  literature  than  he.
i)  l859-'60  he  was  general  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can geographical  society.  In  1861-'2  he  was  ;c_rain
abroad,  and  attached  to  the  American  legation  at
Vienna  under  Minister  John  Lothrop  Motley.  \l<-
turning,  he  was  editor  of  the  dailv  ••Journal"  of
Syracuse,  N.  Y..  in  lS(i4-'6,  and  through  1st;?  bad
charge  of  the  Hartford.  Conn..  "Courant,"  troll
which  he  was  called  in  ISfiS.  after  another
sive  tour  abroad,  which  embraced  Egypt  at
est  inc.  to  the  professorship  of  Jhe  north  European


FISKE


FISKK


40$


languages,  and  the  place  of  chief  librarian,  at  0*>
university. To  his unremitting labors  f«>r
years  in  the  class-room,  as  librarian,  and  bj  di-
r  of  the  University  press,  no  inoonsiderabk
Hm  of t)ii« success  of tile institution  is  due.
ing  this  time  he  t« « >k  |  imp  interest  in  tl:
lorm  of  the  civil  service,  ami  was  a  most i ti tl in-t i-
writer  and  lecturer  in  its  behalf. In 18791m
was  again  abroad  for  live  months,  and  visited
bad. lie  had  la-en  a  principal  promoter  in  this
country  "f  the  contribution  of  a  library  on  Mm
in  of  the  National  millennium,  and  upon
irrivid  he  was  the  guest  of  the  nation  and  ac-
ini honors  seldom  if  ever  given  U-fon-  by  OM
nation  to  a  private  eiti/.eii  of  another. Mis  health
failing  from  his  severe  application  to  college  duties
he  went  abroad  again in 1880. In  that year,  in
Berlin,  he  married  Miss  Jennie  McGraw,  of  Itha-
who  died  in  September,  1881. In  1HN1
he  resigned  his  offices  at  Cornell  and took  up  his
permanent  residence  in  Florence,  Italy. Although
iiw  chief  work  has  been  that  of  a  scholar  and  bih-
liopole,  he  has  been  a  voluminous  contributor  to
various  Swedish.  Icelandic,  and  Qerman  journals,
and  to  the  American  press. He  was  one  of  the
famous  chess  tournament  of  1  Ho 7,  and,  in  conjunc-
tion  with Paul Morphy,  edited  the  "American
Chess Monthly"  in l857-'60,  and  compiled the
"Hook  of the  American  Chess  Congress"  (New
York. 1S59). Ho has  edited various  university
publications, such as  the  "  Ten  -  Year Book  of
Cornell,"  the  "Register,"  etc.,  and  many  biblio-

?ra|ihical  publications,  such  as  the  "  I'niversity
library  Bulletin,"  the  ••  Bibliographic  Psiupsilom-
ca,"  etc.  He  was  one  of  the  chief  promoters  of  the
chapter-lions,,  system  in  the  Greek  letters  societies.
He  is  now  engaged  in  completing  his  two  private
book  collections,  one  relating  to  Petrarch,  the  other
t"  Icelandic  history  and  literature — the  most  con-
siderable collections  in  existence  relating  to  those
subjects  —  and  is  printing  privately  a  series  of
"Bibliographical  Notices"  illustrating  his  collec-
tions. Prof.  Fiske  has  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Hamilton  and  that  <>f  I'll.  I),  from  Cornell.

M*-KE,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
10  April,  1744 ;  d.  there,  28  Sept.,  1797. He  was  a
son  of  the  Rev.  Samuel  Fiske,  of  the  first  church,
Salem. In  1775  he  was  a  master  mariner,  and  be-
came captain  of  the  "Tyrannicide,"  the  first  war-
Teasel  commissioned  by  the  state  of  Massachusetts,
8  July,  1770. He  made  many  successful  cruises  in
her,  and  was  engaged  in  several  sanguinary  eom-
On  10  Dec,  1777,  he  took  command  of  the
ship  ••  Massachusetts,"  a  larger  and  a  better
vessel. After  the  war  he  engaged  in  commerce,
and  became  wealthy. He  was  commissioned  major-
il  of  militia  in  1702.
FISKE,  John,  author,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
30  March.  1843. He  is  the  only  child  of  Fdmund
Brewster  Green,  of  Smyrna.  DeL,  and  Mary  Fiske
Bound,  of Middletown,  Conn. The father  was
r  of  news|japers  in  Hartford,  New  York,  and
una,  where lie  died in 1S.V2.  and  his  widow
led Kdwin  \V.  Stoughton,  of New  York,  in
>. The  son's  name  was  originally Edmund
e  Green  ;  in  I860  he  took  the  name  of  his  ma-
it-grandfather.  .lohn  Fiske. He  lived  at
Middletown during childhood  and until he  en-
tered Harvard,  where he  was  graduated  in 1HI"{.
was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in
ing  In-en  already  admitted  to  the  Suffolk
bar  in 1864,  but h  practised law. Hi-

career  as  author  began  in 1861.  with  an  article  on
Ruckle's  Fallacies."  published  m  the  "No
d  (Quarter;  ," Since  that time  ho  has


been  a  btqiMOl  contributor  to  American  and
British  periodJomu.  In  1868  '71  bs  was  university
lecturer  on  philosophy  at Harvard.  In 18!

structor  in history  there,  and  in  distant

librarian. On resigning  the  latter  place  in
he  was  eli  inber  of  the  boaN  of  overseen,

and  at  the  expiration  of  the  six-years"  term  was
re-elected  in  1888.  Since  1881  he  "has  li-chind  an-
nually on  American  history  at  Washington  univer-
sity. St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  since  lsusj  |ms  held  a  pro-
fessorship of  American  history al  that  Inetitnooa,
but  continues  to  make  his  noUM  in  Cambf
lie  MOtured  on  American  history  at  I'liher-itv
college,  London,  iii  1879,  and  at  the  Royal  institu-
tion of  (inat  Britain  hi  1880.  Since  1n71  he  has
given  many  hundred  lectures,  chiefly  BOOH  ft  mil
history,  in  the  principal  cities  of  the  I'nited
States  and  Great  Britain.  The  largest  part  of  his
life  has  been  devoted  to  the  study  of  instorv;  but
at  an  early  age  inquiries  into  the  nature  of  human
progress  led  nim  to  a  careful  study  of  the  doctrine
of  evolution,  and  it  was  as  an  expounder  of  this
doctrine  that  he  first  became  known  to  the  public.
In  1871  he  arrived  at  the  discovery  of  the  causes
of  the  prolonged  infancy  of  mankind,  and  the  part
played  by  it  in  determining  human  development :
and  the  importance  of  this  contribution  to  the
Darwinian  theory,  now  generally  admitted,  was
immediately  recognized  by  Darwin  and  S|>encer.
His  published  books  are:  "Tobacco  and  Alcohol"
(New  York,  1868);  "Myths  and  Myth-Makers"
(Boston,  1872);  "Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,
based  on  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution  "  fj  vols..  Lon-
don, 1874;  republished  in  Boston):  "The  Unseen
World"  (Boston,  1870);  "Darwinism,  and  Other
Bessys'1  (London,  1M7<|;  new  and  enlarged  edition,
Boston,  1885);  "Excursions  of  an  Evolutionist"
(Boston,  1883);  "The  Destiny  of  Man  viewed  in
the  Light  of  his  Origin"  (Boston,  1884);  "The
Idea  of  God  as  affected  by  Modern  Knowledge"
(Boston,  1885);  and  "American  Political  Ideas
viewed  from  the  Standpoint  of  Universal  History"
(New  York,  1885).  Mr.  Picks  has  in  preparation
a  "  History  of  the  American  People."

FISKE*.  Nathan,  clergvman.  b.  in  Weston,
htasa,  !i  Sept..  1733;  d.  in'Brookfield,  Mass..  24
Nov..  1799.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1754,
studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the
Congregational  denomination,  and  began  his  min-
istry in  Brookfield,  Mass.,  in  May.  1 7.~>s.  lb- or-
ganized a  society  for  mutual  advancement  ami  in-
tellectual culture,  which  published  its  productions,
and  continued  the  publication  of  essays  and  ad-
dieasesthe  rest  of  his  life.  With  little  interrup-
tion theyappeaied  in  the  Worcester  ••  Qaactte,*1  the

•Massachusetts  Magazine,"  and  the  "Spy."  His
ministerial  work  was  continued  without  interrup-
tion, and  he  delivered  a  sermon  on  the  day  of  his
death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Har-
vard in  17!>2.  Dr.  Fiske*s  published  works  include
"  An  Historical  BstlDOn  on  the  Settlement  and
Growth  of  Brookfield"  (177'));  "Oration  on  the
Capture  of  Lord  Cornwallis"  (17N1);  a  volume  of
sermons  (17it4 1 :  "  Dudleian  Lecture  nt  Harvard"
(1796) :  and  a  volume  of  essuvs entitled  "  The  Moral
.Monitor."  published  after  his  death  (2  vols.,  1H01).
The  last-named  work  was  need  extensively  as  a
school-reader. —  His  son,  Nathan  Welby,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Weston.  Ma—..  17  April.  IT'.i*  ;  d.  in  Jeru-
salem. Palestine,  -7  May.  1*47.  ITii  ens  s.mliialefl
at  Dartmouth  in  1817, OM  had  charge  of  an  acade-
my in  Newcastle,  Me.,  for  a  year.  He  was  cIum  n
tutor  at  Dartmouth  in  1818,  which  |x>st  he  held
two  years,  and  was  graduated  at  Andovcf  theo-
logical seminary  in 1823. In  NovemU-r  of  that


47(>


FISKK


PITCH


year  lie  was  ordained  as  an  evangelist,  and  went  to
Savannah.  Ga..  to [trench among  the  seamen  and

others  not  belonging  to  anv  church.  In  April,
L884,  while  yet  in  Savannali,  lie  declined  an  invita-
tion to  supply  the  pastorate  in  Concord.  N.  II..
during  the  session  of  the  legislature,  ami  on  the
same  day  he  declined  the  solicitation  to  represent
the  American  foreign  mission  board  as  a  missionary
to  Palestine  or  to  China.  He  was  nlso  offered  the
professorship  of  mathematics  and  natural  philoso-
phy in  Midulebury  college,  Vt.. but  declined  it, and
became  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  Amherst
in  1824,  adding  to  his  duties  as  instructor  the  de-

{•artment  of  Udles-lettres  from  1825  till  1833,  and
rom  1833  till  1830  was  professor  of  languages  (in-
cluding the  modem)  at  Amherst.  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  chair  of  intellectual  and  moral  philoso-
Jhy.  and  held  it  from  1836  till  the  time  of  his  death.
n"l840,  on  account  of  faijing  health,  he  visited
Palestine,  where  he  died,  and  was  buried  in  Jeru-
salem on  Mount  Sion.  He  was  the  father  of  the
author  Helen  Hunt  Jackson  (q.  v.).  He  published
a  "  Manual  of  Classical  Literature,"  based  upon  the
German  work  of  J.  J.  Eschenburg.  with  additions
and  a  supplemental  volume  of  plates  (Philadel-
phia, 1836;  4th  ed.,  1843);  "  Sermons "  (1850) ;
"Young  Peter's  Tour  Around  the  World  ;  and
"Storv  of  Aleck;  or,  The  History  of  Pitcairn's
Island."  His  biography  was  published,  with  se-
lections from  his  sermons  and  other  writings,  by
Heman  Humphrey,  D.  D.  (Amherst,  1850).

FI8KE,  Oliver,  physician,  b.  2  Sept.,  1762;  d.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1836.  He  was  a  son  of  the
Rev.  Nathan  Fiske,  of  Brookfield,  Mass.,  served  for
a  short  time  in  the  army  during  the  Revolutionary
war.  and  at  its  close  entered  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1787.  He  began  practice  in  Wor-
cester in  1790,  was  mainly  instrumental  in  estab-
lishing the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  and  was
elected  its  president  soon  after  its  organization,
in  1803  he  was  appointed  special  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  and  during  the  five  years
succeeding  1809  was  a  member  of  the  executive
council.  He  was  corresponding  secretary  of  the
Linna^an  society  of  New  England,  counsellor  of  the
American  antiquarian  society,  and  a  member  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  He
published  an  oration  delivered  at  Worcester  in
1797,  an  essay  on  "Spotted  Fever,"  forming  part
of  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Massachusetts  Medi-
cal Society,"  and  other  writings.

FITCH",  Asa,  naturalist,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,
24  Feb.,  1809 ;  d.  there,  8  April,  1878.  He  was  at
first  an  agriculturist  and  country  physician,  but
relinquished  medical  practice  in  1838  to  devote  his
time  to  scientific  agriculture  and  the  study  of
natural  history.  He  was  made  New  York  state
entomologist  in  1854,  and  for  many  years  published
annual  reports  on  insects  injurious  to  vegetation.
Most  of  these  have  been  collected  at  intervals,  and
issued  in  three  volumes  by  the  state  authorities.

FITCH,  Benjamin,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
York,  13  June,  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  Nov.,
1883.  His  father,  Stephen  Fitch,  Vas  a  Quaker,
and  had  him  educated  at  the  Quaker  settlement  in
Mt.  Lebanon,  Conn.  He  was  taken  to  Buffalo  in
1812  by  his  father,  who  went  there  to  see  Red
Jacket,  the  Seneca  chief,  in  behalf  of  the  govern-
ment. He  was  in  Buffalo  when  it  was  burned  by
the  British  in  1813.  He  went  to  Albany,  and  sub-
sequently to  New  York,  where  he  became  clerk  in
a  store.  In  1824  he  opened  a  general  country  store
in  Buffalo,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  the  dry-
goods  business  in  Rochester,  Buffalo,  New  York,
and  Chicago,  retiring  with  a  large  fortune  in  1853


Returning  from  Europe  at  the  outbreak  of  the
civil  war,  he  induced  many  volunteers  to  enlist  in
tin'  BBtlloe  by  promising  to  care  for  their  families,
which  led  to  his  founding,  in  \X(Vi.  the  Pitch  DOOM
in  Darieo,  Conn.,  for  soldiers'  orphans.  He  added
a  public  hall  and  an  art  gallery,  and  also  built  a
church  in  Darien.  He  gave  the  land  and  building
for  the  Fitch  creche,  founded  in  1880.  In  I E
founded  the  Fitch  institute,  which  was  organized
on  the  plan  of  the  Cooper  institute  in  New  Fork
On  the  occasion  of  his  last  visit  to  Buffalo  he  gave
$  15,000  to  the  Charity  organization  society.  II  •
made  liberal  annual  gifts  of  money  to  the  chil-
dren of  the  Fitch  home.

FITCH,  Ebenezer,  educator,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  26  Sept..  1756  j  d.  in  West  Bloomfield.  \.  Y.,
21  March.  1833.  He  was  descended  from  James,
minister  of  Saybrook  and  of  Norwich,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1777,  and  was  a  tutor  there  in  1780-'88
and  1786-'91.  In  1791  he  became  principal  of  Will-
iamstown  academy,  and  when  this  became  Williams
college,  in  June,  1793,  he  was  elected  its  tir>t  presi-
dent, an  office  which  he  held  until  1815,  when  he
resigned  to  become  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  West  Bloomfield,  N.  Y.  He  resigned
this  charge  in  1827,  but  preached  occasionally  after
that  almost  till  the  time  of  his  death.

FITCH,  Eleazar  Thompson,  educator,  b.  In
New  Haven,  Conn.,  1  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  there,  31  Jan.,
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1810,  and  after-
ward was  a  teacher  at  East  Windsor  Hill,  and  subse-
Juentlyin  the  New  Haven  Hopkins  grammar-school,
n  1812  he  entered  Andover  theological  seminary,
where,  after  completing  the  regular  course,  he  re-
mained, pursuing  advanced  studies,  giving  as-
sistance in  instruction,  and  preaching,  until  his
election,  in  1817,  to  succeed  President  Dwight  in
the  office  of  professor  of  divinity  at  Yale.  One
branch  of  his  work  was  to  teach  theology  to
graduates,  and  in  this  his  classes  increased  so  that
he  was  led  to  urge  upon  the  corporation  the
founding  of  a  theological  department,  which  was
organized  in  1822.  In  this  department  he  filled
the  chair  of  homiletics,  at  the  same  time  being
college  preacher  and  pastor,  and  giving  instruction
in  the  academical  department  in  natural  theology
and  the  evidences  of  Christianity.  He  delivered
to  successive  classes  a  series  of  sermons  in  system-
atic theology,  and  some  of  his  doctrinal  views
thus  presented  becoming  publicly  controverted,  he
was  compelled  to  defend  them  as  publicly.  Im-
paired health  compelled  him  to  resign  his  office
as  professor,  yet  he  retained  his  connection  with
the  theological  seminary  as  lecturer  until  1861,
and  with  the  theological  faculty  as  professor
emeritus  until  his  death.  At  his  resignation  he
became  a  member  of  the  "  Circle  of  retired  Clergy-
men and  Laymen,"  in  whose  meetings  he  took  an
active  part.  He  wrote  theological  reviews  and
other  articles  for  periodicals,  and  a  volume  of  his
sermons  wasjmbhshed  in  1871.

FITCH,  Elijah,  clergyman,  b.  in  1745;  d.  in
Hopkinton,  Mass.,  16  Dec.,  1788.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1765,  and  became  a  minister  of  the
Congregational  church  in  Hopkinton  in  1771.  where
he  remained  till  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of
"  The  Beauties  of  Religion,  a  long  Poem  ad<  I
to  Youth,"  and  also  of  a  short  poem  entitled
"The  Choice"  (Providence,  1789).

FITCH,  Graham  Newell,  senator,  b.  in  Le
Roy,  N.  Y.,  5  Dec,  1809.  He  received  a  classical
education,  studied  at  the  medical  college  in  Fair-
field. N.  Y..  and  settled  at  Logansport.  Ind..  in
1834,  where  he  still  (1887)  resides.  From  1S44  till
1847  he  was  a  professor  in  Rush  medical  college,


1-TIVI1


FITCH


471


igo.  and  from 1*7*  till 1KKJ  taught the  art
and  esien if  surgery  in  the  Indiana  medical  col-
lege. He  waH  an  Indiana  i>r«--i<l<tit ial  elector  in
and  a  nslngatt)  t<»  Um  Nation-
al Democratic convention, New York,  in 1868.

0  he  whs  n  member  <»f  the

Mature  <>f Indiana,  and held  a  seat in  congress

from  :: I  Me  was

subsequently .-1. •<tr.| I'nited Static  -.-ii.tt < -r from

,n.|  served  as  such  from  !•  Feb.,  1857,  till

in  h.  1861. In  the  autumn  of  that rear  I>r.

id raised  the -Kith  regiment  of  Indiana  volun-

teers, with other  troops,  and was  commissioned

Hi. He  remained  in  the  field  until  Novem-

|S(>2.  when  he  was  compelled  to  resign  on  ac-
eeonl  of  injariea  recdvecL  He  eommandad  the.
land  foroai  at  the  capture  of  Fort  Pillow,  at  Mem-
phi-.  'IVnii..  and  also  at  St.  Charles,  Ark.

FITCH.  James,  clergyman,  •>.  in  Bocking.  Es-
sex. England,  84  !><•<•. .  1688  ;d.  in  Lebanon,  Coml,
|s  \,,v..  1708.  M-'  came  to  New  England  in  1688,
ami  anpplemented  his  previous  excellent  classical
education  by  seven  years  of  study  under  Hooker
ami  Stone,  lie  was  pastor  at  Saybrook  in  1046-'60,
and  was  afterward  installed  as  the  first  minister
of  Norwich.  He  preached  to  the  atohegans  in
their  own  language,  induced  them  to  cultivate
land,  and  gave  them  some  of  his  own.  He  pub-
lished ••  First  Principles  of  the  Doctrine  of  Christ"
(Boston.  1679),  and  several  sermons.

FITCH.  John,  inventor,  b.  in  Bast  (now  Booth)
Windsor,  Conn..  81  Jan.,  1748;  d.  in  Hardstown,
Kv.,  in  June  or  July,  1798.  He  received  eoonunoa-
sciiool  education,  was  apprenticed  to  a  watch-
maker, and  after  twenty-five  vears  of  home  life
rendered  miserable  by  the  ill-treatment  of  his
father  and  elder  brother,  crowned  the  wretched-
ness of  his  condition  by  an  unfortunate  marriage,
and  in  1769  became  a  wanderer.  Settling  at  Tren-
ton. N.  J.,  he  was  there  exercising  his  trade  of
watch-maker  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.
The  demand  for  arms  induced  him  to  become  a
gunsmith  for  the  American  forces,  which  exposed
his  property  to  destruction  when  the  British  en-
tered the  village  in  December,  1776.  He  joined
the  New  Jersey  troops,  with  whom  he  endured  the
rigors  of  a  winter  camp  at  Valley  Forge,  and  after-
ward resumed  his  trade  in  Bucks  county.  Pa.,
occasionally  traversing  the  country  afoot  -to  repair
watches  und  clocks.  Finally,  under  appointment
of  the  state  of  Virginia  as  a  deputy  surveyor,  he
set  out  for  Kentucky,  knapsack  on  back  and  com-
pass in  hand,  in  the  spring  of  1780,  and,  after  mak-
ing extensive  survey*  between  the  Kentucky  and

ii  rivers,  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  the
autumn  of  17*1.  The  next  spring  he  invested  in
flour  and  goods  the  £150  (Pennsylvania  currency)
which  represented  the  $4,000  he "  had  gathered  in
Continental  currency,  and  began  another  tour  of
western  adventure. At  the  mouth  of  the  Muskin-

fiim  the  party  was  attacked by  Indians,  two  of
is  i ipanions  were  killed,  nine  taken  prisoners,

and  his  goods  destroyed.  Pitch  had  the  address
Miciliate  the  leader  of  the  band,  and  the  en-
durance to  sustain  the  rigors  of  the  captivity,  from
which  he  esca|»ed,  and  in  the  winter  of  17v
penniless  and  dejected,  reached  Warminster.  Pa.
lbre.  IS  April,  17*5,  he  conceived  the  idea  of
steam  as  a  motive-power,  at  first  for  carriages,  but
soon  for  vessels.  His  first  model  of  a  steamboat,
completed  this  year.  l>orc  wheels  at  the  sides,  but
these,  being  found  to  lalx>r  too  much  in  the  w

•  replaced  mi  his  experimenta  <»f  July.  i7v>;.
Ufx'ii  askitT  with  B  steam-engine  of  8-incfa  cylinder)
with  paddles, He  now  besieged  the Continental


s.  n-«  well  as the Pennsylvania legislature,
iiiiary  aid  to  his  project,  and  addressed  the
leading  scientific  and  public  men  of  that  dai
ind  at  all  times  boldly  affirming  tni
ticability  of  SM  navigation  by  steam  vessel*

though  I liciled much Interest among  tl

minds,  his  fervid  predictions  secured  DO  money,
and  he  acquired  the  reputation  of  bring  insane.
Finally,  by  the  construction,  engraving,  and  sale  of
a  map  of  the  northwestern  territory,  all  of  which
was  done  with  his  own  hand,  the  bnpiOSBiOtaf  bring


taken  on  a  cider-press,  he  raised  altout  $800,  in
February.  1787,  formed  a  company  of  forty  shares,
and  began  a  boat  of  sixty  tons.  Meanwhile,  in  1786,
the  state  of  New  Jersey,  and  in  1787  the  states  of
New  York.  Delaware,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia,
had  granted  him  the  sole  and  exclusive  rights  to
their  waters  for  fourteen  years  for  purposes  of
navigating  by  means  of  steam.  Fitch's  second
boat,  45  feet  long  and  12  feet  bean,  with  six  oars
or  paddles  on  each  side,  and  an  engine  of  12-inch
cylinder,  made  its  trial-trip  on  the  Delaware,  at
Philadelphia,  22  Aug.,  1787,  in  the  presence  and
to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  members  of  the
convention  to  frame  the  Federal  constitution,  then
in  session  there.  A  still  larger  boat  in  October,
1788,  and  still  another  in  April,  1790  (see  illustra-
tion), continued  to  demonstrate  with  their  increased
speed  and  facility  the  value  of  Fitch's  invention.
the  latter  boat  being  run  during  the  whole  summer
as  a  regular  passenger-boat  between  Philadelphia
and  Burlington,  wit  ha  speed  of  eight  miles  an  hour.
Another  boat,  "The  Perseverance  "—designed  for
both  freight  and  passengers  on  the  Mississippi,
under  the  Virginia  patent,  which  gave  Fitch  the  ex-
elusive  right  of  navigating  "the  Ohio  river  and  its
tributaries" — was  unfortunately  so  damaged  by  a
storm  as  not  to  be  available  before  the  expiration  of
thedefault  clause  in  that  patent.  The  .stockhold-
ers became  discouraged,  and.  Fitch's  resources  being
exhausted, the  project  was  abandoned.  In  1791  he
received  a  patent  for  his  inventions  from  the  United
States,  which  was  of  little  avail,  and  subsequently
was  lost  by  fire.  In  17SM  he  went  to  France,  there
to  build  a  steamboat  :  but.  arriving  in  the  midst  of
the  revolutionary  troubles,  was  unable  to  carry  out
his  project,  and.  depositing  his  plans  and  specifica-
tions with  the  American  consul  at  I/Orient,  went
to  London.  During  this  absence  his  drawings  and
pajH>rs  were  loaned  by  the  consul  to  Robert  I*  ulton,
then  in  Paris,  in  whose  possession  they  were  for
several  months.  In  17!»4.  disappointed  and  penni-
less. Fitch  retained  to  America,  working  his  pas-
sage as  a  common  sailor,  and  withdrew  to  his  lands
at  Bardstown.  Kv.,  which  he  found  in  the  occupa-
tion of  others ;  but  in  175Mi  he  again  constructed
a  steamboat  from  a  ship's  yawl,  which  was  moved  bv
a  screw-proj teller  on  the  Collect  Pond  in  New  Vork
city. In  the  spring  of  1798  he  made  and  tried.


472


FITCH


FITCH


upon  a  small  stream  near  Bardstown,  a  three-foot
model  of  a  stcamlioat ;  but  some  time  between
25  June  ami  18  July  of  the  same  year  he  committed
suicide  by  poison,  died  in  a  tavern,  unattended  by
relative  or  friend,  and  was  buried  in  Bardstown,
wlnre  m>  BtOlM  marks  his  resting-place.  Mow
inournfullv  prophetic  arc  the  following  words  from
his  journal :  "  The  day  will  come  when  some  more
powerful  man  will  get  fame  and  riches  from  my
invention  ;  but  nobody  will  believe  that  poor  John
Fitch  can  do  anything  worthy  of  attention."  There
have  been  several  later  claimants  to  the  invention
of  steamboats,  noticeably  Robert  Fulton ;  but  when,
in  1817,  the  original  patents,  drafts,  specifications,
and  models,  both  of  Fitch's  and  of  Fulton's  boats,
were  exhibited  before  a  committee  of  the  New
York  legislature,  raised  upon  the  petition  of  Gov.
Ogden,  of  New  Jersey,  in  which  lioth  parties  were
represented  by  the  ablest  legal  talent  of  the  day,
and  witnesses  of  the  highest  character  and  personal
knowledge  of  the  facts  were  examined,  the  com-
mittee finally  reported  that  "  the  steamboats  built
by  Livingston  and  Fulton  were  in  substance  the
invention  patented  to  John  Fitch  in  1791,  and
Fitch  during  the  term  of  his  patent  had  the  ex-
clusive right  to  use  the  same  in  the  United  States."
Fitch's  life  has  been  written  by  Thompson  West-
cott  (Philadelphia,  1857),  and  by  Charles  Whittle-
sey in  Sparks  s  "  American  Biography."  See  also
an  article  in  O'Callaghan's  "  Documentary  History
of  New  York  "  (vol.  2,  1849).

FITCH,  John  Lee,  artist,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
25  June,  1836.  He  studied  four  years  in  Munich
and  Milan  under  Prof.  Albert  Zimmermann  and
his  two  brothers,  Max  and  Richard.  His  profes-
sional life  has  been  spent  in  Hartford  and  in  New
York  city.  He  is  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  of  design,  and  treasurer  of  the  Artists'
fund  society  of  New  York.  He  was  for  twelve
years  chairman  of  the  art  committee  of  the  Cen-
tury club,  but  declined  re-election.  He  has  achieved
reputation  as  a  painter  of  forest  scenes,  and  is  a
close  student  of  nature.  His  largest  picture,  "  In
the  Woods,"  was  exhibited  at  Philadelphia  in  1876.
Among  his  other  works:  are  "On  Gill  Brook"
(1866) ;  "  A  Mountain  Brook  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Out-
let" (1871);  "In  the  Cafion,  Granville,  Mass."
(1873);  "Waiting  for  a  Bite"  (1874);  "A  Stray
Sunbeam"  (1875);  "Twilight  on  John's  Brook''
(1878) ;  "  Cliff  Side  "  (1880) ;  "  Willows  on  the  Cro-
ton  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Near  Carmel,  N.  Y."  (1886).

FITCH,  Leroy,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Indiana  in
October,  1835;  d.  in  Logansport,  Ind.,  13  April,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  the  naval  academy  in
1856,  promoted  to  be  master,  5  Sept.,  1859,  lieu-
tenant, 21  Sept.,  1862,  and  commander,  28  Aug.,
1870.  He  served  in  the  Mississippi  squadron
during  the  civil  war,  taking  part  in  the  capture
of  Forts  Donelson  and  Pillow,  the  reduction  of
Island  No.  10,  and  the  victory  over  the  Confed-
erate fleet  at  Memphis,  Tenn.  On  the  morning  of
19  July,  1863,  being  then  in  command  of  the
steamer  "Moose,"  he  succeeded  in  intercepting
Morgan,  and  frustrated  his  attempts  to  cross  the
Ohio  at  Buffington  Island,  having  followed  him
for  more  than  five  hundred  miles  up  the  river.  He
seized  Morgan's  train  and  a  portion  of  his  guns,
crippling  his  strength,  leading  to  his  capture.
For  these  signal  services  he  received  compliment-
ary letters  from  Gens.  Burnside,  Cox,  and  Sec.
Welles.  He  also  defended  Johnson ville,  Tenn.,
from  the  attack  of  Gen.  Forrest,  was  present  at  the
engagement  before  Nashville  during  the  opera-
tions of  Hood,  and  participated  in  many  minor
skirmishes  with  guerillas  on  the  Mississippi,  Cum-


berland, and  Tennessee  rivers. He  also  accompa-
nied several  land  expeditions  iu  the  same  section.

FITCH,  Samuel,  loyalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  1790;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  probably  iu
1786.  He  received  his  education  in  Boston,  and
practised  law  in  that  city  with  success.  In  17.74.
at  the  height  of  Hutchinson's  unpopularity,  Mr.
Fitch  was  one  of  the  signers  of  the  address  approv-
ing his  course,  and  warmly  espoused  the  royalist
cause.  In  1/76  he  removed  to  Halifax,  No\
tia,  where  he  held,  under  the  king,  the  office  of  so-
licitor, or  counselor  at  law,  to  the  board  of  com-
missioners. He  was  proscribed  and  banished  from
the  United  Colonies  in  1778,  and  was  included  in
the  conspiracy  act  of  1779.  The  same  year  <  177'J)
he  went  to  England,  visited  Hutchinson'  in  his  re-
tirement and  decline,  and  was  appointed  to  deliver
the  loyalist  address  to  the  king.  In  1783  he  paid
another  official  visit  to  England,  remained  two
years,  returning  to  Halifax  in  1785,  where  he  died.

FITCH,  Simon,  surgeon,  b.  in  Horton,  Nova
Scotia,  2  Jan.,  1820.  He  received  his  professional
education  in  London,  Paris,  and  the  Lniversity  of
Edinburgh,  where  he  was  graduated  in  August,
1841.  lie  settled  in  the  same  year  in  St.  John's,
New  Brunswick,  removed  to  Portland,  Me.,  in
1855,  to  the  city  of  Now  York  in  1874,  and  in  1877
to  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.  In  1871  he  introduced
an  improvement  in  the  double  tubular  trocar,  by
removing  the  projecting  canula  from  the  outside
to  the  inside  of  the  puncturing  tube.  In  1875  he  in-
vented the  "  Dome  Trocar,"  with  application  to  ova-
riotomy, aspiration,  and  transfusion,  and  the  same
year de vised  acoupling  for  instantaneous  attachment
and  detachment  of  the  aspirator  needle.  He  is  also
the  inventor  of  the  "  Handy  Aspirator"  (1877),  the
"Trocar  Catheter"  (1882),  the  "Clamp  Forceps,"
and  the  "  Wire  Suture  Twister."  In  1840-'l  he  was
resident  surgeon  of  the  Edinburgh  maternity  hos-
pital, and  in  1851-'2  surgeon  to  the  St.  John's  hos-
pital, New  Brunswick.  He  was  surgeon  in  1864  to
the  5th  corps  military  hospital  at  Fredericksburg,
Va.,  held  the  same  office  at  Fort  Preble,  Me.,  in
1867,  and  is  at  present  (1887)  consulting  surgeon
of  the  Provincial  and  city  hospital,  Halifax,  Nova
Scotia ;  is  member  of  many  medical  societies,  and
has  contributed  to  the  literature  of  his  profession
works  entitled  "  Peculiarities  of  the  Operations  of
Three  Great  Ovariotoniists :  Wells,  Atlee,  Keith "
(Philadelphia,  1872),  and  "  Paracentesis,  Aspira-
tion, and  Transfusion  "  (1877).

FITCH,  Thomas,  governor  of  Connecticut,  b.
in  Norwalk,  Conn.,  in  June,  1699 ;  d.  there  in  July,
1774  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1721,  studied
law,  and  after  middle  life  filled  successively  t  lie
offices  of  chancellor,  judge  of  the  superior  court,
and  chief  justice  of  his  state.  His  principles  were
loyal,  and,  notwithstanding  the  growing  unpopu-
larity of  his  opinions,  he  was  elected  governor  in
1754,  and  held  office  till  1766.  In  1765,  Ingersoll,
the  royal  stamp-master  of  Connecticut,  put  himself
under  the  protection  of  Gov.  Fitch,  and  in  the
same  year,  at  the  general  assembly  held  in  Hart-
ford, the  governor  took  the  oath  of  office  pre-
scribed in  the  stamp-act.  Col.  Putnam  afterward
waited  on  him  to  express  the  sentiments  of  the
people  as  to  this  matter,  and  told  him  that  if  he
refused  to  admit  the  "  Sons  of  Liberty,"  who  were
coming  to  destroy  the  stamped  paper,  his  house
would  be  levelled  to  the  dust  in  five  minutes.  In
consequence  of  persisting  in  the  protection  of  In-
gersoll and  holding  to  his  loyalist  sentiments,  the
general  assembly  of  1?<><>  forced  him  from  public
life  by  electing  William  Pitkin  governor  of  the
state  in  his  stead. Gov.  Fitch  a;  once  retired  to


P1TCB


P1TZGERALD


m


v. A nunient,  raised  by  public

•eriptkm,  which  i*  stfJ]  itandtng  '"  t'1*'  1"
<•iiM.li  :\ nf  in-  in. in.-  in  Norwalk,  Oona.,  com-
memorates Ins  ••  large  acquirements,  virtuous  char-
.  ami  strict fidelity in  discharge  of  im|x>r-
11 1-  deeoendanta  ami  the  collateral
branches  "f  t * i ->  family  are  still  unions  tin-  most
pnblic-epirited  citizens  of  Norwalk. Sr  Van  Rens-
■■  Ancestral  Sketch)

I  Mi  II.  I  honnis  Darin,  physician,  l>.  in  Troy.

Pa.,  14  July,  1838.  Hi  WM  educated
ill  hi-  native  town  ami  at  Knox  college,  Gales-
:.  111.,  to  which  state  his  father  hail  removed
in  l*ii;.  After  studying  medicine  ami  practising
in  Wethersfielil,  III.,  he  was  graduated  at  RuiE
m.ilual  oollege,  Chicago,  in 1*54. In the  same

Eear  he  removed  t"  Kewanee,  III.,  and  in  Deeenv
entered  the  army  as  surgeon  of  the  ttd
Illinois  regiment,  but  resigned  in  May,  Ih^j.  a
year  later  he  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he  has

•  resided.  He  has  been  surgeon  ami  lecturer
on  obstetrics  in  various  Chicago  hospitals,  ami
was  one  of  the  originators  in  1*T<>  of  the  Woman's
hospital  medical  college  in  the  same  city,  in  which
Institution  he  has  filled  the  chair  of  gynecology,
and  the  office  of  trustee,  since  its  organization.
I>r.  Fitch  is  a  memlter  of  several  medical  associa-
ti'ins,  has  contributed  frequently  to  the  literature  of
his  specialty,  and  is  the  author  of  "Antagonism  of
Opium  ami  Quinia,"  a  paper  read  before  the  Chi-
cago medical  society  in  lN<i5.

FITTON,  JameH,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1N(M;  d.  there,  l.i  Sept.,  1881.  He  was
ordained  by  Bishop  Fenwick  in  1827,  and  in  1828
Wat  sent  as  a  missionary  to  the  I'assaimupioddy
Indians.  He  subsequently  labored  among  the  scat-
tered Roman  Catholics  of  New  Hampshire  and
Vermont,  and  soon  the  territory  between  Boston
and  Long  Island  was  placed  under  his  charge,
with  Hartford  as  the  centre  of  his  district.  In
1855  he  removed  to  East  Boston,  where  he  minis-

I  until  his  death.  He  was  instrumental  in  es-
tablishing the  College  of  the  holy  cross  at  Worces-
ter, and  the  first  Roman  Catholic  newspaper.

FITZ,  Henry,  telescope-maker,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  in  180N;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Nov.,
1868.  He  ttegan  life  as  a  printer,  but,  being  of  an
inventive  turn,  learned  the  trade  of  locksmith,
at  which  he  worked  for  many  years.  In-  1835  he
made  his  first  reflecting  telescope,  and  in  the  win*

of  1844  invented  a  method  of  perfecting  object-
eisnma  for  refracting  telescopes,  oonstraeung  the
first  one  out  of  the  bottom  of  an  ordinary  tumbler.
In  1K4.-)  he  exhibited  at  the  American  institute
fair  an  instrument  that  brought  him  the  favorable
notice  of  eminent  astronomers,  and  he  thenceforth

■ted  himself  to  making  telescopes  as  a  busi-
ness  with remarkable  success, lie finally  suc-

led  in  producing  instruments  of  sixteen-imh
a|H>rture.  and  also  made  two  of  thirteen  inches
— one  for  the  Dudley  observatory  at  Albany,  and
the  other  for  an  association  of  gentlemen  at  Alle-
ghany City,  Pa.  There  is  one  of  his  manufacture,
of  twelve  inches  aperture,  at  Ann  Arlxir,  and  he
completed  another  for  the  Vassar  female  college.
Mr.  Fitz's  methods  were  entirely  his  own  devising.
When  seized  with  his  final  illness,  he  was  about  to
sail  for  Kuro|ie  to  select  a  glass  for  a  twenty-four-
inch  tclcs<-ope,  and  to  procure  patents  for  a  camera,
involving  s  new  form  of  lens.

II  I /GERALD.  Lord  Edward,  Irish  patriot,  b.
near  Dublin.  Ireland.  15  Oct..  17W:  d.  there,  4  Jun  .

He  was  a  younger  son  of  the  first Duke  ..f

and  lost  his  father  at  the  age  of  ten. His

■other  married  again,  and  removed  to  the  Conti-


nent, where  Fdward  was  carefully  educated  by  his
father. He  entered  the  army  on  his  retain

to  Filmland  in  177!»,  and  in  17*1  sailed  with  his
regiment  for  America,  where  he  s<m»h  obtained  the
ap|H.intment  of  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  I
uawdoii.  He  gained  in  the  Revolutionary  war  m»
little  reputation  for  personal  courage,  readiness  of
resource,  ami  humane  baling,  ami  was  sc\.
wounded  in  the  battle  of  Futaw  Sprr
After  the  surrender  of  Yorktown,  he  joined  the
staff  of  (Jen.  o'Hara  in  the  island  of  St.  Lucia,  in
17W,  but  retained  in  the  same  year  to  Ireland.
He  was  elected  as  ineinlxr  for  Athy  to  the  Irish
parliament,  and  afterward  rejoined  his  regiment
at  Halifax.  He  subsequently  travelled  through
the  United  States,  going  down  the  Mississippi
river  to  New  Orleans.  In  17JM)  he  returned  to  Ire-
land, and  was  again  returned  to  parliament.  Hav-
ing at  a  public  meeting  avowed  his  sympathy  with
the  republicans,  ami  renounced  his  title,  in  com-
mon with  several  other  Fnglish  officers,  he  was
dismissed  from  the  army.  In  1790  he  joined  the
"United  Irishmen,"  was  afterward  elected  their
president,  and  was  sent  to  France  to  negotiate  a
treaty  with  the  Directory  for  a  French  invasion  of
Ireland.  The  scheme  was  betrayed  to  the  English
ministry,  and  several  of  the  leaders  were  arrested,
but  Fiizgerald,  having  concealed  himself  in  a
house  in  Dublin,  still  continued  to  direct  the  move-
ment. A  price  was  set  on  his  head,  the  place  of
his  retreat  discovered,  and,  after  a  severe  struggle
in  which  he  was  mortally  wounded,  he  was  cap-
tured by  police  officers  and  committed  to  prison.
19  May,  1798,  where  he  died  in  June.  See  "The
Life  and  Death  of  Lord  Edward  Fitzgerald,"  by
Thomas  Moore  9  vols..  Ixmdon,  1831).

FITZGERALD,  Edward,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Limerick,  Ireland,  in  L8SS,  He  came  to  the  I'nited
States  in  1849,  entered  the  College  of  the  Barrens,
Mo.,  in  1850,  and  finished  his  ecclesiastical  studies
in  Mount  St.  Mary's  college.  Fmmettsburg.  He
was  ordained  priest  in  1857,  and  was  appointed
pastor  of  a  Roman  Catholic  church  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  which  had  been  laid  under  an  interdict  by
the  archbishop  of  Cincinnati.  Father  Fitzgerald
was  entirely  successful  in  restoring  harmony  among
his  parishioners,  and  inducing  them  to  submit  to
the  archbishop.  He  remained  over  nine  years  at
Columbus,  and  in  1867  was  consecrated  bishop  of
Little  Rook.  Ark.  Owing  to  the  civil  war.  the
number  of  Roman  Catholics  in  his  diocese  had  de-
creased to  little  more  than  a  thousand,  with  five
priests  and  three  religious  institutions.  He  used
every  exertion  to  attract  immigration  to  the  state,
with'  such  success  that  in  1S84  the  Roman  Catholic
population  was  over  7,000,  with  twenty-three  priests
and  thirty-seven  churches.  He  introduced  the
monks  of  the  Benedict iue  order, established  a  house
of  the  Fathers  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  Maricnstadt,
for  the  purpose  of  holding  special  missions  among
his  flock, and  also  introduced  the  Sisters  of  Charity,
the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,  and  the  Benedictine  nuns,
whom  he  placed  in  charge  of  asylums  and  schools.
He  visited  Rome  to  take  part  In  the  del  il  K-rations
of  the  Vatican  council,  and  was  also  a  member  of
the  third  plenarv  council  of  Baltimore  in  1*S4.

FITZG  ERA  LI).  Thomas,  senator,  b.  in  German-
town,  Herkimer  00*  N.  Y..  H>  April,  1790;  d.  in
Niles.  Mich..  M  March,  l*o.->.  His  father,  an  Irish
soldier  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  was  wounded
and  pensioned.  The  son  received  a  00— ton  school
education,  and  served  with  credit  in  the  war  of
ISIS  under  Gen,  Harrison.  After  its  conclusion
he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  I  tar.  He
then  removed  to  Indiana,  where  he  wee  elected  to  the


474


FITZGIBBON


FITZIinJH


first  lc^islatur«-  tluit  met  in  lndianaj>olis,  iiiul  in
1832  went  to  Michigan,  beginning  the  practice
of  his  pi  uf If  loll  at  St.  Joseph.  In  1837  he  was
made  a  recent  of  the  University  of  Michigan,  and
frmn  M  June,  1848,  till  3  March,  1849,  served  as  a
member  of  the  U.S.  senate,  having  been  appointed
1)V  the  governor  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the
resignation  of  Gen.  Lewis  Cass.  Before  going  to
Washington  he  was  named  as  a  commissioner  to
inquire  into  the  condition  of  what  were  known  as
"  wild-cat "  banks,  and  by  his  i)erseverance  and  in-
dustry succeeded  in  effecting  the  virtual  extermina-
tion of  those  discreditable  institutions.  Senator
Fitzgerald  was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  a
judge  in  one  of  the  territories,  but  refused.  lie  was
subsequently  prolate  judge  of  Berrien  county,
Mich.,  and  was  a  leader  in  the  Democratic  partv.

FITZGIBBON,  James,  British  soldier,  b."  in
1780;  d.  about  1860.  He  was  almost  wholly  self-
educated,  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  and  enlisted  in
the  army  when  he  was  seventeen  years  old.  He
served  in  the  war  against  Napoleon  I.,  and  in  the
American  war  of  1812-'15,  and  in  1HK5  retired  as
captain  of  the  Glengarry,  Canada,  fencihles.  He
afterward  became  assistant  adjutant-general  of
militia  in  Upper  Canada.  In  1837,  during  the
Mackenzie  rebellion,  his  foresight  and  precaution-
ary measures  saved  the  city  of  Toronto  from  the
disaffected,  for  which  service  he  was  awarded
5.000  acres  of  land  by  the  city  council,  received  the
thanks  of  parliament,  and  the  present  of  a  valuable
sword.  The  grant  of  land  was  subsequently  dis-
allowed. Gen.  Fitzgibbon  was  chief  clerk  of  the
lower  house  of  the  Canadian  parliament  in  1816-'29,
and  clerk  of  the  upper  house  in  1829-'35.  In  1850
he  was  created  a  military  knight  of  Windsor,  and
subsequently  resided  in  England.

FITZHUGH,  Edward  Henry,  judge,  b.  in
Caroline  county,  Va.,  21  Sept.,  1816.  He  studied
law,  practised  for  many  years  at  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,
removed  to  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1861,  and  served  in
an  important  capacity  in  the  quartermaster's  de-
partment of  the  Confederate  army,  from  1861  till
1865.  He  was  judge  of  the  chancery  court  of  the
city  of  Richmond  from  1870  till  1883,  when  he
returned  to  the  practice  of  his  profession.  Judge
Fitzhugh  has  been  active  in  the  councils  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  and  in  1867  was  elected  a
member  of  the  executive  committees  of  "  publica-
tion and  education  "  of  the  general  assembly.

FITZHUGH,  George,  sociologist,  b.  in  Prince
William  county,  Va.,  2  July,  1807;  d.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Walker  co.,  Texas,  30  July,  1881.  He  was
largely  self-taught,  the  only  education  he  received
as  a  child  being  gained  in  what  were  known  as  the
"field  schools"  of  his  native  county.  That  the
amount  of  knowledge  thus  acquired  was  probably
not  great,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  Fitz-
hugh, when  only  nine  years  of  age,  was  frequently
left  in  sole  charge  of  the  other  pupils  during  the
extended  absence  of  the  teacher.  In  spite  of  these
early  disadvantages,  he  succeeded  in  securing  a
good  education,  studied  law,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession for  many  years  in  Port  Royal,  Va.,  making
a  specialty  of  criminal  cases.  During  President
Buchanan  s  administration  Mr.  Fitzhugh  was  em-
ployed in  th«  office  of  Attorney-General  Black,  in
the  land-claim  department.  About  this  time  he
made  his  only  visit  to  the  northern  states,  lecturing
in  Boston,  and  visiting  his  relative  by  marriage,
Gerrit  Smith.  At  the  house  of  the  latter  he  met
Mrs.  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.  These  acquaintance-
ships derive  their  significance  from  his  peculiar
poutioal  opinions.  Mr.  Fitzhugh  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  press,  writing  for  the  "New


York  Day-Book,"  "  Richmond  Examiner."  "  Do
Bow's  Review."  and  other  journals  and  periodicals.
He  was  "an  eccentric  and  extreme  thinker."  claim-
ing that  slavery  is  the  natural  ami  rightful  con-
dition of  society,  which,  when  not  founded  on  hu-
man servitude,  "tends  to  cannibalism.  He  did  not
base  his  argument  upon  the  inferiority  ol  the
negro,  but  maintained  that  the  laboring  classes  of
mankind,  irrespective  of  color,  should  In-  sla
in  Greece  and  Rome.  During  the  civil  war  he
wrote:  "It  is  a  "gross  mistake  to  suppose  that
'abolition'  is  the  cause  of  dissolution  between  tin-
north  and  the  south.  The  Cavaliers,  Jacobites,  and
Huguenots  of  the  south  naturally  hate,  contemn,
and  despise  the  Puritans  who  settled  the  north.
The  former  are  master  races,  the  latter  a  slave  race,
the  descendants  of  the  Saxon  serfs."  His  opinion
of  free  labor  may  be  gathered  from  the  following
extracts  from  his  "  Sociology  for  the  South  " :  "  The
free  laborer  rarely  has  a  house  and  home  of  his
own;  he  is  insecure  of  employment;  sickness  may
overtake  him  at  any  time  and  deprive  him  of  the
means  of  support ;  old  age  is  certain  to  overtake
him  if  he  lives,  and  generally  finds  him  without
the  means  of  subsistence;  his  family  is  probably
increasing  in  numbers,  and  is  helpless  and  burden-
some to  him.  In  all  this  there  is  little  to  incite  to
virtue,  much  to  tempt  to  crime ;  nothing  to  afford
happiness,  but  quite  enough  to  inflict  misery.  Man
must  be  more  than  human  to  acquire  a  pure  and
a  high  morality  under  such  circumstances."  And
again :  "  Slavery  without  domestic  affection  would
be  a  curse,  and  so  would  marriage  and  parental  au-
thority. The  free  laborer  is  excluded  from  its  holy
and  charmed  circle.  Shelterless,  naked,  and  hun-
gry, he  is  exposed  to  the  bleak  winds,  the  cold  rains,
and  hot  sun  of  heaven,  with  none  that  love  him,
none  that  care  for  him.  His  employer  hates  him
because  he  asks  high  wages  or  joins  strikes;  his
fellow-laborer  hates  him  because  he  competes  with
him  for  employment.  Foolish  abolitionists !  bring
him  back,  like  the  prodigal  son.  Let  him  fare  at
least  as  well  as  the  dog,  and  the  horse,  and  the
sheep.  Better  to  lie  down  with  the  kids  and  the
goats,  than  stand  naked  and  hungry  without.  As
a  slave,  he  will  be  beloved  and  protected.  WhUst
free,  he  will  be  hated,  despised,  and  persecuted.
Such  is  the  will  of  God  and  order  of  Providence.
It  is  idle  to  inquire  the  reasons."  Mr.  Fitzhugh
published  "  Sociology  for  the  South,  or  the  Fail-
ure of  Free  Society"  (Richmond,  1854),  and  "Can-
nibals All,  or  Slaves  Without  Masters  "  (1856).

FITZHUGH,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bedford,
England,  9  June,  1651 ;  d.  in  Stafford  county,  Va,,
in  October,  1701.  He  was  a  lawyer  by  profession,
settled  in  that  portion  of  Stafford  county  now  com-
prised in  King  George  county,  and  founded  the
Fitzhugh  family  of  that  state.  He  was  also  a
merchant,  planter,  arid  shipper.  A  manuscript
volume  of  his  correspondence,  covering  the  period
from  1679  till  1699,  has  been  preserved,  and  a  copy
of  the  letters  is  in  the  collections  of  the  Virginia
historical  society.  Mr.  Fitzhugh  acted  as  counsel
for  Maj.  Robert  Beverley,  father  of  the  historian
of  Virginia  and  secretary  of  the  colonial  council,
who  was  indicted  for  "  cutting  "  tobacco-plant  s.  and
found  guilty  of  that  and  other  "high  ini-de-
meanors,"  including  a  refusal  to  deliver  up  the
records  of  the  council.  Although  he  had  been  an
active  and  efficient  partisan  of  Gov.  Berkeley  in
the  popular  uprising  stigmatized  as  "Bacon's  re-
bellion," he  was  sternly  dealt  with,  being  long
imprisoned  and  disfranchised.  He  was  finally
released  on  asking  pardon  of  the  council  on  his
bended  knees.


nr/.in  (.n


n.\.


it:.


I  I  I /III  (.11.  Willi. mi  II.  nry.  philanthropist,
I.,  in  Chatham,  Stall  •' :  'I.

in  Cambridge,  Md..  21  May,  1880,  He  was  i
i.f  William  P.  Fitxhugh,  ■  jmt riot  of  thi  Itt-% <>iu-
Uon,  was  graduated  a?  Princeton  in  1808,  and  Wfc-
tlr.1  mi  ill.  patrimonial  domain  of  "  Ravensworth,"
fax  .....  Nil.  He  WM  «-l«*«-l «•<  1  vice-president  of
tin-  American  colonization  society,  ami  t<H.k  an
active  Interest  in  it.  supporting  it  both  with  rota
and  pan.  In  18M  he  published  a  series  of  essays
in  In-half  of  tin-  cause,  over  the  signature  "f
"( toimius,"  in  tin-  columns  of  the  Richmond  "  In-
quirrr."  He  wai  also  thr  author  of  an  address  de-
livered on  the  ninth  anniversary  of  the  association,
ami  of  a  review  of  "Tazewell's  Report"  in  the
rioan  Repository*1  (August  and  NoTamtMf,
*).  In  one  of  hisessavs  he  express's  the  opinion
that  "the  lalM.r  of  the  slave  is  h  curse  on  the  land
on  which  it  i-  cxj»ended,"  which  seems  like  a  truism
now.  I. ut  was  I  told  doctrine  then.

FIT/PATRICK,  Benjamin,  senator,  b.  in
si  county,  (ia.,  :l<>  .liuie.  180*;  d.  in  Autauga
county.  Ala..  »'.">  Nov.,  1888.  He  removed  to  Alaltatna
in  1HJH,  when  it  was  a  territory,  read  law  in  the
office  of  Judge  Benson,  of  Montgomery,  and.  after
he  was  admitted  to  the  Iwr  in  18)1,  became  a  part-
ner of  Henry  (ioldthwaite,  who  afterward  rose  to
eminence  in  his  profession.  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  was  the
next  year  elected  solicitor  of  the  Montgomery  cir-
cuit, and  re-elected  in  1828.  Meanwhile  he  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  (Jen.  John  Klmore,  formerly  of
South  Carolina.  In  1821>  he  found  the  labonof
his  profession  too  severe  for  his  declining  health.
and  retired  to  his  plantation  in  Autauga  county,
near  Montgomery,  where  he  engaged  successfully
in  agriculture.  In  1840,  as  a  candidate  for  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Democratic  ticket,  he  en-
i raged  in  an  active  canvass  in  Udialf  of  Mr.  Van
lurcn.  and  took  part  in  an  animated  discussion
with  Henry  W.  Hilliard,  candidate  for  elector
in  the  mom  district  on  the  Whig  ticket,  who  ar-
dent Iv  advocated  the  claims  of  Gen.  Harrison.  In
1*41  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  was  elected  governor  of  Ala-
bama by  a  majority  of  nearly  7.000  over  Col.  M<-
Lung,  of  Huntsville,  and  in  1848  was  re-elected
without  opposition.  On  the  death  of  Hon.  Dixon
H.  Lewis,  in  1848,  Gov.  Chapman  appointed  Mr.
Fitzpatrick  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  in  the  senate
of  the  United  States.  In  1853  he  was  appointed
by  Gov.  Collier  to  succeed  William  R.  King  in
the  senate,  and  was  elected  by  the  legislature  to
fill  the  unexpired  term.  In  1855  he  was  elected  to
the  senate  for  a  full  term  of  six  years.  He  was
elected  president  of  the  senate  pro  tempore,  and
served  in  four  successive  sessions.  At  the  Demo-
cratic national  convention,  held  in  Baltimore  in
1800,  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  was  nominated  for  vice-presi-
dent on  the  ticket  with  Mr.  Douglas,  who  was
a  candidate  for  the  presidency:  but  he  promptly
declined,  and  Hcrschel  V.  Johnson,  of  Georgia,  was
nominated  in  his  place.  When  Alabama  adopted
her  ordinance  of  secession  in  18(11.  Mr.  Fitzpatrick
withdrew  from  the  senate  and  returned  home.  At
the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  took  part  once  more
in  public  affairs,  was  elected  by  the  people  of  Au-
tauga county  to  the  convention  called  to  frame  a
new  constitution,  and  was  chosen  president  of  the
convention.  When  it  had  finished  its  work  be  re-
tired to  his  plantation,  where  he  passed  his  last
J  ears  in  broken  health,  but  still  attending  to  the
uties  that  pressed  upon  him  as  cheerfully  as  poe-
in  view  of  the  decline  of  his  fortunes  r.-ul  -
Bg  from  the  war.  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  was  distin-
guished f..r  integrity,  nnswerrrog  loyalty  to  truth,
ami  manly  bearing  in  public  affairs.


KM /I'M  Mi  k.  J..I...  Ibrnard,  K.C.  bi.hop.
i».  in  Boston,  Mam,  i  Nor.,  1818;  d.  there,  II  i

He  studied  in  the  BostOfl  Jjitm-school  in
id  in  the  latter  year  was  sent  to  Montreal
college,  where  he  was  ap|H>inted  professor  of  rheto-
ric ami  l»elles-lettres  while  still  a  pupil.  BtOOfS*
Dieted  bJl  OOUrse  Of  Study  in  Montreal  in  1KI7,  and
then  took  a  course  in  the  (irand  seminary  of  St.
Sulpiie,  Paris,  He  returned  in  IKC.I.  and  was  or-
dained in  1*1(».  His  first  mission  was  at  the  Bos-
ton cathedral. He  was  afterward  appointed  BMlOf

ist  Cambridge,  where  he  wcoeeded  in  compos-
ing dissensions  of  longstanding.  He  VM  nomi-
nated coadjutor  bishop  of  Boston  in  1844  '""'  m
1H4<I  succeeded  Bishop  Fenwick.  His  administra-
tion was  signaled  by  many  lamentable  occurrences.
In  1854  the  Koman  Catholic  church  of  Dorchester
was  blown  up  by  unknown  pSTJQSJS,  and  the  "  KIls-
worth  outrage  "  took  place,  in  which  a  petal  s  sj  in-
humanly treated  by  his  fellow-citizens.  He  visited
Koine  in  1H54.  and  on  Ins  return  had  a  remarkable
OOUtrOTSrSJ  with  the  Boston  scIkm.I  board,  which
te-ulted  in  the  repeal  of  rules  that  were  obnoxious
to  the  Koman  Catholic  pupils.  The  Koinau
Catholic  population  increased  so  rapidly  under  his
administration  that  in  1*58  two  new  dioceses  were
created  out  of  that  of  Boston.  When  he  entered
OB.  his  spisoopatfl  there  were  forty  priests  and  forty
churches  in  his  diocese;  at  its  close  there  were
time  hundred  priests  and  three  hundred  churches.
He  hat!  also  erected  one  of  the  finest  orphan  asy-
lums in  the  country,  a  large  reformatory,  a  hospital,
a  college,  and  had  increased  the  number  of  reli-
gious communities  and  orders  fivefold.

F1TZSI.MM0NS,  Thomas,  statesman, b.  in  Ire-
land in  1741  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  August,
1811.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  and  became  a
merchant  in  Philadelphia.  During  the  Revolu-
tionary war  he  commanded  a  company  of  volun-
teers. He  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the
Pennsylvania  assemblv, a  delegate  to  the  Continen-
tal congress  in  1782-'8.  and  to  the  Constitutional
convention  in  1787.  From  1789  till  1795  he  sat  in
the  National  congress.  In  1780  the  firm  of  George
M.a.le  &  Co..  of  which  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  was  a
member,  subscribed  £5,000  toward  supplying  the
Continental  army  with  necessary  equipments.  Mr.
Fitzsimmons  was  president  of  the  Philadelphia
chamber  of  commerce,  and  also  of  the  North  Amer-
ican insurance  companv.

FLAGKT,  Benedict  Joseph,  K.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Contournat.  Auvergne,  France,  7  Nov.,  1763;
d.  in  Nazareth.  Ky..  11  Feb.,  1850.  ne  was  first
educated  in  the  college  of  Billoin,  and  afterward
took  a  course  of  philosophv  in  the  I'niversity  of
Ciermont.  He  then  studied  theology  at  the  Sulpi-
tian  college  in  the  same  city,  and  became S  inemU'r
of  that  order  in  17*8.  He  continued  his  studies  at
bay,  usnr  Paris,  and  in  1788  was  ordained  priest.
He  was  protean  of  dogmatic  theology  for  two
y.ars  in  the  I'niversity  of  Nantes,  ami  filled  the
same  office  in  the  seminary  of  Angers  at  the  haste-
ning of  the  French  revolution.  He  was  obliged  to
tl\.  and  cams  in  1788  to  Baltimore.  Md..  whence  he
was  at  once  sent  by  Dr.  Carrol  as  chaplain  to  Vin-
cennes,  then  a  military  |>ost  in  the  northwest.
During  six  months  of  delay  at  Pittsburg  he  acted
M  chaplain  to  the  Catholics  in  the  army  of  (Jen.
Wayne,  who  was  organizing  a  force  to  attack  the
Indians.  His  congregation  at  Vincennes  was  com-
posed of  7(M)  half-breeds,  who  were  little  Utter
than  savages,  and  his  success  in  civilizing  them
was  considerable.  He  was  recalled  in  1 7'.»~»  and
sent  t>>  QeorgStown  college,  where  he  was  professor
for  three  years. In  1798  he  accompanied  two  other


476


PLAOET


FLAGG


Sulpit ians  to  Hiivaim  for  tho  purpose  of  estal>li>h-
ollege  in  t hut  city,  hut  they  met  with  oi>ih>-
sitinii  from  tlif  native  clergy,  and  were  forbidden
to  perforin  any  priestly  function.  Father  Fluget's
two  companions  withdrew  from  the  island,  hut.  as
he  was  prostrated  by  yellow  fever,  they  hod  to  leave
him  behind.  On  hi*  recovery  he  became  tutor  to
the  sous  of  a  wealthy  Cuban,  and,  on  the  death  of
the  archbishop,  was  restored  to  his  sacerdotal  privi-
leges. During  this  period  he  rendered  great  ser-
vice to  the  Orleans  princes,  which  were  warmly  re-
ciprocated when  Louis  PhilipjHj  became  king  of
the  French.  Father  Flaget  left  Havana  in  1801,
taking  with  him  twenty-three  young  Cubans  to  be
educated  at  Georgetown  college.  The  ensuing
seven  years  were  spent  in  college  duties  and  mis-
sionary labors.  About  the  year  1804  he  had  peti-
tioned to  be  received  into  the  order  of  Trappista,
the  severest  in  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  but  in

1808  he  was  ap-
pointed bishop  of
Bardstown,  Ky.,
and  though  he
made  several  ef-
forts to  be  released,
and  went  to  Europe
for  this  purpose,
ho  was  consecrated
on  his  return  in
1810.  He  arrived
at  Bardstown  in
the  following  year.
The  number  of
priests  in  his  dio-
cese, which  extend-
ed from  the  Atlan-
tic states  to  the
Mississippi,  and
from  the  lakes  to
the  thirty-fifth  parallel,  was  only  seven,  with  ten
chapels,  and  six  more  in  course  of  erection.  To
meet  the  demand  for  priests  he  gave  great  atten-
tion to  the  diocesan  seminarv.  In  1817  he  was  able
to  send  missionaries  to  the  French  and  Indian  com-
munities living  around  the  great  lakes,  as  well  as
to  supply  Indiana  and  Michigan.  By  his  request
he  was  given  an  assistant,  Father  David,  in  1819,
and  in  the  following  years  he  was  engaged  in  a  cor-
respondence with  Rome  relative  to  the  creation  of
new  sees.  He  was  the  first  to  suggest  the  erection
of  an  archiepiscopal  see  in  the  west.  His  advice
was  also  sought  by  the  propaganda  with  regard  to
affairs  external  to  the  church  in  the  United  States,
and  a  controversy  that  existed  for  some  time  be-
tween the  Sulpitians  of  Canada  and  the  bishop  of
Suebec  was  decided  according  to  his  suggestion,
e  attended  the  first  provincial  council  at  Balti-
more in  1829,  and  in  the  following  year,  owing  to
declining  health,  resigned  his  see.  His  resignation
was  accepted,  but  so  great  was  the  opposition  of
the  clergy  and  laity  of  the  west  that  he  was  com-
pelled to  withdraw  it.  During  the  cholera  epi-
demic of  1833  his  attention  to  the  afflicted  of  all
classes  and  creeds  excited  general  admiration.  In
1834  he  received  a  new  coadjutor  in  the  person  of
Bishop  Chabrat.  Up  to  this  time  he  had  erected
four  colleges,  a  large  female  orphan  asylum  and
infirmary,  eleven  academies  for  girls,  and  had  in-
troduced three  religious  sisterhoods  and  four  re-
ligious orders  of  men.  He  was  in  Europe  from
is:*,"")  till  1839,  and  in  1841  the  seat  of  his  diocese
was  removed  from  Bardstown  to  Louisville.  In
1843  he  built  a  convent  and  hospital  at  his  own  ex-
pense, and  in  1848  was  instrumental  in  establish-
ing a  colony  of  Trappists  at  Gethsemane,  fourteen


■^ArtD^TJ/^yct-


miles  from  Bardstown.  The  remainder  of  his  life,
owing  to  his  infirmities  and  his  extreme  age,  was
pa— oa  in  strict  retirement.

FLAGG,  A/aiiah  Cutting,  politician,  b.  in
Clinton  county.  X.  V..  in  1790;  u.  in  New  York
city.  24  Nov..  IN?:;.  When  he  was  nine  yean
his  father  removed  to  Richmond,  N't.,  and  at  the
age  of  eleven  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  in
Burlington.  Here  he  remained  until  aL.ut  1*11.
when  he  removed  to  Plattsburg,  N.  V..  and  served
as  a  soldier  in  the  war  of  1812,  participating  in
several  engagements.  In  1812  or  1813,  Mr.  Flagg
established  the  Plattsburg  "  Republican,"  of
which  he  was  for  many  years  the  editor  and
owner.  In  1823-'4  he  reprocntcd  Clinton  county
in  the  assembly,  and  in  1820  was  appointed  by
Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton  secretary  of  state,  which
office  he  held  until  1833.  He  was  comptroller  of
the  state  in  1834-'9,  and  again  in  1842-'6.  During
almost  his  entire  public  life,  and  especially  after
his  removal  to  the  city  of  New  York,  in  1846,  Mr.
Flagg  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Democratic

Earty  in  the  state,  and  also  bore  the  reputation  of
eing  one  of  its  ablest  financiers.  For  many
years  he  discussed  the  political  questions  of  the
day  in  the  columns  of  the  Albany  "  Argus."  He
was  one  of  the  most  determined  opponents  of  the
U.  S.  bank,  rendered  efficient  aid  to  De  Witt
Clinton  in  moulding  public  opinion  with  regard  to
his  canal  policy,  and  later  was  outspoken  in  his
opposition  to  the  pro-slavery  tendencies  of  the
Democratic  party.  He  was  elected  comptroller  of
the  city  of  New  York  in  1852,  and  re-elected  in
1855.  Soon  after  leaving  office,  in  1859,  he  became
blind,  but  never  lost  his  interest  in  current  politi-
cal events. — His  nephew,  Willard  Cutting,  agri-
culturist, b.  in  Moro.  Madison  co.,  III.,  10  Sept.,
1829 ;  d.  there,  30  March,  1878,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1854,  and  then  took  charge  of  his  father's
extensive  farm.  He  soon  became  prominent  in
local  politics,  was  collector  of  internal  revenue  for
the  12th  district  of  Illinois  in  1862-'9,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  senate  in  1869-'73.  He  wrote
frequently  for  the  press  on  agricultural  and  politi-
cal subjects,  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the
"  farmers'  movement "  in  the  west,  and  was  chosen,
in  1873,  first  president  of  the  Illinois  state  farm-
ers' association.  He  served,  in  addition,  as  trustee
of  the  Industrial  university,  Champaign,  111.,  presi-
dent of  the  National  agricultural  congress,  and
secretary  of  the  American  pomological  society.
He  was  for  many  years  horticultural  editor  of  the
"  Prairie  Farmer,  and  for  a  few  months  before
his  death  was  editor-in-chief  of  the  "American
Encyclopaedia  of  Agriculture,"  for  which  he  had
collected  much  valuable  material.  He  was  con-
sidered one  of  the  best  nomologists  of  the  day.

FLAGG,  Edmund,  author,  b.  in  Wiscasset,
Me.,  24  Nov.,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Bow-
doin  in  1835,  and  soon  afterward  taught  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  where  he  also  contributed  to  the  "  Louis-
ville Journal,"  with  which  his  connection  contin-
ued for  nearly  thirty  years.  He  read  law  in  St.
Louis,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837.
He  edited  the  St.  Louis  "  Commercial  Bulletin"  in
1838,  served  with  George  D.  Prentice  as  associate
editor  of  the  "  Louisville  Literary  News-Letter"
in  1838-'9,  practised  law  in  Vicksburg,  Mis^..  in
1840-'l,  ana  at  the  same  time  was  editor  of  the
"  Whig,"  in  which  capacity  he  was  severely  wound-
ed in  a  duel  with  the  editor  of  the  \  icksburg
"  Sentinel."  He  owned  and  conducted  the  "  Ga-
zette" at  Marietta,  Ohio,  in  1842.  and  the  St.
Louis  "Evening  Gazette  "in  1844-'5.  He  subse-
quently acted  as  the  official  reporter  of  the  courts


FLAGG


PLAGG


•177


ported it  rolui f  il.li.r

litutional convention of Missouri, ami in

I vat ateretan of legation al Berlin. In

1 1 In-  VM I  .  S.  OOMU  ut Venice, ami ajn

tpondent  for  several  New  York  journals. On

ln«  return,  in  February,  1809,  ha  at  omi  took

Democratic  paper  in  St.  Louis,  and

1  it  during  tin-  presidential  campaign  <»f  that

rear. He  was  afterward  placed  at  the  head  of  the

bureau  of  statistics  in  tin-  Department  "f  state  al

hington,  and  prepared,  by  order  of  congress,  a

rsporl  on  the  commercial  relations  of  the  united

States  with  »11  foreign  nattooa  [4  tola,

Tlii^.  with  reports  on  the  cotton  mid  tobacco  trades,

and  Dumerous  annual  statements  resjieeting  f<>r-

conimerce  ami  emigration,  have made Mr.

rg's name familiar t<> merchants, not only

throughout  the  country,  but  in  Europe. Having

ned  his  office  in  the  state  department.  Mr.
rg  acted,  in  lKoM-'(H),  as  Washington  cor-
•ndent  of  the  western  press.  From  1NJ11  till
1870  he  had  charge  of  copyrights  in  the  Depart-
ment of  the  interior,  and  has  since  resided  near
Falls  Church,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  where  he  has
practised  law.  In  ]H36Mr.  Flagg  wrote  "Sketches
of  a  Traveller"  for  the  "Louisville  Journal,"
afterward  included  in  "The  Far  West"  (New
York.  1**8).  He  also  contributed  to  Park  lien-
jamiu's  ••  New  World  "  a  series  of  seven  historical
romances,  liascd  on  the  dramas  of  Victor  Hugo.
In  1848  he  was  awarded  a  prize  of  $100  for  a  novel
entitled  ••  The  Howard  yueen,"  and  in  1850  a  simi-
lar i>ri/.c  for"  Blanche  of  Artois."  He  also  wrote
"  Kifmoml  Dantes."  a  sequel  to  "Monte  Christo"
(Philadelphia,  1848;  new  ed.,  1884);  "Venice,  the
City  of  the  Sea,  1797-1849,"  his  chief  work  (2  vols.,
New  York.  1858):  "North  Italy  since  1849";  and
••  De  Molai,  the  Last  of  the  Military  Grand  Mas-
ter-," an  historical  romance,  the  last  two  not  yet
published.  He  has  also  written  "  Mary  Tudor  "and
other  dramas,  which  have  been  put  on  the  stage,
and  ha-  jn  preparation  his  "Reminiscences."

FLAGG,  George  Whiting,  artist,  b.  in  New
Haven, Conn., 2<> June. 1*1(1. He passed his
boyhood  in Charleston,  S.  C,  afterward studied
art  with  his  uncle,  Washington  Allston,  and  ex-
cited admiration  bv  his  precocity,  as  shown  in  a
portrait  of  Bishop  England,  and  other  efforts. "  A
Boy Listening to a  Ghost Story," "  A Young
Greek,**  and  "Jacob  and  Rachel  at  the  Well,"  be-
long  to  this  jH>riod  of  his  career. A  picture  en-
titled the  "  Murder  of  the  Princes,"  from  "Richard
III.."  procured  him  the  patronage  of  Luman  Read,
of  New  York,  through  whose  aid  he  spent  three
rs  in  study  in  Europe,  and  afterward  lived  for
vears  in London. He  afterward  returned  to
New Haven,  ami subsequently  removed to  New
York city. His works comprise historical and
genre  pictures,  with  some  portraits. Among  those
best  known  may  Im-  mentioned  "Landing  of  the
Pilgrims"; "Landing  of the Atlantic  Cable";
"  Washington Receinng  his Mother's  Blessing4,"
which  has  been  frequently  engraved :  "The  Good
Samaritan  "  :  and  "  Columbus  and  the  Egg"  1 1  -
"The  Match Girl,"  "Haidee."  and "The Scarlet
•  r"  were  painted  in London. Mr.  Flagg  was
ted  ■  member  <»f  the  National  academy  of  de-
in  1851. The  "London  Art  Journal"  refer-
to  hil  "  Haidee"  as  "a  single  figure  painted  with
mu>  h  tenderness." The same authority  said  of
"Columbus": "It is  generally  low  in  tone,
but  rich  and  harmonious  in  color,  and  the  heads
are  distinguished  by  much  nobility  of  character."
ut  of  ill  health,  Mr.  Flagg  has  painted
but  little  of  late  years.— His  brother,  Jured  Ilrad-


'  ley.  arti-t,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  K.June,  1890.
studied  painting  with  George  Whiting  Flagg.
also  received  instruction  from  Washington  Allston.
Winn  on..  fears  old,  he  exhibited  in  the

my  a  portrait  of  his  father,  which
was  favorably noticed by the  criti  'led

in Hartford,  but in 184U  removed to  New  York,
and  the  following  year  was  elected  an  aSSjdansif
lie pursued the -tudvof  theology  at intervals  in
connection  with  that  of  art.  and  entered  the  min-
i-try of  the  Protestant Kpiscoiml  church  in  l-
He  nreived  the  decree  of  A.  M.  from  Trin::
in  1861, and  that  of  S.T.  D.  from  Columbia"  in  1868.
For  ten  years  he  devoted  himself  to  the  discharge
of  his  duties,  when  he  returned  to  the  practice  of

his  art. Dr.  Plagg  has  occasionally  painted ideal

figure  pictures, hoi  still  makes  portraits  a  sjM-cialty.

Anions  the  more  notable  of  the  latter  are  pictures
of  several  of  the  judges  of  the  New  York  court  of
appeals,  including  a  three-quarter  length  of  Chief-
Justice  Church,  which  have  l>een  placed  in  the  m-w
capitol ;  a  life-size  full-length  of  William  M.  Kvarts,
also  to  be  hung  in  the  capitol  (1887);  and  several

Kortraits  of  Commodore  Vanderbilt.  one  of  which
angs  in  the  directors'  room  at  the  Grand  Central
ilejMit,  New  York.  His  other  pictures  include"  Holy
Thoughts"  and  "Paul  before  Felix "  (1849),  and
"  Angelo  and  Isabella  "  ( lHoO).

FLAGG,  Henry  Collins,  lawyer,  b.  near
Charleston,  in  the  parish  of  St.  Thomas,  S.  <
Jan.,  1792;  d.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,  8  March,  1868.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1811,  studied  law,  and
began  practice  in  New  Haven.  He  took  an  active
part  in  politics,  Opposing  the  Federalist  party  in
Connecticut,  both  as  a  puolic  speaker  and  as  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "  Connecticut  Herald."  He
was  also  clerk  of  the  New  Haven  county  court.  In
1824  he  returned  to  South  Carolina,  where  he
practised  law  until  1833,  when  he  again  took  up  his
residence  in  New  Haven,  in  order  to  educate  his
children.  He  retired  from  the  bar  in  1842.  From
1834  till  1839  he  held  the  office  of  mayor.  His
attachment  to  his  native  state  was  strong,  but  his
devotion  to  the  Union  was  stronger,  and,  in  com-
mon with  his  friend.  James  L.  Petigru,  he  stead-
fastly opposed  the  niilliticrs  of  1K52.

FLAGG,  John  Foster  Brewster,  phya*  ian,
b.  in  Boston, Mass..  12  Mav,  1804;  d.  in  West  Clus-
ter, Pa..  8  Sept.,  1872.  He  was  educated  in  his
native  city,  and  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from
the  Rhode  Island  medical  society.  Pet  ween  1850
and  1860  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  and  physi-
ology in  the  Philadelphia  college  of  dentistry,  and
subsequently  held  a  cliair  in  the  Pennsylvania  col-
lege of  dental  surgery.  He  is  the  author  of  a
standard  work  entitled  "Fther  and  Chloroform,
their  Fmplovmeiit  in  Surgery,  Dentistrv.  Mid-
wiferv,  etc.  "'(Philadelphia.  Vj6l\

FLAGG,  Wilson,  naturalist,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,o  Nov.,  lxo.">;  d.  in  North  Cambridge,  Mass.,
<i  May,  l^sj.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips  Ando-
ver  academy,  and  entered  Harvard  in  1M23.  but
remained  there  only  three  months,  leaving  to  de-
vote himself  to  the  study  of  medicine:  he,  how-
ever, never  practised.  In  early  manhood  he  made
a  pedestrian  tour  alone  from  Tennessee  to  Virginia,
ami  denes  home,  lie  also  delivered  lectures  alxiut
the  same  time  on  natural  science.  Meanwhile  he
had  developed  a  taste  for  political  discussion,  and
became  a frequent contributor  to  the Boston

"  Weekly  Magazine"  and  the  Boston  "POOL*  In
lK-W  he  esased  writing  on  polttinal  subjects,  and
turned  his  attention  almost  exclusively  to  the
agricultural  journals.  His  jiapers  in  "Ilo\.\"-
Magazine  of  Horticulture" formed the IwisU ,.f


•ITS


KLANAGIIAN


FLANDRAU


tfUru(ftfo<L


his  first  book.  Manv  of  his  articles  also  ap-
peared in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly."  Prota  L844
till  1818  be  ITU  employed  in  the  Boston  custom-
house. In  1850  he  removed  to  Cambridge,  Mam,
where  he  afterward  re-
sided, lie  WM  the  au-
thor of  "Studies  in
the  Field  and  For-
e-i  "  (Iioston,  1857) ;
"  Woods  and  By-
Ways  of  New  Eng-
land "  (1872) ;  and
"  Birds  and  Seasons
of  New  England "
(1875).  Be  also  edited
44  Mount  Auburn,  its
Scenes,  its  Beauties,
and  its  Lessons."  Most
of  the  matter  con-
tained in  the  three
volumes  first  men-
tioned has  been  repub-
lished, with  some  new
material,  under  the  ti-
tle "  Halcyon  Days,"  "  A  Year  with  the  Trees,"
and  44A  Year  with  the  Birds"  (8  vols.,  Boston,
1881). — His  son,  Isaac,  educator,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  7  Sept.,  1843,  was  a  student  at  Phillips  An-
dover  academy,  and  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1864.
After  serving  as  tutor  in  Greek  at  Harvard  from
1865  till  1869,  he  studied  in  the  universities  of
Berlin  and  Gottingen  during  1870-'l.  He  has
since  been  professor  of  Greek  at  Cornell  univer-
sity, and  has  edited  '4  The  Hellenic  Orations  of
Demosthenes"  (Boston,  1864)  and  "The  Seven
Against  Thebes  of  ^Eschylus  "  (Boston,  1885).

FLANAGHAN,  James  Winright,  lawyer,  b.
in  Gordonsville,  Va.,  5  Sept.,  1805. In  1814  his

f>arents  removed  to  Kentucky,  where  he  received  a
United  education,  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,
and  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  for  twelve  years.
He  was  a  member  of  the  circuit  court  of  Breckin-
ridge county  from  1833  till  1843,  when  he  removed
to  Harrison  county,  Kentucky,  and  after  spending
one  year  settled  in  Henderson,  Rusk  co.,  Texas,
where  he  was  the  first  to  sell  merchandise.  He
also  became  interested  in  cotton-planting.  He  was
a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in
1851-'2,  and  of  the  state  senate  in  1855-'6.  In
1857  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  a  delegate
to  the  peace  congress  of  1861.  He  was  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  conventions  of  1866  and
1868.  In  1869  he  was  elected  to  congress  for  the
state  at  large,  and  in  that  year  he  also  held  the
office  of  lieutenant-governor.  He  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  1870
till  1875,  and  was  a  member  of  the  committees  on
mines  and  mining,  and  post-offices,  and  chairman
of  the  committee  on  education  and  labor.  After
his  service  he  retired  to  his  farm  near  Longview,
Texas,  and  occasionally  appears  in  court,  notwith-
standing his  advanced  age.  He  was  an  "  old-line
Whig  "  before  he  united  with  the  Republican  party.
— His  son,  Webster,  politician,  b.  in  Cloverport,
Breckenridge  co.,  Ky.,  9  Jan.,  1832,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1851,  and  became  interested  in  poli-
tics, holding  important  local  offices.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  in  the  Confederate  ser-
vice. In  1865  he  was  appointed  judgv  of  the  5th
judicial  district  of  Texas.  He  was  elected  to  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1869,  and  two
years  afterward  became  lieutenant-governor  of  the
state.  He  was  chairman  of  the  delegation  to  the
Republican  convention  which  met  in  Philadelphia


in  1872,  and  served  as  meml)er  of  the  Texas  senate
till  1H7"),  when  he  represented  his  district  In  aa>
othcr  constitutional  oonTentfcm,  thns  saristing  in
the  formation  and  adoption  of  two  state  constitu-
tions. In  18H0  he  was  a  Texas  memljer  of  the
"Grant  guard"  at  the  Chicago  convention.  Tlie
civil  service  was  brought  under  discussion,  and
when  Mr.  Barker,  from  Massachusetts,  declared
that  certain  ones  had  an  "eye  to  the  offices,"  Mr.
Flanaghan  denounced  the  resolution,  and  asked,
•■  What  are  we  here  fort"  which  question  was  re-
ceived with  great  applause,  and  brought  him  prom-
inently into  notice  for  the  time.  In  1884  he  was  a
member  of  the  Chicago  convention,  and  supported
Gen.  Arthur,  who  appointed  him  collector  of  inter-
nal revenue  for  the  4th  district  of  Texas  in  1884,
which  office  he  held  one  year.  Since  then  he  has
devoted  himself  to  his  stock  farm,  and  has  intro-
duced fine  horses  and  Jersey  cattle  into  the  state.
From  1876  till  1880  he  was  president  of  the  Hen-
derson and  Overton  railroad.

FLANDERS,  Ken  jam  in  Franklin,  statesman,
b.  in  Bristol,  N.  H.,  26  Jan.,  1816.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1842,  removed  to  New  Or-
leans in  1843,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice,  at  the  same  time  devoting
much  of  his  time  to  teaching  in  the  public  schools
of  the  city,  of  which  he  was  for  several  years  the
principal,  being  finally  chosen  superintendent  in
the  3a  municipality,  an  office  which  he  declined.
He  was  part  proprietor  and  one  of  the  editors  of  the
New  Orleans  "Tropic,"  a  short-lived  newspaper.
In  1862  he  was  compelled  to  leave  New  Orleans
for  the  north  because  of  his  devotion  to  the  Union,
but  on  the  capture  of  that  city  he  returned,  and  in
the  same  year  the  Federal  military  authorities
made  him  treasurer  of  New  Orleans.  This  office
he  resigned  in  a  few  months,  having  been  elected
a  representative  to  congress,  as  a  Unionist,  taking
his  seat  within  a  fortnight  of  its  final  adjourn-
ment, in  March,  1863.  In  that  year  Sec.  Chase
appointed  him  supervising  special  agent  of  the
treasury  department  for  Louisiana,  Mississippi,
and  Texas,  which  place  he  resigned  in  1866.  In
June,  1867,  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan  created  him
military  governor  of  Louisiana,  superseding  J.
Madison  Wells,  an  office  which  he  assumed  with-
out inauguration  ceremonies,  and  resigned  in  six
months.  By  the  choice  of  Gov.  Warmoth,  he  was
made  mayor  in  May,  1870,  and  in  November  fol-
lowing was  elected  for  two  years.  In  1873  Gen.
Grant  appointed  him  U.  S.  assistant  treasurer  in
New  Orleans,  and  this  office  he  held  until  1885.

FLANDERS,  Henry,  lawver,  b.  in  Plainfield,
Sullivan  co.,  N.  H.,  13  Feb.,  "1826.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Kimball  academy  and  at  the  seminary  in
Newbury,  Vt.  He  studied  law,  chiefly  with  his
father,  Charles  Flanders,  who  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1808,  and  a  well-known  member  of  the
New  Hampshire  bar.  In  1850  he  settled  in  Phila-
delphia, where  he  has  since  practised.  He  is  the
author  of  a  "  Treatise  on  Maritime  Law  "  (Boston,
1852) :  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Shipping  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1853);  "Chief  Justices  of  the  United  States
Supreme  Court "  (1855-'8) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Cumber-
land" (1856);  "  An  Exposition  of  the  Constitution
of  the  United  States"  (1860);  and  a  "Treatise  on
the  Principles  of  Insurance"  (1871).

FLANDRAU,  Thomas  Macomb,  physician,  b.
in  New  York,  8  Julv,  1826.  His  youth  was  spenl
in  Georgetown,  D.  C.  He  studied  under  George
J.  Abbott  in  Washington,  and  was  graduated  at
the  National  medical  college  in  Washington  in
1848.  After  practising  in  Georgetown,  he  settled
in  Rome,  N.  Y.,  in  1853,  making  specialties  of  sur-


PLASTI1


mini;


199


I  anil  obstetrics,  and  has  since  rw»i«l«  •!  there,

with  the  exception  of  live  yean  epent  in  Brock|»ort,

.'  in-  «!»•«  commissioned  surgeon  of

w York regiment, was promoted

•  ■in  i.f  brigade  in  1808,  and  wreeoii  hi  nhfaf
of  tli«'  2d  « 1  i  \  ision,5th  corps,  Army  nf  tin-  IN>|ntu;t<-.
in  1864. In  1865  he  was  discharged  from  thi

. having  liecii l>r«-\ «-t  t«-< L  lieutenant-colonel  of

S.  volunteers for  meritorious  d the

field. In  lnint  be  mi  app>intcd  F.  s.  |  tension  i  \
mining  Burgeon,  which  office  be  now  holds  t !
II- was ii delegate  tn  the  International medical

Hiw  Ht  Philadelphia  in  1878b  Dr.  Flandrau  is
a  member  of  the  New  York  state  medical  society,
of  the  American  median]  association,  and  of  the
Oneida  county  medical  society,  of  which  he  was

E-  .•  lent  in  1870. — His  brother,  Charles  Eugene,
iwyi-r.  I».  in  New  York  city,  15  July,
educated  in  Georgetown,  I).  ('.  Prom  1841  till
1844  he  was  a  sailor  before  tin-  mast.  He  learned
a  trade  in  1848— T.  After  studying  law  in  White*-
boro,  N.  V..  In- whs  admitted  t<>  the  U»r  in  1801,
settled  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  in  1  KM.  and  was  a  iik-im-
ber  of  the  territorial  oouncil  of  Minnesota  in  1886,
F.  S.  Indian  agent  for  the  Sioux  tribe  in  1066-*?.
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of
Minnesota  in  185 7,  and  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  territory  and  state  of  Minnesota  from
:  till  1864.  In  18(12  he  defeated  the  Sioux
Indians  in  the  battle  of  New  Ulin,  Minn.,  which
saved  the  town  of  that  name.  In  1807  he  was
elected  president  of  the  first  board  of  trade  of
Minneapilis.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Democratic
state  central  committee  in  l8<>8-'9.

FLASCH.  Kilian.  EL  C  bishop,  b.  in  Retzstadt,
Havana,  in  1K51.  He  came  with  his  parents  to
the  United  States  in  1847.  studied  in  the  college  of
Notre  Dame,  Indiana,  and  afterward  in  the  semi-
nary of  Milwaukee,  began  his  theological  studies
in  the  Salesianum,  Milwaukee,  in  1K>0,  and  was
ordained  priest  in  1K>9.  He  was  assigned  to  mis-
sionary work  at  Laketown,  where  he  remained
until  1880,  when  he  was  appointed  professor  in  the
Salesianum.  He  resigned  in  1807,  and  took  charge
of  an  orphan  asylum  near  Milwaukee.  In  1879
he  was  appointed  rector  of  the  Salesianum,  and  in
1881  consecrated  bishop  of  La  Crosse.

I  I  VSH,  Henry  Lvden,  poet,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
( Ado,  90  Jan.,  1835. His  parents  were  residents  of
the  West Indies,  who  removed  to  New  Orleans  in
Henry  was  graduated  at  the  Western  mili-
tary institute  of  Kentucky  in  1863. At  the  liegin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confederate
army,  and  served  as  a  volunteer  aide  on  the  staff-
Gen. William J. Hardee  and Gen.  Joseph
'heeler. At  its  close  he  edited  the  "Confeder-
in Macon.  Ga. He  engaged  in  business  in
Jew  Orleans  from  lHiili  until  hi-  retirement  in  1888,
id  at  present  (18*7) re-id.--,  in  Log  Angela*,  QaL
lr.  Flash  is  best  known  under  the  iH-n-names  of
Lvden Eclair"  and "Harry Flash.*' He  has
iblished  a  volume  of  poems  (New  York.  181
FLKKT,  Thomas, printer, b. in Shropshire,
England,  8  Sept..  1800:  d.  In Beaton,  Ham,  01
Inly,  17-X. He  learned  the  business  of  printing  in
Metal,  England,  and  came  to  America  at  the  age  of
ft  i  eaieu  and  established  Mm— if  (n  ••  pudding
tow  Devonshire  street),  Beaton.  He  married.
h  Goose,  daughter  of  a  wealthy  Bostonian.
June.  1715. His  mother-in-law,  who  lived  at  his
-pent  her  whole  time  in  the  nurtarj  and  in
mndering  about  the  bouse,  pouring  forth,  ia  un-
llodknia  Strains,  an  abimdan<-e  of  rhymes  for  th--

awnanl  of  Fleet'-  infant  son,  greatly  t<>  the
jyance  of  the  whole  neighlnirhood,  and  of  Fleet


in  (Mirticular. He  endeavored  for  a  long  tin
run iiii-an-  in  Ul  |»'«<  r.  to  put  an  and  to  it  ;  but
his Mad mother-in-law would not l»
Finallv he  0000*1  red  the  idea  of  quietly  writing

down  baraonga,  which  he  did.  and  published  them

in  IsMik-form  umler  the  title.  M8ongJ  for  the
Nurx-rs  :  or.  Mother Oooae'l  Melodies  for  Children.
Printed  by  T,  Fleet,  at  his  Printing  House,  Pud-
ding Fane  [now  Devon-hire  Street].  171!i  !
two  coppers."  The  boat,  was  |M)pular  and  re-
munerative. In  17:11  Fle.t  built  himself  a  man-
sion on  the  corner  of  Water  street,  baring  for  hi-,
sign  a  heart  ami  crown.  Hen-  he  Brad  with  his
familv.  prosecuted  printing  and  editing,  and  main-
tained a  shop  ami  an  auction-room.  In  1700  Bt
became  proprietor  and  publisher  of  the  •'  Weekly
Rehearsal,"  which  two  years  afterward  was  changed
to  tin-  ••  Boatoa  Braning  Post."  and  in  Its  manage-
ment he  continued  until  his  death.  He  possessed
a  vein  of  keen  though  coarse  wit,  that  was  suited
to  the  times, and  aided  the  jtopularity  of  the  pa|>cr.
—  His  eld. -t  -on.  Thomas,  over  whos4-  cradle  the
celebrated  "Mother  Goose  Melodies"  were  gath-
ered, aided  his  father,  and  after  his  death  succeed-
ed him  in  the  management  of  the  [mj»er.  From
1779  till  1801  his  descendants  published  "  PI
Annual  Register."  and  printed  the  first  edition  of
Hutchinson'-  "  History  of  Massachusetts."
FLEMING,  John,  printer. He  was  one  of  the

Sublishers  of  the  Boston  "Chronicle"  in  17*i7.  the
r-t  paper  thai  was  published  twice  a  week  in  New
England.  In  the  second  year  of  its  publication  it
espoused  the  royal  cause,  and  in  1770  was  sus-
pended. Fleming  found  it  prudent  to  retire,  and
went  to  England  in  177:5.  and  subsequently  to
France,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.

FLEMING,  Michael.  K.C  Canadian  bishop,  b.
in  Ireland  alxnit  17S5;  d.  in  St.  John's,  Newfound-
land, in  1850.  He  was  nominated  coadjutor  to  the
vicar  ajMistolic  of  Newfoundland  in  1001,  and  in
1829  succeeded  to  the  vicariate.  At  this  time  New-
foundland was  without  schools,  and  had  only  a  few
churches.  The  knowledge  that  he  had  acquired  of
the  condition  of  the  peninsula  during  his  coadjutor-
ship  enabled  him  to  introduce  several  reform.-.  Ib-
divided  it  into  thirteen  districts,  and  built  churches,
piv-livteries,  and  schools  in  each.  In  1KM  he  ob-
tained permission  from  the  government  to  build  a
cathedral,  a  convent,  and  schools,  and  an  episcopal
residence,  on  some  land  near  St.  John's  which  was
valueless  for  other  purposes.  Hut  shortly  after-
ward the  government  retracted  the  oonmeaion  and
he  went  to  London  to  solicit  the  execution  of  the
promise.  He  was  successful,  and  on  his  return  in
1841  laid  the  foundation  Of  his  cathedral,  which
when  finished  was  one  of  the  noblest  editire-  in
America.  In  1846  he  sent  missionaries  to  Labrador.
In  1*4!!,  Pins  IX.  erected  the  city  of  St.  John's  into
a  bishopric  and  nominated  him  its  first  bishop.

FLEMING.  Sand  ford.  Canadian  engineer,  b.  in
Kirkcaldy.  Pifaabire,  Scotland.  7  .Ian..  1007.  Ha
received  his  early  training  there,  and  served  an  ap-
prenticeship as  a  surveyor  and  engineer.  He  emi-
grated to  Canada  in  1845,  and  in  1K>2  was  appointed
one  of  the  engineering  staff  of  the  Northern  rail-
way, then  known  as  the  Ontario.  Siineoe,  and
Huron  railway.  Subsequently  he  Hatted  the  Red
river  settlement,  for  the  purjtose  of  ascertaining
the  practicability  of  connecting  that  section  with
the  rest  of  Canada.  In  1803  he  went  to  Great
Britain  to  preoenl  the  memorial  of  the  inhabitants
of  Red  river  settlement,  jictitioning  for  railway
communication,  to  the  hnparial  government,  but
was  not  successful.  Qq  his  return  he  was  com-
mi-sioned  to  make  a  preliminary  survey  of  a  pro-


480


FLEMING


FLETCHER


jected  Una  of  mil  way  to  connect  the  maritime
provinces  with  Canada,  and  this  he  accomplished:
but  the  work  of  construction  was  not  prosecuted
to  any  treat  extent  until  the  completion  of  the
road  had  been  rendered  Imperative  m  INCiT  by  the
conditions  impond  u|m>ii  the  Dominion  govern-
ment by  the  articles  of  union  with  the  maritime
provinces.  Under  Mr.  Fleming's  supervision,  as
chief  engineer,  the  Intercolonial  railway  was  suc-
cessfully completed,  and  was  formally  opened  on

1  July,  187(5.  While  this  railway  was  under  con-
struction, Mr.  Fleming  was  ordered  in  1871  to  sur-
vey a  line  that  would  connect  old  Canada  with  the
Pacific  ocean.  This  work  he  had  most  successfully
prosecuted,  when  political  exigencies  arose,  and  he
resigned  in  1880.  Though  he  was  not  afterward
connected  with  the  Canada  Pacific  railway,  the
ultimate  success  of  that  great  enterprise  was  owing
largely  to  his  skill.  In  recognition  of  his  ability
as  an  engineer,  he  was  made  in  1877  a  companion
of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George ;  in  1880
he  was  elected  chancellor  of  Queen's  university,
Kingston,  Ontario ;  in  1881  he  represented  the  Ca-
nadian institute  and  the  American  meteorological
society  at  the  International  geographical  congress
at  Venice ;  and  in  1884  the  Dominion  at  the  Inter-
national prime-meridian  conference  at  Washing-
ton, D.  C.  The  same  year  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  St.  Andrew's  university.  He  has
published  "  England  and  Canada,"  besides  reports
on  his  engineering  enterprises.

FLEMING,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Botetourt
county,  Va.,  in  1727;  d.  there  in  August,  1776.
He  commanded  200  men  at  the  battle  of  Point
Pleasant,  with  the  Indians,  in  1774.  Point  Pleasant
is  at  the  junction  of  the  Great  Kanawha  and  Ohio
rivers.  The  whites  were  commanded  by  Gen.
Andrew  Lewis,  of  Augusta  county,  Va.,  and  the
Indians  by  Cornstalk.  The  soldiers  of  Col.  Flem-
ing's division  concealed  themselves  behind  trees
and  held  out  their  hats,  which  the  Indians  fired  at.
The  hats  dropped,  the  Indians  ran  out  to  scalp
their  victims,  and  were  tomahawked  by  the  settlers,
who  were  all  backwoodsmen.  The  first  division
was  commanded  by  Col.  Charles  Lewis,  kinsman
and  neighbor  of  Col.  Fleming.  The  Indians  num-
bered about  1,000;  the  whites,  400.  Col.  Flem-
ing's division  was  attacked  on  the  bank  of  the
river,  a  low  bottom,  hemmed  in  on  both  sides  by
mountains.  After  leading  his  soldiers  with  great
bravery  and  discretion  in  two  charges,  Col.  Flem-
ing was  severely  wounded,  two  balls  passing  through
his  arm  and  one  through  his  breast.  After  cheer-
ing on  the  officers  and  soldiers,  he  retired  from  the
field.  In  March,  1776,  he  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  9th  Virginia  regiment  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  He  died  of  disease  that  had  been  contracted
by  fatigue  and  exposure  in  camp.

FLEMING,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  1734;  d.

2  Feb.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  college  in  1763,  was  a  member  of  the  house
of  burgesses  and  of  the  Virginia  conventions  in
1775-'6,  member  of  the  committee  on  independ-
ence in  May,  1776.  became  judge  of  the  general
court  and  presiding  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals,
and  served  as  a  delegate  from  Virginia  to  the
Continental  congress  in  1779-'81.

FLEMING,  William  Mayburv.  actor,  b.  in  Dan-
bury,  Conn.,  29  Sept.,  1817 ;  d.  in  New  York,  7  May,
1866.  He  began  his  professional  career  at  about
twenty  years  of  age,  and  became  known  chiefly  for
his  personations  of  Romeo,  Claude  Melnotte,  Kdgar
in  "  King  Lear,"  the  Bastard  in  "  King  John,"
Hamlet,  Richelieu,  Sir  Giles  Overreach,  Sir  Edward
Mortimer,  Mathias in  "The  Bells," Rolla,  Jack


Cade,  and  a  few  special  roles  of  poetic  character.
In  1852  lie  a-Miiiied  control  of  the  National  theatre,
Boston,  which  DC  directed  for  several  years.  After
visits  to  Kngiand  and  California,  lie  I'm -came  leasee
and  manager  of  the  Savannah  athenaeum  and  the
Macon  theatre  simultaneously,  acting  occasionally
as  a  star  on  his  own  stage.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  relinquished  his  busiie
in  the  south  at  pecuniary  loss,  and  soon  afterward
entered  the  National  service  as  a  paymaster,  rising
to  the  rank  of  colonel.  His  death  resulted  from
injuries  received  in  Gen.  Sherman's  Georgia  cam-
paign in  1864-'5.— His  son,  Maybnry,  is  a  dote
matic  critic,  now  (1887)  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the
New  York  "  Mail  and  Express."

FLETCHER,  Asaph,  physician,  b.  in  Westford,
Mass.,  28  June,  1746;  d.  in  Cavendish,  Vt.,  5  Jan..
1839.  He  was  elected  in  1780  to  the  convention
that  formed  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  and
labored  earnestly  to  introduce  into  that  instrument
the  principle  of  absolute  freedom  of  worship.  In
1787  he  removed  to  Cavendish,  Vt.,  where  he  soon
became  prominent.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Ver-
mont convention  that  applied  to  congress  for  ad-
mission of  that  state  into  the  Union,  and  also  of
a  subsequent  convention  for  revising  the  state
constitution.  Here,  as  in  Massachusetts,  he  ably
advocated  the  principles  of  religious  liberty.  I M
was  one  of  the  presidential  electors  that  made  James
Monroe  president  of  the  United  States. — His  son,
Richard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cavendish,  Vt.,  8  Jaiu,
1788;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  21  June,  1869,  was
graduated  from  Dartmouth  college  in  1806,  and,
having  studied  law  with  Daniel  Webster,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1809.  He  practised  in  Salis-
bury, N.  H.,  till  1819,  and  then  removed  to  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his
life.  He  was  distinguished  in  commercial  and
maritime  law,  and  particularly  in  the  law  of  marine
insurance.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  in  1836  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  de-
feating Charles  Sumner,  and  serving  one  term.  In
1848  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  Massachusetts
supreme  court,  which  office  he  held  until  his  resig-
nation in  1853.  He  then  resumed  his  practice,  but
retired  in  1858.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Brown  in
1848-'57,  and  for  a  short  time  was  an  overseer  of
Harvard.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  Brown  in  1839,  by  Dartmouth  in  1846,  and
by  Harvard  in  1849.  Judge  Fletcher  was  never
married. He  was  active  in  all  benevolent  enter-

E rises,  and  bequeathed  more  than  $100,000  to
•artmouth.  He  published  a  speech  to  his  con-
stituents, delivered  in  Faneuil  Hall  (Boston,  1837).
— Another  son,  Horace,  clergyman,  b.  in  Caven-
dish, Vt.,  28  Oct.,  1796;  d.  27  Nov.,  1871,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  continued  in  the
practice  of  his  profession  for  fifteen  years.  He
then  abandoned  it,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Townshend,  Vt.,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  most
useful  and  respected  ministers  in  his  native  state.
He  was  chosen  state  senator  in  1855.  In  1860,
Madison  university  conferred  upon  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D. — Another  son  Ryland,  governor  of
Vermont,  b.  in  Cavendish,  Vt.,  18  Feb.,  1799;  d.
in  Proctorsville,  Vt.,  19  Dec.,  1885,  studied  in  the
Norwich  military  academy,  and  became  a  farmer.
He  was  active  as  an  anti-slavery  agitator,  was
chosen  to  the  state  senate,  and  lieutenant-governor
of  Vermont  from  1854  till  1856,  when  he  was  elect-
ed governor  of  the  state  by  the  Free-soil  party,
serving  until  1868.  From  "l861  till  1S(»4  he  was  a
representative  in  the  legislature.  In  18(>4  he  was
a  presidential  elector  on  the  Republican  ticket.


FLKTCHKK


FLKTCHKR


4H1


I  I  I  li  ill  C Itenjamln.  governor-

:  the  17th  century. Col.  Fletcher,  who  «u

a  soldier  of  fortune,  was  appointed  governor  by

William  and Mary,  and,  after  soliciting  troops,

f. >r  the  Indian*,  and  war  stores,  armed  in

rk  <>ii  M  Am;..  1898. He  visited  the  Mo*
Imwk  triU'.  wh.s  entertained  by  the  varrioi
learned  their  character  and  dialect When  Benny-

lt-r  witit  to  the  relief  <>f  the  Indiana against  the
French,  Fletcher  joined  him  at  Schenectady,  on  17
Feb..  1698,  and  ■eirfttftd  the  Indian-,  who  gave  him
m  "f  "Great  White  Arrow."  During  his
administration  the  sum  <>f  t'600  for  the  defence  of
the  frontier  was  granted  by  the  assembly.  Fletcher
hail  inneh  difficulty  in  bringing  the  different  colo-
nial factions  to  an  agreement.  He  said  he  ruled
*a  divided,  contentious,  ami  Impoverished  |>eople."
Be  endeavored  to  obtain  control  of  the  Connecti-
cut militia,  which  had  been  improperly  granted
him in  his  commission;  bat the  assembly  of  thai

colony  refused
to  acknowledge
his  right,  and
sent  Winthrop
to  England  to
lay  the  mat-
ter lx»fore  the
council,  who
derided  in  fa-
vor of  Connec-
ticut. In  1698,
OoL  Fletcher
received  a  com-
mission from
William  and
Mary  to  assume
the  government
of  Pennsylva-
nia and  the
annexed  terri-
tories, which
had  been  urged
by  the  enemies
of  Penn  as  ne-
cessary for  the
safety  of  the
colony.  He  ar-
rived in  Phila-
delphia in  April,  1693,  in  great  pomp,  and  the  gov-
ernment was  immediately  surrendered  to  him.  An-
noyed by  the  subserviency  of  Lloyd  and  Markham,
Penn  wrote  to  Fletcher  cautioning  him  to  "tread
softly."  ;us  the  territory  and  government  were  his.
Fletcher  summoned  the  assembly,  and  thus  excited

tl pposition  of  the  council, which  protested  against

calling  the  legislature  in  defiance  of  the  laws  made
by  Penn.  The  assembly  met,  and  Fletcher  de-
manded money  to  defrav  the  expenses  incurred  in
the  expedition  against  the  French  in  Albany.  'Phis
demand  was  fortified  by  a  letter  from  Qmh  Mary,
in  which  she  expressed  her  will  that  all  the  colo-
nies should  contribute  troops  and  money  in  defence
of  the  frontier,  according  to  the  dictates  of  the
governor  of  New  York.  A  bill  of  a  penny  a  pound
for  the  support  of  the  government,  and  a  jm>11-
■f  six  shillings,  which  yielded  over  £700,  was
d.  Fletcher  ap|N>inted  William  Markham
deputy  governor,  and  then  returned  to  his  colony.
He  again  met  and  addressed  the  assembly  in  the
following  year.  During  his  stay  in  Pennsylvania
he  presided  at  the  trial  of  the  printer.  William
I  ford.  Desirous  of  introducing  printing  into
t<hcr  took  Bradford  to  New  York.
where  he  set  np  the  first  press, and  printed  the  cor-
poration laws. Fletcher  was  passionate,  reckless,

vol.  ii. — 31


and avaricious,  and  was  accused  of  paying  little
attention  to  the  navigation  laws, and  of  protecting

1>i  racy  for  his  private  gain.  He  denied  thi»,  but
lis  association  witii  Kind  and  Tew,  and  the  abun-
dance of  Arabian  and  Fast  India  foods  in  the
colony,  seemed  to  justify  the  suspicion.  I:
finally  deposed,  and  itdlomont  ap|M>iutcd  in  his
stead.  His  zeal  for  the  extension  ol  the  Anglican
church  in  the  colony  proved  an  era  in  the  religious
history  of  New  York.  He  built  a  small  BJMBal  in
the  fort  in  1698,  for  which  the  queen  sent  books,
[date,  and  other  furniture.  This  was  burned  in
1741.  and  little  is  known  <>f  its  history.  In  1697  a
charter  was  granted  for  building  a  church  on
••  Kind's  farm,"  which  was  called  Trinity  church,
and  the  present  building  of  this  name  standi  00
the  same  ground.  The  seal  ami  autograph  are
from  a  patent  of  city  property  granted  to  Samuel
Bayard  of  New  York  in  l«il»7.

FliKTCHKK.  J  a  met*  Cooler,  clergyman,  b.  in
Indianapolis,  Ind..  in  1N£J.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  184<>.  Afterstudying  theology  two  years
at  Princeton,  he  went  to  Europe  to  complete  his
theological  course  and  perfect  himself  in  the
l'leiuii  language,  in  order  to  become  a  missionary
in  Hayti.  lie  returned  to  the  United  States  in  180&
and  in  1851  abandoned  the  mission  to  Hayti.  and
went  to  Bio  de  .Janeiro  as  chaplain  missionary  of
the  American  and  foreign  Christian  union,  and
of  the  American  seamen's  friend  society.  He  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1854,  but  during
1855-'6  travelled  3,000  miles  in  Brazil  distributing
Bibles  as  t  lie  agent  of  the  American  Suiidav-schooi
union.  In  1n<>:»  he  travelled  2.(HK)  miles  up  the
Amazon,  and  made  a  collection  of  rare  objects  in
natural  history  for  Professor  Agassiz.  The  result
of  his  labor  was  Agassiz's  exploration  of  Brazil  in
1865.  In  1894-*5  Mr.  Fletcher  was  the  means  of
inducing  the  Brazilian  government  to  join  the
United  States  in  establishing  a  line  of  steamships
between  New  York  and  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  was
agent  of  the  American  tract  society  in  1868-'9,
U.  S.  consul  at  Oporto,  Portugal,  in  1869~'73,  and
missionary  at  Naples  in  lN7:{-'7,  after  which  he
again  returned  to  the  United  States  and  made  his
home  in  Indianapolis.  He  has  been  a  constant
contributor  to  the  periodical  press,  and  has  pub*
lished,  in  connection  with  Rev.  D.  P.  Kidder,
"  Brazil  and  the  Brazilians"  (Philadelphia,  1857;
Btfa  ed.,  1868).— His  daughter,  Julia  Constance,
author,  b.  about  1850,  is  a  resident  of  Rome,  and  a
favorite  in  the  literary  society  of  that  city.  Her
novels,  written  under  the  pen-name  of  "George
Fleming."  include  ••  Kismet  "  (Boston.  1*77):  "  Mi-
rage" (1H7H):  -The  Bead  of  Medusa"  (1880):
"Sonnets  of  Gaspara  Stamiui  "  (1**1):  "  Vestigia"
(1HS4);  and  "  Andromeda''  (1885).

FLETCHER.  John,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Rochester.  Kent,  England,  in  17H7:  d.  in  Sher-
brookc.  Canada,  11  Nov..  1844  He  was  educated
in  Loudon,  studied  law.  was  .-ailed  to  the  bar,  and
hail  a  large  practice  in  London  befON  removing  to
Canada  in  1810,  On  arriving  there  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Canadian  bar.  and  was  for  years  one
of  the  most  distinguished  lawyers  in  the  country.
On  the  eriKtioti  of  the  eastern  townships  of  Lower
Canada  into  the  separate  district  of  St.  Francis  in
ls-2;{,  he  was  appointed  its  judge.  He  was  also
one  of  the  justices  of  the  court  of  (Queen's  bench,
and  of  the  provincial  court  of  appeals.

FLETCHER.  Thomas  Clement,  governor  of
Missouri,  b.  in  .Jefferson  county.  Mo.,  tl  Jan..  1887,
He  received  a  common-school  education,  was  clerk
of  the  circuit  and  county  courts  from  1K41>  till
1856,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1807. Hi


-1S-2


FLETCHER


FLEURY


was  colonel  of  the  Bill  Missouri  regiment  fan  the
National  army  from  \W>2  till  1864  nHB  In-  became
colonel  of  the  17th  Missouri,  and  in  that  year  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  In  1863
he  was  captured  and  taken  to  Libby  prison.  In
1865-'9  he  was  governor  of  Missouri,  and  tamed  the
proclamation  abolishing  slavery  in  that  state.  Gov.
Fletcher  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican
convention  of  1800  and  1864.  He  was  the  first
speaker  in  the  first  Republican  convention  held  in
a  slave-state,  and  although  his  parents  were  slave-
owners, he  had  been  an  ardent  abolitionist  since  his
boyhcod.  He  has  made  many  political  speeches,
most  of  which  were  published,  but  they  have  never
been  collected  in  l>ook-form.

FLETCHER,  William  A.,  jurist,  b.  in  Massa-
chusetts ;  d.  in  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  about  1855.  He
was  engaged  in  mercantile  affairs  until  he  removed
to  Michigan  in  1820,  when  he  studied  law.  For
many  years  he  was  one  of  the  most  successful  law-
yers in  Detroit,  and  tx?came  attorney-general  of  the
territory.  On  the  adoption  of  the  first  state  con-
stitution in  1835  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of
the  supreme  court,  and  was  employed  by  the  legis-
lature to  prepare  the  first  codification  of  the  laws
of  Michigan.  In  1842  he  retired  from  the  bench
and  resumed  his  law  practice.  He  published  "Re-
vised Statutes  of  Michigan  "  (Detroit,  1838).

FLETCHER,  William  Baldwin,  physician,  b.
in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  18  Aug.,  1837.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  Lancaster  academy  in  Massachusetts,
and,  after  graduating  at  the  New  York  college  of

ithysicians  and  surgeons,  began  to  practice  in
ndianapolis.  During  the  war  he  served  in  vari-
ous capacities  as  scout  and  volunteer  engineer,
and  had  charge  of  one  department  of  secret  ser-
vice. In  July,  1861,  he  was  captured  by  the  Con-
federates, and  imprisoned  for  nine  months.  Sub-
sequently he  served  on  the  medical  staff  in  various
departments.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  session  of
the  American  medical  association  held  in  Boston
in  1865.  He  represented  Marion  county  in  the
state  senate  in  1882-'3,  and  since  1882  he  nas  been
devoted  to  the  investigation  of  cerebral  circulation.
In  1883  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  Indi-
ana Hospital  for  tne  insane,  and  since  that  time
has  published  several  pamphlets  on  the  manage-
ment of  the  insane.  Among  his  contributions  to
medical  journals  are :  "  The  Discovery  of  Various
Entozoa  found  in  Pork";  "Human  Entozoa";
"  Report  of  Five  Cases  of  Trichiniasis  " ;  and  he
has  published  a  monograph  on  the  "  History  of
Asiatic  Cholera"  (Cincinnati,  1863).

FLEURIEU,  Charles  Pierre  Claret,  Comte
de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Lyons,  22  Jan.,
1738  ;  d.  in  Paris,  18  Aug.,  1810.  He  entered  the
navy  at  the  age  of  thirteen  years,  and  became  a
lieutenant  in  1759.  The  peace  of  1763  gave  him
occasion  to  apply  himself  to  office  work  and  study,
and  he  assisted  the  engineer  Ferdinand  Berthoud,
in  1766,  in  his  invention  of  the  marine  watch  or
chronometer.  In  1768  he  was  appointed  to  the
command  of  the  frigate  "  Isis "  on  an  expedition
to  experiment  with  the  new  instrument,  sailing
from  Aix  in  November  of  that  year.  He  took  ob-
servations at  Martinique,  Santo  Domingo,  Porto
Rico,  Havana,  Jamaica,  Colon,  and  New  Orleans,
and  after  touching  at  New  York,  Boston,  and  New-
foundland, returned  to  Aix  on  11  Oct.,  1769.  The
results  of  this  expedition  were  important  to  geog-
raphy, as  he  established  the  exact  position  of  all
the  points  visited,  and  published  them  in  his  later
works.  In  1776  Fleurieu  was  appointed  inspector-
general  of  ports  and  navy-yards,  and  from  1778
till  1783  he  elaborated  all  the  plans  for  the  naval


war  against  England,  to  assist  the  struggle  for  the
independence  of  the  United  States.  In  1790-'l  he
was  minister  of  the  navy,  and  in  1793  was  impris-
oned under  the  reign  of  terror,  but  was  released  in
1794,  and  under  the  directory  was  appointed  to
the  bureau  of  longitudes.  He  was  a  member  of
the  council  of  500  in  1797,  and  in  1800  was  (ailed
by  Bonaparte  to  the  council  of  state.  In  1805
he  was  minister  plenipotentiary  for  the  signature
of  the  treaty  ceding  Louisiana  to  the  United
States,  and  on  his  return  became  intondant  of  the
imperial  house,  senator,  in  1806  admiral,  and  in
1808  governor  of  the  Tuileries.  His  body  was
buried  in  the  Pantheon.  His  works  are  "  Voyage
fait  en  1768  et  '69  pour  6prouver  en  mer  les  hor-
loges  marines"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1773);  "Longitude
exacte  des  divers  points  des  Antilles,  et  de  l'Ame-
rique  du  Nord"  (1773);  "Les  Antilles,  leur  flore
et  leur  faune "  (1774);  "  Le  Neptune  Americo-
Septentrional"  (1780);  and  "  Histoire  des  aventu-
riers  espagnols,  qui  conquerirent  l'Amerique"
(1800).  Fleurieu  also  published  a  fine  "Atlas
of  the  Caribbean  Sea  and  the  Coasts  of  North
America  and  Newfoundland"  (1776),  and  "Voyage
autour  du  monde  d'Etienne  Marchand,"  with  an
atlas  and  notes  on  the  discoveries  on  the  northwest
coast  of  America  from  1537  till  1791  (1798).

FLEURY,  Ernest  de,  Baron  de  Lisle,  traveller,
b.  in  Lyons,  France ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14
Sept.,  1867.  He  was  educated  in  Paris,  and  in-
herited a  large  property.  In  1844  or  1846  he
came  to  the  United  States,  visited  California,  and
was  subsequently  employed  in  locating  the  Nicara-
gua route.  He  travelled  entensively  in  Central
and  South  America.  In  1858  he  settled  in  the
city  of  Mexico,  and  in  1864  espoused  the  cause  of
Maximilian,  joining  the  imperial  army,  and  being
commissioned  captain.  Just  before  the  downfall
of  the  emperor  he  was  promoted  to  the  colonelcy
of  a  regiment  of  chasseurs.  At  the  surrender  of
Maximilian  he  became  a  prisoner  of  war,  was  tried
by  court-martial,  and  sentenced  to  be  shot;  but
two  days  before  the  date  fixed  for  his  execution
he  bribed  the  guard,  escaped  in  disguise  to  Vera
Cruz,  and  sailed  by  way  or  Havana  to  New  York.
He  took  passage  for  France  by  the  next  steamer,
but  died  suddenly  before  the  day  of  departure.

FLEURY,  Louis  de,  chevalier  and  viscount,
soldier,  b.  in  Limoges,  France,  about  1740:  exe-
cuted in  Paris  in  1794.  He  was  descended  from
Hercule  Andre  de  Fleury,  tutor  of  the  grand-
son of  Louis  XIV.,  and  became  cardinal  and
prime  minister.  He  was  major  in  the  regiment
Rouergue.  Soon  after  the  news  of  the  American
revolt  reached  France  he  came  to  this  country,
was  kindly  received  by  Washington,  and  accepted
a  commission.  He  was  educated  for  an  engineer,
and,  as  his  talents  were  brought  into  requisition,  he
proved  himself  a  brave  and  intelligent  soldier.  He
was  engaged  at  Fort  Mifflin  on  the  Delaware,  and
in  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine.  In  token  of  his
gallantry  at  the  latter  place,  congress  presented  him
with  a  horse.  He  was  sub-inspector  under  Steuben
in  1777  and  1778,  adjutant-general  of  Lee's  division,
4  June,  1778,  and  second  in  command  of  a  light-
infantry  corps  in  the  Rhode  Island  expedition,  and
afterward  commanded  a  battalion  of  light -infantry
under  Washington.  When  Rochambeau  arrived
in  1780,  Fleury  left  the  American  service  and  be-
came an  officer  under  him.  At  the  storming  of
Stony  Point  in  July,  1779,  he  commanded  the  van
of  the  right  column,  and  was  the  first  to  enter  the
British  works,  striking  their  colors  with  his  own
hand.  He  returned  to  France,  having  received  a
congressional  vote  of  thanks.


I1.1NN


II. INT


188


I  I  inn.  \inln  >w, lergyman.  I>.  in  Maryland  in

L  in  Chariestoi  i When

be  ww  mi  infant  Mi  imn-niti  removed  to  Meekten*

i  I.  I  . Ilf  »w  graduated  ,lt  'I"'  Flli-

..f  N'orth  Carolina  in  1790,  studied  theology,
and  was  licensed  t<>  preach  by  the  presbytery  of
0  in  1800. in  1808  he  was  ordained  pastor

of  tin-  ohorob  at  Fayettcvillc,  N.  ('..  hut  was
obliged  to  divide  hk  duties  by  teaching,  in  order
to  support  himself.  In  ixii  m  was  installed  pas-
tor of  tile  Scotch  Presbyterian  cliiin  h  (if  Charles-
ton, S.  ('.,  iiiul  became  known  through  the  state  as
an  attractive  pulpit  orator.  In  1811  he  was
ator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Prcsby-

UTiiin  church, lie  eontirmed  |»astor  of  the  church
arleston  till  the  time  of  his  death.
FLINT, Abel, clergyman, b,  in Windham.

('(•mi.,  »i  Aug..  1786;  (1.  in  Hartford,  7  March,
1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1785,  and  in
the  following  year  was  appointed  tutor  in  Brown,
where  he  remained  until  1  TIM).  He  then  studied
theology,  and  in  1791  became  pastor  of  the  2d
i  Dgational church in Hartford, Conn. He

was  secretary  of  the  Connecticut  missionary  so-
ciety at  its  organization  in  1798,  and  bald  this
office  for  several  years.  He  was  an  editor  of  the
"Connecticut  Evangelical  Magazine"  in  1800,  and
aiiout  this  time  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  the
*  Hartford  Selection  of  Hymns,"  which  passed
through  several  editions.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Connecticut  Bible  society  in  1809,
and  was  actively  engaged  in  its  management.
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  bin  by
I'nion  in  1818.  He  published  "Geometry  and
Trigonometry,  with  a  Treatise  on  Surveying "
(1806),  and  a  selection  and  translation  from  Massil-
lon  and  Ilourdaloiie's  sermons.

FLINT,  Austin,  physician,  b.  in  Petersham,
Mass.,  20  Oct.,  1812;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13
March,  1880.  He  studied  at  Amherst  and  Har-
vard, and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  latter  institution  in  1838.  His  pro-
fessional career  began  in  Northampton,  and  was
continued  in  Boston  until  lKJii,  when  he  removed
to  Buffalo,  and  remained  there  till  1844. He  then

accepted  a  call  to
the  chair  of  the
institutes  and
practice.of  medi-
cine at  the  Hush
medical  college
in  Chicago,  but
a  year  later  re-
turned to  Buf-
falo. In  1846  he
established  the
"  Buffalo  Medi-
cal Journal,"
which  he  subse-
quentlvconduct-
ed  until  1856.
In  connection
with  Dr.  .lames
P.  White  and
I>r.  Frank  II.  Hamilton,  he  founded,  in  1847,  the
Buffalo  medical  college,  in  which,  for  six  years,
he  was  professor  of  the  principles  and  practice  of
medicine,  and  clinical  medicine.  In  1852  he  was
called  to  fill  a  similar  chair  in  the  I^ouisville  uni-
versity, bat  in  I8.V1  returned  to  Buffalo  and  lie-
came  professor  of  pathology  and  clinical  medicine.
IkOB  1868  till  1801  he  spent  the  winters  in  New
Orleans  as  professor  of  clinical  medicine  in  the
school  of  medicine  there,  and  visiting  phv-uimi
Charity  hospital. In  1859  he  removed  to


C?$x^itZl~- a^Jty


New  York,  and  two  years  later  was  appointed

professor  of  pathology  and  practical  medicine  in
the  Long  Island  college  hospital,  in  which  relation
ntiinied  until  lH«in.  At  the  name  time  he  be-
came professor  of  the  principles  and  practice  of
medicine  in  the  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college,
and  also  visiting  physician  to  the  hospital  it
These  offices  lie  held  until  his  death.  Or.  Flint
Was  also  consulting  phy-ician  to  the  Charity  li<
till,  to  the  Hospital  t<>r  the  ruptured  and  crippled,
to  St.  Mary's  ho-pital,  and  to  St.  Elizabeth's  hos-
pital. In  1872  ne  was  elected  president  of  the
New  York  academy  of  medicine,  and  held  that
office  until  1885, 'when  he  resigned,  on  the  adop-
tion of  the  medical  code  sanctioning  consultations
with  physicians  of  oilier  than  the  -regular"
school,  and  lie  was  pre-ident  of  the  American  medi-
cal association  in  1884.  Ik-sides  iieing  a  correspond*
ing  member  of  numerous  medical  societies  abroad,
ho  was  connected  witii  many  American  medical
and  scientific  bodies,  and  his  name  was  on  Un-
rolls of  the  county  ami  state  medical  associations
from  the  time  they  were  organized.  In  1876  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  International  medical  con-
gress which  met  in  Philadelphia,  and  delivered  an
address  on  "Medicine."  He  attended  the  medi-
cal congresses  held  in  London  in  1881  and  in  Co-
penhagen in  1884,  and  had  Inch  elected  to  preside
at  the  congress  to  be  held  in  Washington  in  1887.
Hi-  contributions  to  medical  literature  were  very
large,  and  his  essays  "On  the  Variations  of  Pitch
in  Percussion  and  Respiratory  Sounds  "  and  "  <>n
the  Clinical  Study  of  tne  Heart  Sounds  in  Health
and  Oisease"  received  the  first  prizes  of  Un-
American  medical  association  in  1852  and  1859.
His  larger  works  include  "Clinical  Reports  on
Continued  Fever"  (Buffalo,  1808);  "Clinical  He-
port  on  Chronic  Pleurisy"  (1853) ;  "Clinical  Re-
port on  Oysentery "  (1853);  "Physical  Explora-
tion and  Oiagnosis  of  Diseases  affect  ing  the  Respi-
ratory Organs"  (Philadelphia,  1856;  3d  ed..  1868);
"Practical  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart"
(1859;  2d  ed.,  1870);  "Treatise  on  the  Principles
and  Practice  of  Medicine,"  of  which  more  than
40.000  copies  have  been  sold  (1866;  5th  ed.,  18S
"Contributions  Relating  to  Camp  Diseases"
(New  York.  1867);  "  Kssays  on  Conservative  Medi-
cine and  Kindred  Topics"  (Philadelphia,  1874);
"  Phthisis,  its  Morbid  Anatomy,  Etiology,  Symp-
tomatic Events  and  Complications,  Fatality  and
Prognosis,  Treatment  and  Physical  Diagnosis"
(1875);  "Manual  of  Auscultation  and  Percussion"
(1876);  "Clinical  Medicine,  a  Systematic  Treaties
on  the  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of  Diseases"
(1879);  "Physical  Exploration  of  the  Lungs  by
Means  of  Auscultation  and  Perc—sion  (1882);
and  "  Medical  Ethics  and  Etiquette  "  (New  York,
1888).—  Hi>  son.  Austin,  physician,  b.  in  North-
ampton, Mass..  28  March,  18;{(i,  accompanied  his
parents  to  Buffalo,  where  he  received  his  early
education.  He  entered  Harvard  in  1808,  but  left
at  the  end  of  his  first  year,  and  spent  some  time  in
the  study  of  civil  engineering.  In  18.VI  he  began
his  medical  studies  in  Buffalo,  continued  them  in
Louisville,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Jefferson
medical  college,  in  Philadelphia,  in  X^u.  Subse-
quently, until  I860,  he  edited  the"  Buffalo  Medi-
cal Journal,"  which  afterward  was  transferred  to
New  York  and  merged  in  the  "  American  Medi-
cal Monthly."  In  1858  he  was  appointed  one  of
the  attending  surgeons  of  the  Buffalo  city  hospital,
and  during  the  same  year  was  appointed  professor
of  physiology  in  the  Buffalo  medical  college,  lie
came  to  New  York  in  1859,  was  elected  to  the
chair  of physiology  in the New Fork medical


484


FLINT


FLINT


OoUmb,  and  to  a  similar  chair  in  the  New  Orleans
school  of  medicine  in  1S1MI,  hut  wignod  the  latter
at  tin'  In-Winning  of  the  civil  war.  As  a  student
in  Louisville,  he  had  developed  a  special  taste  for
physiology,  and  had  experimented  on  living  ani-
mals with  1'rof.  Lunsford  P.  Vandell.  While  in
New  Orleans  he  experimented  on  alligators,  and
developed  some  important  point!  with  reference  to
the  influence  of  the  pneumogastric  nerves  upon
the  heart.  Dr.  Flint  was  the  first  physiolgist  in  the
United  States  tooperateon  the  spinal  cord  and  the
spinal  nerves  in  living  animals,  and  early  in  1801
spent  several  months  studying  in  Paris  under
Charles  Robin  and  Claude  Bernard,  On  the  organ  i-
zatiotiof  the  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college,  in
1861,  he  became  professor  of  physiology  and  micro-
scopic anatomy,  and  also  secretary  and  treasurer  of
the  faculty.  For  eight  years  he  delivered  lectures
on  physiology  in  the  Long  Island  college  hospital.
In  1^74  he  became  surgeon-general  of  New  York
state.  His  experimental  work  has  received  high
praise.  In  1862  his  investigations  on  "  A  New  Ex-
cretory Function  of  the  Liver "  was  presented  to
the  French  academy  of  sciences  for  the  Monthyon
prize,  and  in  1809  it  received  honorable  mention
and  1,500  francs.  He  published  in  1809  an  elabo-
rate review  of  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  the
motor  and  sensory  properties  of  the  roots  of  the
spinal  nerves,  in  which  the  discovery  was  ascribed
to  Francois  Magendie  instead  of  to  Sir  Charles  Bell,
who  has  generally  been  regarded  as  its  author.
During  the  same  year  he  conducted  a  series  of  ex-
periments upon  the  glycogenic  function  of  the
liver,  in  which  he  endeavored  to  harmonize  various
conflicting  observations,  and  is  considered  to  have
settled  the  question.  Dr.  Flint  is  a  member  of
medical  and  scientific  societies,  has  been  a  large
contributor  to  medical  journals,  and  has  published
numerous  monographs.  He  was  the  author  of
articles  in  the  "American  Cyclopaedia,"  and  his
works  include  "The  Physiology  of  Man"  (New
York,  1S00-'T4);  "  Manual  of  Chemical  Examina-
tion of  the  Urine  in  Disease"  (1870;  6th  ed.,  1884);
"Text-Book  of  Human  Phvsiology  "  (1876;  3d  ed.,
1881) ;  "  On  the  Source  of  Muscular  Power  "  (1878) ;
and  "On  the  Physiological  Effects  of  Severe  and
Protracted  Muscular  Exercise  "  (1871).

FLINT,  ltilla.  Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Eliza-
bethtown,  Leeds  co..  Out.,  9  Feb.,  1805.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  town,  and  became  a  mer-
chant. He  has  been  president  of  the  Belleville
board  of  police,  and  also  its  reeve  and  mayor ;  was
warden  of  Hastings  county  in  1873,  and  was  mem-
ber of  the  county  council  for  twenty-four  years.
He  was  also  reeve  of  Elzevir  for  twenty-one  years,
ending  in  1879.  He  represented  Hastings  in  the
Canadian  assembly  from  1847  till  1851,  and  South
Hastings  from  1854  till  1858.  He  was  an  un-
successful candidate  in  1801  for  the  legislative
council  of  Canada,  but  in  1802  was  elected  and
represented  the  Trent  division  until  the  union  of
1S(J7.  when  he  was  called  to  the  senate.

FLINT,  Charles  Louis,  b.  in  Middleton,  Mass.,
8  May.  1824.  His  ancestors  were  among  the  early
settlers  of  Salem.  He  was  brought  up  on  his
father's  farm,  and  obtained  a  collegiate  education
through  his  own  exertions,  graduating  at  Phillips
Andover  academy  in  1845,  and  at  Harvard  in  1849.
He  studied  law,  but,  having  acquired  some  distinc-
tion by  his  contributions  to  agricultural  journals,
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  Massachusetts  board
of  agriculture,  which  office  he  held  from  1853  till
1881.  He  was  one  of  the  original  organizers  of  the
Massachusetts  agricultural  college  at  Amherst,  was
its  secretary  for  nearly  twenty  years,  and  for  one


year  served  as  president.  In  addition  to  full  and
valuable  annual  reports,  he  has  publi-hed  •  •  The
Agriculture  of Massachusetts"  (3  vols.,  Boston,

I :  "  Treatise  on  Grass  and  Forage Plants
(New  York,  1857);  M  Milch  Dowi  and  Dairy  Farm-
".  '-ton,  1859);  anew  edition  of  Harris's  "  In-
sects Injurious  to  Vegetation  ";  and.  with  George
B.  Kmerson,  a  "  Manual  of  Agriculture."

FLINT,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  in  1075 ;  d.  13  Feb.,  1760.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1093,  appointed  a  fellow  of
that  college  in  1700,  and  in  1705-'54  was  a  tutor
there. He  published  a  volume  of  sermons  (1739).

FLINT,  Henry  Martvn.  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 24  March,  1829  ;*  d.  in  Camden,  N.  J.,  12
Dec.,  1868.  He  studied  law,  was  an  editor  of  the
Chicago  "Times"  in  1855-'61,  and  then  acted  as
correspondent  for  various  newspapers.  He  pub-
lished  a  "  Life  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas"  (Philadel-
phia, 1860);  "The  History  and  Statistics  of  the
Railroads  of  the  United  States"  (1868);  and  "  Mexi-
co under  Maximilian"  (1869).

FLINT,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Reading,  Mass.,
7  Aug.,  1767 ;  d.  in  Marshfield,  Mass.,  11  Oct.,  1835.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1794,  and  ordained
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  Congregational  church  in
Cohasset,  10  June,  1798.  He  published  a  history
of  Cohasset  in  the  Massachusetts  historical  collec-
tion, and  two  discourses  on  the  history  of  Cohasset
(1821,  reprinted  in  1868). — His  son,  Joshua  Bar-
ker, surgeon,  b.  in  Cohasset,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1801 ;
d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  19  March,  1864,  studied  with
his  father,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1820.
He  was  appointed  usher  in  the  English  classical
school  at  Boston,  of  which  George  B.  Emerson  was
the  principal,  and  remained  there  for  two  years,
after  which  he  studied  medicine.  He  received  his
medical  degree  at  Harvard  in  1825.  and  practised  in
Boston  for  twelve  years,  during  which  he  served
several  terms  in  the  legislature.  In  1837  he  was
called  to  the  chair  of  surgery  in  the  Louisville
medical  institute,  which  he  held  until  1849.  He
was  then  elected  to  the  same  chair  in  the  Ken-
tucky school  of  medicine,  and  remained  there
until  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Practice
of  Medicine  "  (2d  ed.,  1868).

FLINT,  John  James  Bleecker,  Canadian  law-
yer, b.  in  Belleville,  Ont,  29  Dec,  1838.  He  re-
ceived his  education  at  the  Belleville  grammar-
school,  and  at  Victoria  college,  Cobourg.  He  began
to  practise  law  in  1862,  was  made  town  councillor
in  1868,  and  held  that  office  until  1872,  when  he
was  elected  mayor  of  Belleville.  In  1884  he  was
appointed  police-magistrate.  He  is  a  Liberal  in
politics.  He  has  been  active  in  several  philan-
thropic enterprises,  and  has  aided  in  erecting  a
hospital  and  home  for  the  friendless.

FLINT,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Reading,
Mass.,  11  July,  1780;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  10  Aug.,
1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1800,  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Congregational  church,  and  sai
tied  in  Lunenburg,  Mass.,  in  1802.  He  was  a  dili-
gent student  in  natural  science,  and  his  chemical  ex-
periments led  ignorant  persons  to  charge  him  with
counterfeiting  coin.  He  prosecuted  them  for  slan-
der. Ill-feeling,  increased  by  political  differed
arose  between  him  and  his  parishioners,  whic
caused  him  to  resign  his  charge  in  1814.  He  ther
preached  in  various  parts  of  New  England,  and
1815  went  to  the  west  as  missionary,  and  ipMfl
seven  or  eight  years  in  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi
valleys.  In  1825  he  returned  to  Massachusetts,
broken  in  health  and  fortune.  He  then  gave  his
attention  to  literature.  In  1825  he  removed  M
Cincinnati,  where  he  edited  the  "Western  R-


Fl.nllR


n.oRRS


186


for  three  years. He  vacd to  N.»  Y«.rk  in  1888,
nn, I  Gondii  uuiiiInt.  of  the  -  Kuicker-

bookar  Magazine." Afterward  In-  resided  in  Alex-
andria, Va.,  lull  s|H-iit  mod  "f  I » i  ->  WBWWH  in  New
England. His  publications  are  "  Keoolleotiom  "f
passed  in  tin-  Valley  of  tin-  Mississippi  "

.  1H26;  reprinted  in  I*>ndoti,  and  translated
rench);  " Francis  Berrian;  <»r.  Tin'  N
Patriot"  (Boston,  1886);  "Condensed  Geography
and  History  of  the  Western  states  in  1 1 u>  Missis-
sippi  Yalli  \  "  (8 vols.,  Cincinnati, 1N2H; 2d  ed.,

•Arthur  Clenning"  (2  vols., Philadelphia.

"George  Mason;  or.  The  Young  iU-k-
■ooasinan"  (1829);  MShoshoneo  Valley"  (Cincin-
nati.  1K{(I);  a  translation  of  I Im/,'-  ••  Kssay  on  the
Art  of  Being  Happy"  (Boston.  1832);  '"Indian
Wars  in  the  West  '  (Cincinnati.  \KK\)\  "  Lectures
on  Natural  History.  Geology,  Chemistry,  and  the
Arts"  (Boston,  \K\<\)\  a  translation  of-  (Vlilmcv
Vntupiisheil ;  or.  The  Old  Bachelor  Reclaimed'*
(Philadelphia  1884);  and  a  "Memoir  of  Daniel
Boone"  (Cincinnati.  lNo4>.  He  contributed  a  scries
of  papers  on  "American  Literature"  to  the  Ixmdon
"Athenauim"  in  1855. — His  son,  Micnli  1*.,  law-
yer, l>.  in  Lunenburg,  Mass.,  in  1807:  d.  In  1880,
was  educated  by  his  father,  and  travelled  with  him
in  the  south  and  west.  He  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  l»ar  in  Alexandria,  Miss.  He  pub-
lish, -d  "The  Hunter,  and  Other  Poems"  (Boston,
1826),  and  contributed  to  the  "Western  Review."

FLOUR.  George  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ger-
many in  1758;  d.  in  Wytheville,  Va..  in  1826.  He
studied  medicine  in  Paris,  and  witnessed  the  exe-
cution of  Louis  XVI.  The  accidental  and  terrible
death  of  an  individual  in  the  crowd  standing  near
him,  a  part  of  whose  mangled  body  was  thrown
upon  him,  so  affected  him  that  he  changed  all  his
plans  for  the  future.  He  at  once  abandoned  the
thought  of  a  medical  career,  and  resolved  to  con-
secrate himself  to  the  ministry,  emigrating  to
the  United  States  and  going  to  Madison  county,
Va..  where  he  studied  theology  under  the  direction
of  the  K.v.  William  Carpenter,  teaching  in  Cul-
peper  until  his  preparation  for  the  ministry  was
completed.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
synod  of  Pennsylvania,  and  immediately  engaged
in  missionary  service  in  southwestern  Virginia.
In  1799  he  accented  a  call  to  Wythe  countv,  where
he  labored  faithfully  until  his  death.  He  exer-
cised great  influence  upon  all  classes  of  society,  and
was  frequentlv  called  upon  to  settle  difficulties  as
a  judge  and  lawyer  as  well  as  a  clergyman.  He
preached  altogether  in  German,  and  aressed  ac-
cording to  the  old  German  custom.  He  ]>onsoascd
an  extensive  knowledge  of  French,  and  was  well
read  in  Greek  and  Latin.  A  volume  of  his  ser-
mons was  published  after  his  death.

I  I  ORENCE,  Thomas  Birch,  statesman,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  26  .Ian..  1M12 :  d.  in  Washing-
ton. :t  .Inly.  1*75.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
s<hoo|s,  apprenticed  to  a  hatter,  and  went  into
business  for  himself  in  1KW.  For  several  years
he  was  prominent  in  the  temperance  cause,  and  a
■MBberof  a  secret  organization  of  workmen, called
"The  Brotherhood  of  the  Union.*1  Alter  several  in-
effectual efforts  to  enter  congress,  he  was  elected  as
a  Democrat  in  1850, and  served  from  1S51  till  1M61.
when  he  retired  from  politics  and  established  and
edited  the  Washington  "Constitutional  I'nion,"
and  in  1808  the  Washington  "  Sunday  Gazette."
In  ls?l  he  was  defeated  by  so  small  a  majority  for
congress,  by  Chapman  Freeman,  the  Republican
candidate,  that  he  would  have  contested  the  elec-
tion had  he  not  died  of  gangrene,  caused  by  an
accident  that  occurred  during  the  <  anvass.


FLOP  I  \<  I  Milliam  .leriinn.  letor,  b,  in
Alba  I.  m Philadelphia,

v..  1X91. He  entered  upon  the  eej

of  an  actor,  made  his  An«t  apjx-nnmcc  in  Rich-
mond. (I  Dml,  1840.  M  Peter  in  "The  Stranger."
and  soon  acquired  distinction  as  a  ti  inic

actor.  He  afterward  appeared  in  Providence,  suc-
cessfully playing  Macduff  to  Bootk'l  MaeUth.
Returning  to  New  Vork.  he  ap|>eared  at  Brough-
am's Lyceum  in  Irish  characters.  He  married.
00  New  Year's  day,  1KVJ,  Mrs.  Malviua  I  Pray  j
Lit  tell,  a  danseusc  attached  to  Wallack's  tie
and  on  8  .Line  following  the  two  appeared  §j  the
National  theatre.  New  York,  as  the  Irish  Boy  and
the  Yankee  (iirl.  In  1886  they  vent  to  Kngland,
aiel  appeared  in  Drury  I^ane  theatre,  London,  for
fifty  nights,  to  crowded  houses,  afterward  inform-
ing in  various  theatres  throughout  the  United
Kingdom.  Mr.  Florence's  best-known  |>arts  are
those  of  Bardwell  Slote  in  "The  Mighty  Dollar  "
and  Captain  Cuttle  in  "  Dombsg  ami  Son."  while
Mrs.  Florence  is  a  favorite  as  Mrs.  General  Gil-
florv. She  is  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Barney  Williams.

FLORENCIA,  Francisco,  clergyman.  !>.  in
Florida  (prolwbly  in  St.  Augustine)  in  1880;  d.  in
Mexico  in  1695.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  order  in
18  IS)  and  became  famous  as  a  professor  of  theology
and  philosophy.  He  was  appointed  procurator  for
the  Jesuit  province  of  Mexico,  at  Madrid  and
afterward  at  Rome ;  was  next  stat  ioncd  at  Seville
as  procurator  of  all  the  provinces  of  his  order  in
the  Indies,  but  returned  to  Mexico  in  1680.  Ib-
was  the  author  of  numerous  works,  the  principal
of  which  are  ■  ••  Menologio  de  los  varones  mas  se-
flalados  de  la  Coinpafiia  de  Jesus  en  N.  Kspafia  "
(Barcelona,  1661),  and  "  Historia  de  la  Coinpafiia
tie  .L-u-~  en  la  N.  Kspafia  "  (Mexico.  1894),

FLORES,  Ignacto,  South  American  adminis-
trator, b.  in  Satacunga,  Ecuador,  early  in  the  1st L
century;  d.  in  Buenos  Ay  res  in  17M.  He  com-
pleted his  education  in  Spain,  and  became  professor
m  a  college  in  Madrid,  but  entered  the  army  and
returned  to  South  America,  rising  gradually  to  the
rank  of  colonel.  In  1782  he  was  appointed  presi-
dent of  Chanas,  Upper  Peru,  which  was  then
in  a  disturbed  state,  owing  to  the  consequences  of
Tupac-Amaru's  Indian  revolt.  He  sulxlued  the
Indians  after  a  bloody  struggle,  and  restored  Older:
but  the  Spanish  judges  of  the  audiencia,  jealous  of
the  position  acquired  by  a  Spanish- American,  rep-
resented to  the  viceroy  of  Peru  that  Flores,  instead
of  being  the  pacificator,  had  l)een  one  of  the  pro-
moters of  the  insurrection.  He  was  in  consequence
deposed  and  ordered  to  present  himself  in  Baenoo
Ayres,  where  he  arrived  early  in  1784  but  died
before  his  trial,  which  had  been  intentionally  de-
layed. While  in  college  ho  wrote  a  novel.  ••  Viajes
de  Bnriqne  Wanton."  a  delicate  satire  on  Kngland,
France,  and  Spain.

FLORES,  Jose.  Mexican  physician,  b.  in  Chia-
pas. .Mexico,  about  1780;  d.  in  Guatemala  pJbcwt
lT'.t.").  He  studied  medicine  in  his  native  city,  was
called  to  a  professorship  at  the  University  OS  San
Carlos  de  Guatemala  in  1775.  ami  appointed  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  medicine  of  Central  America.
He  made  many  journeys  through  that  country,
studying  botany,  formed  a  rich  hcrlmrium  for  the
university,  and  tare  impulse  to  the  teaching  of
anatomy  by  constructing  with  his  own  hands  three
models  for  his  classes.  Flores  wrote  many  scien-
tific works,  which  are  preserved  in  manuscript  at.
the  library  of  San  Carlos.  The  only  one  published
is  -  BsneflUOO  Nuevamente  Hesculiierto  en  el  Kcino
de  Guatemala  |>ara  la  curacioii  radical  del  horrible
inal  thd  Cancro"  (Mexico,  1788;  reprinted  in  1888}


486


FLOHKS


FLOWER


The  work  asserts  that  cancer  can  be  radically  cured
l>v  eating  ii  kind  of  lizard  found  near  San  Oritfo-
bal  Amat  it  Ian  in  Guatemala.

FLORES,  Juan  Jose\  Sjmnisli-American  sol-
dier, b.  In  Puerto  OnheOo,  Venezuela,  19  July,
1800;  d.  at  sea  in  1864.  He  was  forced  to  enlist
in  a  Spanish  regiment  under  command  of  Cal-
zaila  :  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  battle  of
Ohire,  in  1815,  he  remained  in  the  rear,  walked  to
where  Gen.  Ricaurte  was  stationed  in  Pore,  and
was  taken  into  the  service.  He  fought  for  the
liberty  of  New  Granada  in  1819,  made  the  cam-
paign of  Trujillo  and  Merida  in  1820,  became
colonel  in  1822,  and  in  1823  commander  of  Pas-
to,  New  Granada,  where  he  was  defeated.  But
he  soon  recovered,  and  was  second  in  command
in  the  victorious  campaign  of Ibarra. In  1824

he  resumed  com-
mand of  a  part
of  the  army,  and
put  an  end  to
the  war.  In  1825
he  was  appoint-
ed command-
ing" general  of
Ecuador,  and  re-
established peace
in  the  country.
He  was  made
brigadier-general
in  1826,  and  in
1827  fought

against  the  in-
surgents of  Lima,
and,  after  much
bloodshed,  re-es-
tablished order.
In  1828  he  be-
came command-
er-in-chief of  the
army,  continuing  the  war  with  Peru  and  repelling
the  invaders.  He  negotiated  the  treaty  of  Jiron,
and  when  peace  was  concluded  was  appointed  com-
mander of  Ecuador.  In  1830  Ecuador  became  in-
dependent, and  Flores  was  elected  its  first  presi-
dent. In  1832  the  country  was  involved  again  in
war,  until  1835,  when  Flores  restored  peace  and  re-
signed the  government.  In  1839  and  1843  he  was
elected  president  of  the  republic  again,  and  in  the
latter  year  again  suppressed  a  rebellion  ;  but  in  1845
he  resigned  his  office  and  went  to  Europe.  In  1860
he  returned  to  Quito  and  captured  Guayaquil  from
the  insurgents. — His  son,  Antonio,  b.  in  Quito  in
October,  1833,  was  educated  at  the  college  of  his
native  citv  and  in  Paris.  He  was  minister  to
Washington  in  1860-'4.  In  1881  and  1882  he  was
elected  senator  of  Ecuador,  but  was  exiled  by
Veintimilla.  He  returned  in  May,  1883,  joined
the  revolutionary  forces,  and  participated  in  the
siege  of  Guayaquil.  He  was  elected  to  the  Na-
tional convention,  in  1884  was  again  appointed
minister  to  Washington,  Paris,  London,  and  Rome,
and  in  1887  to  Belgium.  In  1888,  while  in  Europe,
he  was  elected  president  of  the  republic,  and  re-
turned home.  He  has  published  "  Compendio  de
Historia  Universal"  (I860);  "Las  Letras  Espafto-
las  en  los  Estados  Unidos,"  and  "  La  Naturaliza-
ci6n  en  los  Estados  Unidos"  (New  York,  1881);
"  El  Gran  Mariscal  de  Ayacucho "  (1885) ;  and  is
now  (1887)  writing  "  La  Diplomacia  Americana  y
los  Diplomaticos  Americanos."

FLORES,  Venancio  (flo-rez).  Uruguayan  sol-
dier, b.  in  Pavsandu  in  1809;  d.  in  Montevideo,  19
Feb.,  1868.  He  was  the  son  of  a  rich  cattle-owner,
and  passed  his  youth  on  the  pampas. In  1853  he


^e^TJ^^t^


led  an  insurrection,  and  when  the  president  fled
to  a  neutral  man-of-war  for  protection.  Plorea  '1<-
clared  the  executive  chair  vacant.  Be  then  had
himself  appointed  president,  but  in  18f>.")  hi
eminent  was  overthrown,  and  he  retired  to  Bnenoi
Ayres.  In  1858  he  invaded  the  republic  tot
ond  time,  but  was  soon  defeated.  When  the  war
between  Buenos  Ayres  and  the  Argentine  Confed-
eration began,  Flores  volunteered  to  serve  under
Mitre,  and  in  1863  invaded  Uruguay  for  a  third
time,  but  was  defeated  at  Las  Piedras  on  16  Aug.
When  war  between  the  republic  and  Brazil  began,
Flores,  assisted  by  a  Brazilian  and  Argentine  force,
blockaded  Montevideo  and  forced  Villalba,  who
had  taken  charge  of  the  government  provisionally,
to  enter  into  an  arrangement  by  which  Flores  was
elected  president,  Flores  entered  into  the  triple
alliance  against  Paraguay,  1  May,  1865,  and  was
in  command  of  the  allied  armies  at  the  capitula-
tion of  the  Paraguayan  army,  for  which  he  re-
ceived from  the  emperor  of  Brazil  the  cross  of  the
Cruceiro.  During  his  absence  in  the  field  Vidal
had  been  elected  president  pro  tempore;  but  on
his  return  in  1866,  Flores  forced  the  former  to  re-
sign the  government  into  his  hands.  In  conse-
quence of  a  revolution,  headed  by  his  sons,  he
resigned  the  presidency,  15  Feb.,  1868,  before  his
term  was  ended,  and  was  assassinated  in  a  street
tumult,  four  davs  afterward.

FLORES  ALATORRK.  Jnan  Jose\  Mexican
lawyer,  b.  in  Aguascalientes,  1  June,  1766;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico,  8  July,  1854.  He  graduated  at
the  University  of  Mexico  in  1790,  was  appointed
defender  of  the  poor  in  1794,  and  in  1799  public
defender  of  the  criminals  of  his  tribunal.  He  was
made  judge  of  the  same  court  in  1801,  commis-
sioned to  inspect  the  treasury  of  Sombrerete  in
1807,  and  in  1808  was  promoted  criminal  judge
for  the  supreme  court  of  Mexico.  He  was  deputy
for  Zacatecas  to  the  constituent  cortes  of  Cadiz  in
1813,  and  in  1814  was  elected  president  of  the
Academy  of  jurisprudence.  In  1818  he  became  a
member  of  the  supreme  court  of  Guadalajara.  The
Emperor  Iturbide  appointed  him  one  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  supreme  court  of  the  empire,  and  dur-
ing the  political  disturbances  of  the  following  years
Flores  was  left  undisturbed  in  his  office,  which  he
left  in  1840,  with  a  pension.  He  left  ready  for
publication  a  "  Diccionario  Legislativo."

FLOURNOY,  Thomas  Stanhope,  lawyer,  b.  in
Prince  Edward  county,  Va.,  15  Dec.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Pitt-
sylvania county,  Va.,  13  March,  1883.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Hampden-Sidney  college,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  at  Halifax  Court  House,
Va.  He  was  distinguished  throughout  the  circuit,
which  was  noted  for  its  brilliant  bar,  as  a  speaker
of  much  eloquence,  and  for  his  great  success  as  a
criminal  lawyer.  Though  a  Whig,  through  his
personal  popularity  he  was  elected  to  congress  in
1846  in  a  largely  Democratic  district.  In  18S6  hi
was  nominated  by  the  Whig  and  Know-Nothing
parties  as  candidate  for  governor  of  Virginia  against
Henry  A.  Wise,  who  was  elected.  Mr.  Flournoy
was  a  member  of  the  convention  of  Virginia  in
1860-1,  and  used  all  his  influence  to  prevent  the
secession  of  the  state.  When  it  finally  declared  for
the  Confederacy,  he  joined  the  army  of  nort  hern
Virginia  as  a  private,  but  was  appointed  colonel,
and  was  in  active  service  throughout  the  war.

FLOWER,  Frank  Abial,  author,  b.  in  Cottage,
Cattaraugus  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  May,  1854.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Towanda  union  and  Fredonia  normal
schools,  learning  the  printer's  trade  at  the  same
time.  Subsequently  he  settled  in  Wisconsin,  where
for  several  years  he  edited  a  newspaper. In  1883


1  l.nWKR


FLOYD


489


he  was  appointed  eoaaasjesioner  of  labor  and  hi-
ll statietio&j  iin>l IMPpoiottd in l*s

n-|Miri^  in  thfai  connection  hare  received  favorable
cniniiuiii.  He  has  also  held  other appotatmenta.
mikI  i>  oorator  "f  tin*  Wiaoonain  state  historical
Mr.  Flower  is  the  author  nf  several  local
histories, and  has  published  "Old  Aha,  tin*  Wiscon-
;!.•"  (Milwaukee,  1hmo>:  ••  Life  of  Mat-

!1.  Carpenter  "  (Madison.  1888);  and  a  "  Ilis-

the  Republican  Party"  (Springfield,  1884).

FLOWER,  George,  colonist,  b.  in Hertford-

Kngland,  about  1TM«>;  d.  in  Grayville,  White
co.,  111.,  10  Jan.,  1888.  Il<"  was  born  in  alllucnt
circumstances,  and,  after  travelling  on  the  Conti-
nent for  the  benefit  of  husbandry,  be  bum  to  the
United  States  in  1H17  as  the  associate  of  Morris
Birkbeck,  in  order  to  found  an  English  colony  in
Albion.  Kd  wards  co..  111.  Here  he  built  an  elegant
man-ion,  and  his  large  wealth  gave  him  a  com-
manding position.  In  addition  to  the  improved
husbandry,  this  farm  was  stocked  with  the  finest
fleeces  of  Kngland  and  Spain.  His  wisdom  and
benevolence  exerted  great  influence  upon  the  new
settlement.  When  the  attempt  to  legalize  African
slavery  in  Illinois  was  made  in  1823,  he  was  instru-
mental in  securing  its  defeat.  In  the  financial
changes  of  the  new  country  his  wealth  was  lost,  and
for  many  years  he  lived  in  retirement  with  his
children  in  Indiana  and  Illinois.  In  December,
lmil.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Flower  made  a  visit  to  their
daughter,  Mrs.  Aguiel,  in  Grayville,  White  co..  111.,
and  early  in  January,  1862,  they  both  became  ill
on  the  same  day, and  a  week  later  died  on  the  same
day.  He  wrote  a  "  History  of  the  English  Settle-
ment in  Kd  wards  County,  Illinois,  founded  in  1817
and  1818  by  Morris  Birkbeck  and  George  Flower"
(Chicago,  1888),— His  son,  Edward  Fordham,  b.
near  Hertford.  England,  31  Jan.,  1805;  d.  in  Lon-
don. •-»<>  March.  INHo,  spent  his  early  life  in  Illinois,
and  then  resided  for  nearly  half  a  century  at  Strat-
ford-on-Avon,  where  he  was  well  known  for  his
hospitalities  to  Shakespearian  visitors.  Bryant,
Emerson,  Longfellow,  and  Sumner  were  among  his
American  guests.  He  was  four  times  chosen  mayor
of  the  borough.  Mr.  Flower  advocated  with  en-
ergy a  more  humane  treatment  of  horses,  especially
in  the  abolition  of  bearing-reins  and  severe  bits,
upon  which  subject,  and  also  upon  the  improve-
ment of  road-making,  he  published  several  widely
circulated  pamphlets.  One  of  his  three  sons  is
president  of  the  Zoological  society  of  London.

FLOWER,  Roswell  Pettabone,  congressman,
b.  in  Theresa,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1835.
His  ancestor  emigrated  from  England  to  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  1686.  Roswell  lost  his  father  when
eight  years  old,  became  a  clerk  in  a  store  at  four-
teen, and  afterward  received  a  high-school  educa-
tion. After  working  in  a  brick-yard,  and  as  a
post-office  clerk,  he  was  for  ten  years  a  jeweller,
and  afterward  became  a  broker  in  New  York  city.
In  1881— *8  he  was  a  member  of  congress,  having
been  elected  as  a  Democrat  over  William  W.  Astor.
In  ls.se,  ilt.  was  appointed  one  of  the  electric-sub-
way commissi. .ners  in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Flower
Save  $5o.(MM)  for  the  erection  of  the  St.  Thomas
oine  on  59th  street.  New  York.
I  LOWERS,  Samuel  Bnce.  physician,  b.  in
Wayne  county.  N.  ('..  :il  Oct.,  1885.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Wake  Forest  college.  N.  C.  and  was  gradu-
ated m  medicine  at  the  ('Diversity  of  Pennsylvania

I.  In  that  year  he  settled  in  Camden.  Ark.,
but  returned  to  North  Carolina  in  1888, and  -cr\e.'

_'<>n  iii  the  Confederate  army  during  the
civil  war. He  i>  a  member  of  the  board  of  health

•  ne  county,  of  the  Wayne county medical


society,  of  the North  Carolina  medical  aociet  |
whii  h  he  wn-  elected  vice-president  in  Im75,  and  of
the Beaten medical  association,  of  which ho  was

vice-president  in  1*7?. lb-  baa  contributed  to  the

"  Philadelphia  Medical  ami  Surgical  Hcporta,"  and
to  the  "  Virginia  Medical  Monthly."

FLOY,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  citv,
20  Aug..  1WW;  d.  there.  14  Oct.,  1WU.  He  was
educated  at  Columbia,  and  then  spanf  three  years
in  Europe  studying,  es|>ccially  tiotaiiy,  at  the  royal
gardens  at  Kew.  In  1*35  he  was  received  into
the  New  York  conference  of  tin-  Methodist  I
copal  church,  and  for  eighteen  years  was  pastor
of  ohOfphea  in  Middletown,  New  Haven,  Brook-
lyn, and  New  Y'ork.  In  1*4*  he  was  planed  00  the
committee  U)  revise  the  Methodist  hymn-l>ook,  in
1854  was  appoint  ed  presiding  elder  of  the  New  Y'ork
district  of  Sew  York  east  conference, and  in  1M56  be-
came editor  of  the  "  National  Magazine,"  ami  DOIIO*
monding  secretary  of  Tract  society,  M.  E.  church.
He  also  edited  a  denominational  paper  called  "Good
News."  In  1860  he  published  his  "  Guide  to  the
Orchard  and  Fruit-Garden."  and  edited  the  posthu-
mous works  of  the  Kev.  Stephen  Olin.  I).  I).  In
1861  he  returned  to  his  pastorate  in  New  York  city,
in  which  he  continued  tdl  his  death.  Dr.  Floy  was
one  of  the  ablest  and  earliest  of  the  anti-slavery
clergymen,  suffering  the  unpopularity,  ami  after-
ward enjoying  the  success,  of  the  cause.

FLOYD,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  8
Oct.,  1769;  d.  in  Camden  county,  Oa.,  24  June,
1839.  His  father  was  Col.  Charles  Floyd,  who  was
ruined  pecuniarily  by  the  Tories  of  the  Revolution.
The  family  removed  to  Georgia  in  1791,  and  by
boat-building  at  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Ilia  river  re-
trieved their  fortunes.  John,  one  of  several  sons,
received  little  early  education,  but  had  a  l>old  and
indomitable  spirit,  which  soon  made  itself  felt  in
the  community.  In  1813  he  was  elected  brigadier-
general  of  the  Georgia  militia.  He  commanded  at
the  battle  of  Autossee,  Ala.,  against  the  Creek
Indians,  29  Nov.,  1813,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  <  >n  27  Jan.  of  the  next  year  he  com-
manded at  Camp  Defiance,  in  battle  with  the  same
Indians.  From  1820  till  1N27  he  was  a  memlter  of
the  Georgia  legislature,  and  in  1827-'9  of  congress.
Afterward  he  was  major-general  of  militia.

FLOYD,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Jefferson  county.
Va.,  in  1770 ;  d.  at  Sweet  Springs, Va.,  16  Aug.,  \K\7.
He  served  in  congress  from  Yirginia  from  1*17  till
1829,  as  a  states  rights  Democrat,  in  lM2!»-"34  he
was  governor  of  Virginia.  He  was  a  personal  friend
of  Presidents  Jefferson,  Madison,  and  Jackson,  but
became  incensed  by  the  proclamation  of  the  latter
against  the  nullification  of  South  Carolina,  and  op-
posed him  for  his  second  term.  South  Carolina
voted  for  Mr.  Floyd  for  the  presidency  in  1KJ2.
He  married  Letitia*.  sister  of  Gen.  Frank"  Preston,
of  Virginia. — Their  son,  John  Buchanan,  states-
man, b.  in  Blacksburg,  Va..  1  .June.  1H07  :  d.  near
Abingdon.  Va..  2<»  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1886,  removed
to  Arkansas  in  1836,  and  resided  there  three  years,
when  he  returned  to  Virginia  and  practised  law  in
Washington  county.  He  served  in  the  state  legis-
lature in  1847-'!)  and  1853,  and  was  governor  of
Virginia  in  1850-*3.  He  was  a  member  of  the
electoral  college  in  1868,  and  a  IQpPOfter  of  James
Buchanan  for  the  presidency,  who  appointed  him
secretary  of  war. Be  held  this  aflat  from 1869

till  the  autumn  of  lsiH).  when,  having  declared  for
secession,  he  resigned,  and  returned  to  his  home  in
Abingdon.  Va.  In  the  winter  of  ls«il  he  was  in-
dicted in  Wa-hingtoii.  on  the  charge  of  having
secretly,  during  the  latter  portion  of  his  admini-


488


FLOYD


FLOYD


tration  of  the  war  department,  prepared  the
means  to  aid  secession  leaders,  dispersed  the  army
into  remote  parts  of  the  country,  where  t  he  troops
could  not  readily  be  conveyed  to  the  Atlantic
cun-t.  ami  transferred  from  northern  to  southern
arsenals  118,000  muskets;  and  that  he  was  privy
t<>  the  abstract  ion  of  f;870,000  in  l>onds  from  the  de-
partment of  the  interior  during  the  latter  part  of
VUfk  Immediately  on  learning  of  these  charges,  Mr.
Floyd  went  to  Washington,  appeared  before  the
court,  gave  bail,  and  demanded  trial.  In  January,
1801,  a  committee  of  the  house  of  representatives
made  an  investigation,  and  completely  exonerated
Mr.  Floyd  from  each  charge  of  the  indictment.
In  1861  lie  was  appointed  brigadier-general  in  the
Confederate  army,  and  was  engaged  at  the  battle
of  Carnifex  Ferry,  10  Sept.,  1861.  At  the  battle  of
Fort  Donelson,  16  Feb.,  1862,  he  reached  the  field
when  the  engagement  had  begun,  and  found  the
position  untenable  and  the  Confederate  army  in
a  cul  de  sac  from  which  nothing  but  the  hardest
fighting  could  extricate  it.  He  gave  orders  to  that
effect .  ami,  after  two  days'  heavy  fighting,  succeeded
in  opening  a  way  for  the  extrication  of  his  troops
by  a  movement  to  his  left.  Afterward  Gen.  Pillow
ordered  back  the  main  body  of  the  Confederate
army  which  was  under  his  command  to  its  original
position,  leaving  Gen.  Floyd's  troops  without  sup-
port on  the  ground  they  had  gained,  whereupon  he
retreated,  with  little  comparative  loss  to  his  own
command.  Two  weeks  afterward  Gen.  Floyd  was
censured  by  Mr.  Davis  for  this  act,  and  relieved  from
command. — His  wife,  Sally  Buchanan,  b.  near
Abingdon,  Va.,  14  Feb.,  1802;  d.  there,  7  May,
1879.  She  was  the  third  daughter  of  Gen.  Frank
Preston,  of  Abingdon,  granddaughter  of  Gen.
William  Campbell,  who  commanded  at  King's
Mountain,  and  niece  of  Patrick  Henry.  Her
brothers  were  William  C.  Preston,  senator,  and
Gen.  John  S.  Preston,  of  South  Carolina.  Gen.  and
Mrs.  Floyd  had  no  children,  but  adopted  two  or-
phan relatives — John  Preston  Johnson,  an  artillery
officer  of  the  United  States  army,  who  was  killed
at  Contreras  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  Eliza,  his
sister,  who  married  Judge  Robert  Hughes,  of  the
United  States  district  court,  of  Norfolk,  Va.

FLOYD,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  in  Brecknock-
shire, Wales,  about  1620 ;  d.  in  Seatolcott  (now  Se-
tauket),  Suffolk  co.,  N.  Y.,  about  1690.  He  came
to  this  country  in  1654,  and  with  Richard  Wood-
hull  and  fifty-two  others  to  Setauket,  which  they
founded  in  1655.  He  was  the  first  of  the  Floyd
family  on  Long  Island,  and  a  man  of  intelligence
and  vigor.  At  the  beginning  of  the  settlement  he
was  chosen  judge  of  Suffolk  county,  and  colonel  of
militia,  and  held  the  offices  during  his  life. — His
eldest  son,  Richard,  b.  in  Setauket,  12  May,  1661 ;
d.  there,  28  Feb.,  1737,  was  appointed  judge  of  the
common  pleas  in  1723,  and  was  also  colonel  of  the
militia  of  Suffolk  county.  He  married,  12  May,
168(5.  Margaret  Nicoll  (1662-1718),  oldest  daughter
of  Matthias  Nicoll,  secretary  of  the  Duke  of  York's
commissioners  who  captured  New  York  from  the
Dutch,  and  the  first  secretary  of  the  English  prov-
ince of  New  York. — Their  eldest  son,  Richard,
third  of  the  name,  b.  29  Dec,  1703;  d.  21  April,
1771,  likewise  became  iudge  of  the  common  pleas  in
1752,  and  colonel  of  the  militia  of  Suffolk  county.
which  offices,  like  his  father  and  grandfather,  he
held  during  his  life.  He  was  a  man  of  integrity
and  honor,  easy  of  access,  and  generous  to  those
who  stood  in  need  of  aid.  He  married  the  daugh-
ter of  Col.  Samuel  Hutchinson,  of  Southold. — Their
eldest  son.  Kit-hard,  fourth  of  the  name,  b.  about
1736;  d.  in  Maugerville,  New  Brunswick,  30  June,


1791,  like  his  ancestors,  was  iudge  of  the  common
ppointed  in  17i»4),and  colonel  of  the  militia
of  SulTolk  county.  He  was  noted  for  his  affability,
politeness,  fine  manners,  and  profuse  hospitality.
The  great  estate  of  the  family  in  the  manor  of  St.
George  had  descended  to  him,  and  his  house  was
famed  for  its  always  open  doors.  Here  he  enter-
tained Gov.  Tryon  and  all  his  chief  officers  on
his  march  down  Long  Island.  Its  position,  and
the  politics  of  its  owner,  exposed  it  to  the  attacks  of
the  whale-boat  expeditions  from  Connecticut,  and
three  times  he  was  robbed  of  his  cattle,  sheep,  and
slaves.  He  was  included  in  the  act  of  attainder,
and  at  the  peace  of  1783,  when  the  act  became
operative,  he  removed  to  New  Brunswick  and  set-
tled on  the  St.  John's  river. — His  wife,  whom  he
married  on  26  Sept.,  1758,  was  Arabella,  daugh-
ter of  Judge  David  Jones,  of  Fort  Neck,  Queens
co.,  and  sister  of  Judge  Thomas  Jones,  of  the  su-
preme court  of  New  York,  author  of  the  "  History
of  New  York  during  the  Revolutionary  War";
and  upon  her  male  issue,  her  father  by  will  en-
tailed his  estate  at  Fort  Neck  in  default  of  issue
to  her  brother,  Judge  Thomas  Jones,  on  condition
of  adding  the  name  of  Jones  to  their  own.  The
latter  had  no  issue  by  his  wife  Anne,  daughter  of
Gov.  James  de  Lancey.  Consequently  David  Rich*
ard,  only  son  of  Richard  Floyd  and  Arabella
Jones,  b.  14  Nov.,  1764;  d.  in  1826,  became  David
Richard  Floyd-Jones,  which  double  patronymic
the  family  has  since  borne.  This  change  was  also
confirmed  by  special  act  of  the  legislature  of  New
York  in  1788.  Hence  the  junior  branches  only
of  this  family  for  the  last  hundred  years,  and
at  present,  bear  the  name  of  Floyd. — Thomas
Floyd- J  ones,  eldest  son  of  the  last,  b.  in  1788;  d.
in  1851,  succeeded  to  the  estate  of  Fort  Neck,  and
at  his  death  the  entail  by  its  terms  came  to  an  end.
— His  eldest  son,  David  Richard  Floyd-Jones,
lawyer,  b.  in  1813 ;  d.  8  Jan.,  1871,  was  member  of
assembly  for  New  York  in  1841,  1842,  1843,  and  in
1857,  state  senator  in  1844-'7,  inclusive,  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  of  1846,  secretary  of
state  in  1860-'l,  and  lieutenant-governor  of  New
York  in  1863-'4. — Henry  Floyd-Jones,  second
son  of  Thomas  Floyd-Jones,  and  uncle  of  the
Lieut.-Gov.  Floyd-Jones,  b.  in  1792:  d.  in  1862,
was  member  of  assembly  in  1829,  state  senator  and
member  of  the  court  of  errors  from  the  old  first
district,  consisting  of  Kings,  Queens,  New  York,
and  Richmond  counties,  from  1836  till  1840,  and
brigadier-general  of  militia.

FLOYD,  William,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Brookhaven,  Suffolk  co.,
N.  Y.,  17  Dec,  1734;  d.  in  Weston,  Oneida  co.,
N.  Y.,  4  Aug..  1821.  He  was  the  son  of  Nicoll
Floyd,  of  Brookhaven,  who  was  second  son  of
Richard  Floyd,  second  of  the  name,  received  from
his  father  only  a  moderate-sized  farm,  and  was
engaged  in  its  cultivation  during  the  earlier  part
of  his  life.  Being  a  strong  Congregationalist,  like
many  Suffolk  county  people,  and  fixed  in  his  con-
victions on  all  subjects,  he  embraced  warmly  the
cause  of  independence  when  the  Revolution  be-
gan, until  which  time  he  had  taken  no  active
part  in  political  affairs.  He  was  about  forty  years
of  age  when  he  first  entered  political  life  by  Ining
sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  congress
of  1774.  The  next  year  he  was  a  deputy  to  the
New  York  provincial  convention  to  choose  dele-
gates to  the  1st  Continental  congress  of  177"),  and
was  by  it  appointed  a  delegate  to  that  body,  He
continued  by  successive  reappointments  a  mem-
ber of  every  Continental  congress  up  to  ]'■
elusive. At  the  same  time,  from,  1777  till 1783.


IIKK


180


be  wae  state  senator  under  tin-  fir-t  constitution

k,  betas;  regularly  appointed  by  that

Imm|>  f.ir  the  southern  district,  then  wholly  within

Iritleh  lines,  *o  tlmt no  elections  could U>

held. From  ith4  till  1786  he  was  duly  elected  t..

the  same  office  from  tin-  hh  district. In  1787

and  1 7*9  he  was  chosen  a  mcmU'r  of  the  council

■t  appointment, In  the  prcsidcntlaJ  election!  of

1786, \***K  and 1N>»

he  was  chosen  our  of

tin-  prminVintlal  eleet*

on,  and  in  1801  he
sat  for  Suffolk  county
in  the  Constitutional
ci  in  v. •nt  inn  of  that
year.  1 1 e  was  an  early
and  warm  supporter
of  Jefferson.  His  edu-
cation beinconlj  that
of  the  country  schools
of  his  youth,  he  was
not  a  speaker  nor
orator,  nor  an  aeeom-
pliahed  writer.  But
in  the  work  of  the  dif-
ferent  bodies  in  which
he  served  he  was
noted  for  his  assiduity,
-ound  mlvii v.  and  un-
flagging labor  and  thorough  knowledge  of  the
business  before  them.  He  was  eminently  a  prac-
tical man,  and  his  firmness  and  resolution  were
very  great.  Although  somewhat  unpolished  in
manner,  he  at  the  same  time  possessed  a  natural

Savity  and  dignity  which  made  itself  felt.  After
e  war  he  was  appointed  major-general  of  the
militia  on  Long  Island,  and  in  his  youth  he  was  a
captain.  But  his  military  services  were  confined
to  heading  a  detachment  of  militia  that  was  sud-
denly called  to  repel  a  boat  invasion  from  a  Brit-
ish ship  at  the  outset  of  the  war.  Except  at  the
beginning,  for  a  short  time,  he  received  nothing
from  hie  farm  during  the  war,  as  it  was  within  the
British  lines,  and  appropriated  to  the  use  of  Con-
iiccticut  refageea  as  "rebel  property."  He  was,
therefore,  often  during  the  war  in  great  straits,
having  nothing  but  his  pay  as  a  delegate  in  con-
gress. At  its  close  he  bought  a  very  large  tract  of
confiscated  land  in  Oneida  county,  to  which,  in
1804,  he  finally  removed  with  his  children,  and
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  He  was  married
twice,  first  to  Hannah  Jones,  of  Southampton,  who
■lied  iii  17*1.  and  secondly  to  Joanna  Strong,  of
Setauket.  by  each  of  whom  he  left  issue.

I'll  SSK.R,  Charles  W..  naval  officer,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  in  lH;fc{;  d.  near  Plymouth,  N.  C,
Is  April,  \x*>l.  He  removed  to  Kentucky  when  a
child,  and  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in  the
navy.  19  July,  1*47.  His  first  cruise  was  made  in
the  "Cumberland."  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,
16  Sept.,  1855,  and  in  1857  became  assistant  pro-
fessor at  the  l'.  S.  naval  academy.  He  was  in  the
brig  "  Dolphin  "  in  lsV.i  "(Hi.  and  during  his  suc-
ceeding leave  of  absence  the  civil  war  bgan.  He
refuse* I  the  offer  of  a  high  command  in  the  Con-
rate  sendee,  applied  for  active  duty,  anil  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  gun-boat  "Com-
modore Perry,"  with  which  veeeel  he  took  |>art  in
the  attack  by  Com.  Goldslmrongh  that  preceded
the  nipt ure  of  Roanoke  Island  on  7  Feb.,  1862.  In
Imt  he  took  part  in  the  shelling  of  Franklin.
and  afterward  commanded  the  "  Perry  "  in  the
th  Carolina  water-.  He  was  killed  while  in
command  of  the  gun-boat  ". Miami"  in  battle  with
the  iron-clad  "Albemarle"  in  Itoanokc  river.


PL!  N  Y  I  I nd  James,  Canadian  stateeman,

b,  in  Perce,  Lower  Canada.  16  Nov..  1M7.  He  was
educated  at  the  seminary  of  Qnehon,  and  at  I^aval

university,  where  he  was  graduate.1  in  June.  ;-
Be  was  called  to  the  Uir  in  Soptassbarof  that  year,
and in 1*74 was  appointed ptofasJOf  of BOMB

law  in  I^aval  university,  which  chair  he  still  fills,
lb-  was  elected  to  the  provincial  parliament  in
1H?N,  and  was  a  im-mUr  of  the  executive  council
and  commissioner  of  crown  lands  in  the  ChaplejHi
government  from  81  Oct.,  1N7I*.  till  81  Julv,  U
He  was  commissioner  of  railways  from  Februarv,
1884,  till  July,  lumi,  and  is  now  (1hm7>  eolicitor-

{erieral. He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from
m\h\  university  in  1896

FO liKS,  Perez,  educator,  b.  in  Bridgewater,
Mass.,  21  Sept..  1742:  d.  2:5  Feb..  1*12.  He  was
graduated- at  Harvard  in  17(52,  became  a  teacher,
studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  in  November,
17»>»>.  as  pnttof  of  the  Congregational  church  in
Kaynham,  Mass.  He  was  a  zealous  patriot,  and
in  1777  volunteered  as  chaplain  in  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  notwithstanding  his  feeble  health.
In  1786  Dr.  Fobes  was  chosen  vice-president  of
Brown  university,  and  shortly  afterward  was  elect-
ed to  the  professorship  of  natural  philosophy.  In
1711.")  he  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  university,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  he  was  called  to  the  supervision  of
Bristol  academy,  which  he  retained  so  long  as  his
health  permitted.  He  was  a  thorough  scholar,
and  had  a  rare  talent  for  communicating  knowl-
edge. Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  LIj.  D.  in
1792.  Dr.  Fobes  published  "Topographical  De-
scription of  Kaynham.  with  its  History  "  (in  Massa-
chusetts historical  collections,  1794);  "Scripture
Catechism"  (1804;  abridged  ed.,  1809);  and  ser-
mons, including  two  before  the  legislatures  of
Massachusetts  (1775)  and  Rhode  Island  (17!>"»).

FOCHER,  Jean  (fo-shay  ),  Flemish  monk.  b.  in
Ghent  in  1501 ;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  30  Sept,,
1678,  He  studied  in  his  native  city  ami  in  I^ey-
deii.  was  graduated  as  doctor  in  canonical  and
common  law,  and  in  1526  entered  the  order  of  St.
Francis,  going  in  1531  to  Mexico  to  offer  his  ser-
\  lose  as  a  missionary.  His  erudition  became  soon
apparent  to  his  superiors,  who  sent  him  as  profes-
sor to  their  newly  established  college  of  Santiago
de  Tlaltelolco,  where  he  instmcted  the  sons  of  the
native  emperors  and  caciques  who  had  been  sent
by  order  of  Charles  V.  to  this  college.  He  soon
became  the  oracle  of  the  Mexican  prelates  and
men  of  letters,  and  his  sense  of  justice  wus  so  in-
flexible that  once,  when  his  decision  on  a  point  of
law  went  against  the  dictate  of  the  superior  of
his  convent,  he  preferred  undergoing  a  disciplin-
ary chastisement  rather  than  change  his  decision.
At  his  death  nothing  but  his  Bible  and  body  of
law  were  found  in  his  cell,  and  such  was  his  repu-
tation as  an  authority  on  literary  and  canonical
points  that  one  of  the  most  illustrious  clergymen
of  Mexico,  Alonso  de  la  Veracruz,  exclaimed,  on
hearing  of  his  death,  "  Now  that  Father  Focher  is
dead  we  shall  all  U>  in  utterdarkness."  Focher  wrote
numerous  works,  part  of  which  were  sent  to  Spain,
and  many  of  them  loot;  part  exist  in  manuscript
in  the  Bihlioteca  Nacional  of  Mexico.  A  few  of
the  bob]  noteworty  are  "  itincrarium  catholicum
proflcicientibus  ad  infldeles  conTefteodos"  (Mex-
ico; reprinted.  Seville,  1874);  "Artede  la  Leans

Mexicnna"  (MS.  in  Bihlioteca  Nacional  of  hu  \-
ico);  "  Da  Fratre  professo  ah  Online  eject o.  niatri-
moniuin  contrahere  volente"  (MS.  in  the  library
of the Franciscan convent of T.  •  Re-

spiiisa  a«l  Fr.  Mi<  haelem  de  Zarate  npsf  dubia


490


FOGG


FOLGKR


quaedam  juris"  (manuscript  in  Biblioteea  Nacio-
nal  of  Mexico);  and  "  Enchiridion  lmptismiadulto-
nim;  ann.  1644  script  urn"  (manuscript  in  the
Franciscan  library  of  Toledo,  Spain).

FOGG,  George  1-  i  1  man.  senator,  b,  in  Mere-
dith. N.  II..  26  May.  1K15 ;  d.  in  Concord.  N.  II..
5  Oct.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1839,  and  became  principal  of  Hebron  academy,
and  then  professor  of  English  literature  in  the
academy  at  New  Hampton.  After  studying  law
privately  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school,  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,  and  practised  in  (iil-
manton.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1846,  and
soon  afterward  was  appointed  secretary  of  state.
He  then  became  editor-in-chief  of  the  "Independ-
ent Democrat,"  published  first  at  Manchester  and
afterward  at  Concord,  and  held  that  post  from
1854  till  1861.  He  was  reporter  of  the  state  su-
preme court  in  1855-'9,  and  in  1856  was  clerk  of
the  congressional  committee  sent  by  the  house  of
representatives  to  Kansas.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Buffalo  Free-soil  convention  of  1848,  to
the  Pittsburg  convention  of  1852,  the  Philadel-
phia Republican  convention  of  1856,  and  to  the
Chicago  convention  of  1860.  ne  was  a  member
of  the  Republican  national  committee  from  1856
till  1864,  and  was  at  one  time  its  secretary.  He
declined  the  office  of  commissioner  of  patents,  and
was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  IT.  S.  minister
to  Switzerland,  serving  from  1861  till  1865.  Dur-
ing the  succeeding  year  he  was  appointed  by  the
governor  of  New  Hampshire  to  the  IT.  S.  senate  in

flace  of  Daniel  Clark,  resigned,  and  served  till
867.  In  1866  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia
loyalists'  convention.  He  was  actively  connected
with  the  New  Hampshire  historical  society,  and
was  a  trustee  of  Bates  college,  Lewiston,  Me.,  to
which  he  gave  $5,000,  and  which  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  I).  After  his  return  from  Europe  he
resumed  the  editorship  of  the  "Independent  Demo-
crat" till  it  was  united  with  the  "Statesman"  in
1871,  and  was  then  for  one  year  the  principal  po-
litical writer  for  the  combined  paper,  when  he  re-
signed and  retired.  Mr.  Fogg  was  a  man  of  strong
convictions  and  honest  purposes,  and  a  vigorous
and  fearless  writer. He  never  married.

FOLEY,  Margaret  E.,  artist,  b.  in  New  Hamp-
shire; d.  in  Menan,  Austrian  Tyrol,  in  1877.  She
was  entirely  self-taught,  and  began  her  career  in  a
humble  way,  carving  small  figures  in  wood,  and
modelling  busts  in  chalk.  Later  she  removed  to
Boston,  where  she  suffered  many  privations,  and
earned  a  scanty  support  by  carving  portraits  and
ideal  heads  in  cameo.  At  the  end  of  seven  years
she  went  to  Rome,  where  she  spent  the  rest  of  her
professional  life,  becoming  the  friend  and  associate
of  Harriet  Hosmer,  Gibson,  Story,  Mrs.  Jameson,
and  William  and  Mary  Howitt.  In  the  summer
of  1877,  her  health  failing,  she  accompanied  the
Howitts  to  their  home  in  Austrian  Tyrol,  where
she  died.  Among  her  portrait  busts  are  those  of
S.  C.  Hall,  Charles  Sumner,  and  Theodore  Parker.
The  medallions  of  William  and  Mary  Howitt,  Long-
fellow, and  William  Cullen  Bryant,  and  her  ideal
statues  of  "Cleopatra,"  "Excelsior,"  and  "Jere-
miah," are  the  best  specimens  of  her  cameo  work.

FOLEY,  Thomas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Baltimore
in  1823;  d.  there  in  1879.  He  studied  in  St.  Mary's
seminary,  Baltimore,  and  was  ordained  priest  in
1846.  He  was*  first  placed  over  the  mission  of
Rockville,  and  afterward  appointed  assistant  pas-
tor to  St.  Patrick's  church,  Washington.  Alter
1848  he  was  chancellor  of  the  archdiocese  of  Balti-
more, and  in  1867  he  was  appointed  vicar-general.
Afterward,  when  the  diocese  of  Chicago  had  bean


thrown  into  confusion  by  the  insanity  of  Bishop
Duggan.  Father  Foley  was  commissioned  to  restore
order,  and  in  1869  he  was  nominated  coadjutor-
bishop  of  Chicago.  He  was  consecrated  in  1^70.
After  the  Chicago  fire  had  destroyed  seven  churches
and  several  schools  and  asrhims,  he  set  at  one."  to
work  to  rebuild  them.  He  erected  the  cathedral
of  the  Holy  Name,  and  founded  five  new  convents
and  seven  academies.  During  his  administ ration
the  number  of  priests  in  the  diocese  increased  from
142  to  206,  and  the  churches  from  200  to  M0.

FOLGER,  Charles  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Nan-
tucket, Mass.,  16  April.  1818;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,
4  Sept.,  1884.  In  1*31  he  removed  with  his  father
to  Geneva,  N.  Y.  He  was  graduated  at  Geneva
(now  Hobart)  college  in  1836,  studied  law  in  Can-
andaigua,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Albany  in
1839,  and,  after  practising  a  short  time  in  Lyons,
settled  in  Gene-
va in  1840.  In
1843  he  became
a  judge  of  the
court  of  com-
mon pleas  in
Ontario  county,
and  soon  after-
ward was  also
made  master  and
examiner  in
chancery,  which
offices  were  abol-
ished by  the  con-
stitutional con-
vention of  1846.
He  was  also
county  judge  in
1852-'6.  He  was
a  Democrat  till
1854,  when  he
joined  the  newly  formed  Republican  party.  He
was  a  state  senator  in  1861-9,  acting  for  four  years
of  the  time  as  president  pro  tempore,  and  was  chair-
man of  the  judiciary  committee  during  the  whole
period.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  con-
stitutional convention  of  1867,  and  chairman  of
its  judiciary  committee.  By  the  appointment  of
President  Grant  he  was  U.  S.  assistant  treasurer  in
New  York  city  from  1869  till  1870.  He  was  elected
associate  judge  of  the  state  court  of  appeals  in  1871,
and  on  the  death  of  Chief-Justice  Church,  in  1880,
he  was  designated  by  Gov.  Cornell  to  fill  the  unex-
pired term  of  that  officer.  In  November  of  that  year
ne  was  re-elected  to  the  bench  of  the  court  of  appeals
for  the  full  term  of  fourteen  years,  but  resigned  in
1881  on  his  appointment  by  President  Arthur  to
the  treasury  portfolio,  which  he  retained  till  his
death.  The  New  York  state  Republican  conven-
tion in  September,  1882,  nominated  him  for  gover-
nor, but  through  a  defection  in  his  party  he  was
defeated  by  Grover  Cleveland  by  nearly  200,000
majority.  He  took  his  defeat  so  much  to  heart
that,  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  knew  him  weU,
his  health  was  seriously  affected  thereby.

FOLGER,  Peter,  colonist,  b.  in  England  in
1617;  d.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  in  1690.  He  left
Norwich,  England,  in  1635,  with  his  father,  settled
in  Watertown,  Mass.,  and  removed  to  Martha's  Vine-
yard in  1641,  where  he  taught,  surveyed  land,  and
assisted  Thomas  Mavhew,  the  missionary,  in  his
labors  among  the  Indians.  He  afterward  became
a  Baptist  minister,  and  in  1663  he  removed  to
Nantucket,  having  been  offered  by  the  proprietors
a  half-share  of  land  if  he  would  serve  there  as
surveyor  and  interpreter.  He  was  one  of  five
commissioners  to  lay  out  land;  tt  was  voted  that.


^^*/yf x/£  /jjz^.


Kul


401


I  In-  doM  by  them.  <>r  any  three  of
>|ger  being  one,  shall  l>c  accounted
lejmi  and  Mill':  i  clerk  of  tin  ooorti

her,  in  Ins  "  Bcclesiastioa]
'  the  Province  in  New  Kngland,"  ref<
er  a«  pioM  and  learn,  id. lb-  VM  familiar  with
tti.'  scripture*,  taught  them  t<>  tin-  youths,  tod  oo-
•iiiilly  preached. Among  other  lessor  pieces,
iihlished  it  i mm'iii  entitled  "  A  L>oking-(Haai  for
rimes;  or,  1'hc  Former  Spirit  of  New  Kngland
leration"  (Hi7.*>:  2d  ed.,  1 7*wt >.
njamin  Franklin,  in liis  autobiography,
■ays:  "The  poem,  in  familitir  verse,  appeared  to  lie
ten  with  >t  manly  freedom  an«l  n  pleasing  sim-
plicity, agreeably  to  the  tastes  of  the  times  and  the
try. The  author  addresses  him-elf  to  the  gov-
rs  of  tin'  colonies,  speaks  for  lilterty  of  ooBr
nce,  and in favor  of the toleration  of  sects,
among  them  the  Quakers  and  Anabaptists,  who
had  suffered  persecution." — His  daughter,  Ahiah.
b. in Nantucket. 15 Aug.,  KMt?,  married Josiah
Franklin,  and became  the  mother  of  Benjamin
Franklin. —  His  great-grandson.  Peleg,  sailor,  b.  in
tucket.  Mass..  i:i  Oct..  1733;  d.  there.  26  .May.
IT^'.i. His  life  was  parsed  on  a  farm  until  he  was
twenty-one  years  old.  when  he  changed  from  land
■■a,  and  for  several  years  was  engaged  iu  the
coil  ami  whale  fisheries. He  kept  a  journal  of  his
voyages,  which  is  written  in  a  much  more  scholar-
ly manner  than  could  be  expected  from  his  limited
education. Some  of  the  verses  that  he  introduced
into  his  journal  were  quoted  in  Macy's  "  History
of  Nantucket."  and  seem  to  be  those  of  a  scholar
rather  than  a  sailor. On  his  retirement  from  the
sea,  his  counsel  was  much  sought  by  his  neighbors.
He  was  a  memU-r  of  the  society  of  Friends.

FOLGFIt. Walter,  lawyer!  b. in  Nantucket,
Mass..  12  June.  17itt  ;  d.  H  Sej.t..  1849. He  attended
the  common  schools,  studied  higher  mathematics,
navigation,  and French  by  himself,  and  became  a
proficient  scholar. He  was  for  many  years  a  watch
ami clock maker, and in 1788 began  an  astro-
nomical clock,  which  he  completed  in  1790. He
calculated  and  published  an  almanac  for  1790,  and
assisted in  compiling others. He  then studied
medicine  and  surgery,  and  practised  gratuitously;
also  studied law,  and  followed  this  profession 'in
the  courts  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  till
al>ouf  1828. He  was  one  year  a  representative  in
the Massachusetts legislature, state  senator in
1809-' 15,  was  for  six  years  a  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  and  of  the  court  of  sessionfl  in  Nan-
tucket county,  and  at  one  time  chief  justice  of  both
of  these  courts. He  represented  his  state  in  con-
gress from 1817-*21,  having been elected as a
K-rat. During  the  war  of  1812  he  established
a  factory  at  home,  where  carding,  spinning,  and
weaving  were  carried  on  by  himself  and  his  sons.
|Miwer-looms  were  among  the  earliest in  this
country,  and  he  manufactured  many  kinds  of  oot-
uid  woollen  goods. He  kept  a  record  of  the
weather  for  twenty-one  years  (1827-48}, was  for
time principal  of  Nantucket  academy,  and
during  two  winters,  in  the  evenings,  taught  navi-
i and nautical astronomy to several ship-
He made observation  on the comet  of
Is!  I.  ami  afterward  calculated  the  orbit  of  another
i. In hi*  seventieth year he  began  a  gene-
alogy of  the people  of Nantucket,  on which he
tinned  to  write  till  his  death. He  contributed,
mathematical  problems  to  various  newspapers  and
ntiflc  journals  in Boston  and New  York,  and
was  the  author  of  "  Description  of  Nantucket.'*  in
M  i.-.s«chiisetts historical collections ilTHJi.
and  "Observations  of  the  Solar  BeUpse  "f  1811."


I  <»|  |  |  v  Charles  Theodore  <  hrlstlan,  edu-
cator. Ii.  in  Komrod.  Germany,  I  Sept,  1798;  d.  in
Long  Island  sound,  18  Jan!.  1*10.  He  was  the
second  son  of  Christopher  Pollen,  an  eminent
jurist. He  was  educated  at  the  preparatory  school

at  <iiesseii,  where  he  distinguished  bimaali  for
proficiency  in  Greek,  Latin.  Hebrew,  French,  and
Italian.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  entered  the
University  of  Qiaaaan,and  began  the  study  of  juris-
prudence, but  presently,  OH  hearing  the'  new-  of
Nap. Icon's  defeat  at  Ijeipsic,  he  enlisted  in  a  corps
of  riflemen.  A  few  weeks  after  enlisting,  his  mili-
tary carifr  was  cut  short  by  an  acute  attack  of
typhus  fever,  which  seemed  for  a  time  to  have
completely  destroyed  his  memory.  After  his  re-
covery he  returned  to  the  university,  where  In-  took
the  degree  of  doctor  of  civil  law  "in  1H17.  In  the
following  year  he  lectured  on  the  pandects  in  the
Iniversity  of  Jena.  Here  he  was  arrested  on  sus-
picion of  complicity  with  the  fanatical  assassin,
Sand,  in  the  murder  of  Kotzchuc.  The  suspicion
was  entirely  groundless.  After  his  acquittal  he
returned  to  Giessen,  but  soon  incurred  the  dislike
of  the  government  through  his  liberal  ideas  in
politics.  His  brother  had  already  bean  thrown
into  iail  for  heading  a  petition  lagging  for  the
introduction  of  a  representative  government.  Dr.
Pollen,  peiosiving  that  he  was  himself  in  danger,
left  Germany  and  went  to  Paris,  where  he  made
the  acquaintance  of  Lafayette.  In  1880  the  French
government  ordered  all  foreigners  to  quit  France,
and  Dr.  Follen  repaired  to  Zurich,  where  he  became

Brofessor  of  Latin  in  the  cantonal  school  of  the
risons.  He  was  soon  afterward  transferred  to  the
University  of  Basel,  as  professor  of  civil  law,  and
here,  in  association  with  the  celebrated  De  Wctte.
he  edited  the  literary  journal  of  the  university,
and  published  an  essay  on  the  "  Destiny  of  Man."
and  another  on  "  Spinoza's  Doctrine  of  Law  and
Morals."  In  1824  the  governments  of  Russia,
Austria,  and  Prussia  demanded  of  the  Swiss  gov-
ernment that  Dr.  Follen  should  be  surrendered  to
"justice"  for  the  crime  of  disseminating  revolu-
tionary doctrines,  and.  finding  the  Swiss  govern-
ment unable  to  protect  him,  he  made  his  escape  to
America,  and.  after  devoting  a  year  to  the  study  of
the  English  language,  was  appointed  instructor  in
Qerman  at  Harvard.  He  studied  divinity  with
Dr.  W.  K.  C'hanning,  began  preaching  in  1828,  and
also  served  as  instructor  in  ecclesiastical  history  in
the  Harvard  divinitv-school.  In  1830  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  German  literature  at  Harvard.
There  was  no  regular  foundation  for  such  a  pro-
fessorship; it  was  merely  continued  from  time  to
time,  by  a  ipeoial  vote  of  the  corporation.  About
this  time  Dr.  Pollen  became  prominently  connected
with  the  anti-slavery  movement,  which  was  then
extremely  unpopular  at  Harvard,  and  in  1834  the
corporation  refused  to  continue  his  professorship.
Thrown  thus  upon  his  own  resources,  after  nearly
ten  years  of  faithful  and  valuable  service  at  the
university.  Dr.  Pollen  supported  himself  for  a
time  bv  Manning  and  writing,  living  at  Water-
town.  Milton,  and  Stookbridge.  In  1890  he  was
formally  ordained  as  a  Unitarian  minister,  and
preached  OCOntionaUy  in  New  York,  Washington,
and  Boston.  He  continued  conspicuous  among
the  zealous  advocates  of  the  alxdition  of  slavery.
In  1K40  he  was  settled  over  a  pariah  in  East  Lex-
ington, Mass.,  but  while  on  his  way  from  New
York  to  Bottom  he  lost  his  life  in  the  burning  of
the  steamer  "  Ix-xington."  He  published  a  "(ier-
man  Header"  (Boston,  1KU  ;  new  ed..  with  addi-
tion-, by  <;.  A.  Schmitt.  1808);  and  "Practical
Grammar of the German language" (Boston,


409


FOLLET


I'oLSO.M


1831).  His  complete  works,  containing  lectures
on  moral  philosophy,  miscellaneous  essays  and
sermons,  and  a  fragment  of  a  treatise  on  psy-
aholoffj,  and  a  memoir  by  his  widow,  were  pub-
lished after  his  death  (5  vols.,  Boston,  1842). — His
wife.  Eliza  Lee  Cabot,  author,  1>.  in  Boston,  15
Aug.,  1787;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  26  Jan.,  1860,
was  the  daughter  of  Samuel  Cabot,  of  Boston,  and
married  Dr.  Pollen  in  1828.  After  her  husband's
death  she  educated  their  only  son,  whom,  with
other  pupils,  she  fitted  for  Harvard.  She  edited
the  "  Child's  Friend  "  in  1843-'50.  Mrs.  Follen  was
an  intimate  friend  of  William  Ellery  Channing,
and  was  a  zealous  opponent  of  slavery.  Besides
the  memoir  of  her  husband,  mentioned  above,  she
published  "  The  Well-Spent  Hour"  (Boston,  1827);
"The  Skeptic"  (1835);  "Poems"  (1839);  "To
Mothers  in  the  Free  States  "  (1855);  "  Anti-Slavery
Hymns  and  Songs"  (1855);  "Twilight  Stories
(1858);  and  "  Homo  Dramas"  (1859).

FOLLET,  David  Lyman,  jurist,  b.  in  Sher-
burne, N.  Y.,  17  July,  1836.  He  was  educated  at
Cazenovia  seminary,  N.  Y.,  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Binghamton  in  1858,  and  settled  in  Norwich,  N.  Y.
He  has  been  assessor  of  internal  revenue  for  the
19th  district,  and  in  1874  was  elected  a  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  New  York.

FOLSOM,  Abby,  reformer,  b.  in  England  about
1792  ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1867.  She  came  to
the  United  States  about  1837,  became  noted  as  an
advocate  of  anti-slavery  reform,  and  was  well  known
for  her  addresses  at  the  meetings  of  the  American
anti-slavery  society,  about  1842-'5.  She  married  a
Mr.  Folsom,  a  resident  of  Massachusetts,  and  after-
ward rarely  appeared  in  public.  She  published  a
"  Letter  from  a  Member  of  the  Boston  Bar  to  an
Avaricious  Landlord  "  (Boston,  1851).

FOLSOM,  Charles,  scholar,  b.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,
24  Dec.,  1794;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  8  Nov.,  1872.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1813.  During
his  college  vacations  he  taught  in  Sudbury,  Mass.,
and  after  graduation  had  charge  of  the  academy  at
Hallowell,  Me.,  for  one  year.  He  began  the  study
of  divinity  in  1814,  and  became  chaplain  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  and  midshipman's  teacher  of  mathe-
matics on  the  ship  "  Washington,"  in  1816.  He
was  charge  d'affaires  in  Tunis  in  1817— '19.  David
G.  Farragut  was  one  of  the  youngest  of  Mr.  Fol-
som's  pupils  on  board  the  "  Washington,"  and  was
given  permission,  at  his  own  request,  to  leave  the
ship  and  remain  with  his  teacher  at  Tunis.  In
after  years  Farragut  was  never  weary  of  acknowl-
edging his  affectionate  obligation  to  his  friend  and
teacher.  Mr.  Folsom  was  tutor  in  Harvard  from
1821  till  1823,  and  in  1825  was  instructor  in  Italian.
He  was  librarian  of  Harvard  in  1823-'6,  and  of  the
Boston  athenasum  from  1845  till  1856.  After  1826
he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Folsom,  Wells  &
Thurston,  proprietors  of  the  university  press,  and
was  engaged  in  the  examination,  correction,  and
partial  editing  of  various  classical  works.  Through-
out his  life  he  was  accustomed  to  give  much  time
to  the  version  and  criticism  of  the  proofs  of  the
works  of  various  authors,  among  whom  Quincy,
Sparks,  Norton.  Palfrev,  and  Prescott  have  ren-
dered special  tribute  to  his  ability.  From  1841  till
1845,  with  his  wife,  he  conducted  a  school  for  young
ladies  in  Boston.  Late  in  life  he  was  engagea  with
others  in  the  preparation  of  Worcester's  Diction-
ary. He  was  the  author  of  the  inscriptions  upon
the  monuments  erected  to  three  presidents  of  Har-
vard— Dunster,  Willard.and  Webber — and  was  fre-
quently called  HOOD  for  aid  in  similar  labors,  as
also  in  the  deciphering  and  interpretation  of  an-
cient inscriptions. At  the  close  of  the  civil  war


Admiral  Farragut  gave  Mr.  Folsom  a  silver  vase,
handsomely  engraved  from  sketelies  made  by  Far-
ragut himself.  Mr.  Polaoin  was  co-editor  with
William  Cullen  Bryant  of  the  "  U.  S.  Literary
Gazette"  in  Boston  and  New  York  in  1834,  MM
edited,  with  Andrews  Norton,  the  "  Select  Journal
of  Foreign  Periodical  Literature"  in  Is::::.  Un-
published "  Cicero's  Select  Orations,"  with  notes
(Boston,  1811),  and  "Additional  Selections  from
Livy,"  with  notes  (Cambridge,  1829). — His  wife,
Susannah  Sarah,  daughter  of  Prof.  Joseph  Me-
Kean.  of  Harvard,  married  Mr.  Folsom  in
and  has  written  both  prose  and  poetry.  During
Mrs.  Eliza  Lee  Follen's  absence  in  Europe  -lie
edited  volumes  thirteen  and  fourteen  of  the  "  (  hi  Id's
Friend  "  (Boston,  1850),  and  wrote  an  "  Ode  for  La-
dies Fair  "  (1840).  She  also  contributed  to  Miss  A.
W.  Abbot's  "  Autumn  Leaves  "  (Cambridge,  1853),
and  to  Arthur  Gilman's  "  The  Cambridge  of  1776  "
(Cambridge,  1876). — Their  son,  Charles  William,
engineer,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  17  April,  1826,  was.
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1845,  and  was  engaged  in
the  construction  of  railroads  in  New  York, Virginia,
and  Ohio  from  1848  till  1854,  and  in  Nova  Scotia
from  1855  till  1856.  He  served  in  the  National
array  during  the  civil  war,  was  receiver  of  railroads
in  Virginia  and  Tennessee  for  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment in  1869,  and  superintendent  of  Mount  Au-
burn cemetery,  near  Boston,  from  April,  1870,  till
April,  1873.  He  has  been  employed  in  the  sewer
department  of  Boston  since  1876. — Another  son,
Norton,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  April,
1842,  studied  in  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of
Harvard,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  medical
school  in  1864  He  was  surgeon  of  the  45th  col-
ored troops  in  1864-'5,  and  acting  medical  director
of  the  25th  army  corps,  receiving  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  in  Texas  when  mus-
tered out  of  service,  and  became  a  surgeon  in  the
Liberal  Mexican  army  under  Gen.  Escobedo.  He
was  resident  physician  at  the  Massachusetts  gen-
eral hospital  in  Boston  in  1869-'76,  and  since  that
time  has  practised  his  profession  in  that  city.  Dr.
Folsom  has  invented  sanitary  appliances,  and  pub-
lished "  Essay  on  the  Senses  of  Smell  and  Taste,"
which  gained  the  Boylston  society  prize  (Boston,
1863),  and  "  Plans  and  Suggestions  for  Johns  Hop-
kins Hospital,  Baltimore  'r(New  York,  1875).

FOLSOM,  George,  antiquarian,  b.  in  Kenne-
bunk,  Me.,  23  May,  1802;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  27
March,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1822,  studied  law  in  Saco,  Me.,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Framingham,  and  afterward  in  Worces-
ter, Mass.  In  the  latter  town  he  was  associated
with  the  American  antiquarian  society,  was  its
chairman,  and  edited  the  second  volume
series.  He  removed  to  New  York  in  1837,
an  active  member  of  the  historical  society  of
city,  and  virtually  quitted  his  profession  for  hit
cal  literature.  In  1844  he  was  elected  to  the
senate,  and  in  1850  appointed  by  President  Ti
charge  d'affaires  at  the  Hague,  where  he  remaine
until  1854.  After  travelling  in  Europe  two  yet
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  renewed
connection  with  various  literary  and  charita
associations.  He  repeatedly  returned  to  Europe.
and  collected  a  valuable  library,  but  was  d
by  ill  health  from  active  historical  studies  lb-
was  president  of  the  American  ethnological  society
and  of  the  citizen's  savings  bank,  and  published
"Sketches  of  Saco  and  Biddeford"  (Saco,  .Me.,
1830);  "  Dutch  Annals  of  New  York"  (New
1841);  "Letters  and  Dispatches  of  Cortez,"  trans-
lated from  the  Spanish  (1843);  "Political  Conditio*
of  Mexico"  (Boston,  1842);  an/1  an  "Add:


Fol»soM


POLWELL


408


the  Discovery  of  Maim-."  which  wm  delivered  be-
N  >rk  historical  —  M-i.-t  v.  6  Sept.,

KOI. sum.  Joseph  l.. I'li.r,  i..  in  Meredith,
napco.  (thin  a  |>;tr!  of  Strafford  counts  I,  N.  II ..
■  1.  in Sim  J..*c.  Oil..  1!»  July,
He  *M  graduated  at  the  U.S.  military  academy  in
1840,  MM  a**igned BO  the  infantry,  serving  in  the
la  war  against the  Somlnok ■  until  1*11,  and
on the  northern  frontier  until  1844. In  that
jeer  ho  was  ap|>ointcd  assistant instructor  of  in-
try  tactics  M  Wtsl Point. He  was  transferred
to  the  quartermaster's  department,  with  the  rank
iptain,  in  l*4'i.  and  served  in  California  daring
the  war  with  Mexico. Kn»m 1K-KJ  till  1K4M  he  was
i  -olleetor  of  customs  for  the  |>ort  of  San  Fran-
He  was  one  of the  first to  appreciate  the
of  gold  in  California,  ami  to  impart  the
news  officially  to  the  government. He  was  identi-
fied with  the  early  history  and  development  of  San
Francisco,  when-  he  was  a  large  property  owner,
and  one  ..f  the  wealthiest  citizens  of  California
Polsom  City,  on  the  American  river,  near  the  locali-
ty where  pi  Id  was  discovered,  was  named  for  him.

FOI.SOM,  Nathaniel,  Revolutionary  soldier,  b.
in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  in  1726;  d.  there.  26  May,  1790.
His  earliest  ancestors  in  America  wrote  the  name
Foulshame.  In  the  French  war  of  1755  he  com-
mauded  a  company  at  Fort  Edward,  was  distin-
guished at  t  he  defeat  and  capture  of  Karon  Dieskau,
and  appointed  general  of  militia,  before  the  Revo-
tntion.  He  served  daring  the  siege  of  Boston,  in
1775,  until  he  was  relieved  by  Sullivan  in  July,
was  a  member  of  the  Continental  congresses  of
W74-'5  and  17?7-'H,  was  a  councillor  in  177H,  and
served  as  president  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion of  New  Hampshire  in  17*3.

FOI.SOM.  Nathaniel  Smith,  clergvman,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  12  March,  IstHJ.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1838  and  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary  in  1831,  and  ordained  on  26  Sept.
of  that  year.  After  acting  as  a  missionary  in  Lib-
erty county,  (Jo.,  in  lN3l-'2,  he  was  pastor  of  a
byterian  church  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  ^l','-":',.
professor  in  Lane  theological  seminary  in  ln:}:{,
and  held  the  chair  of  biblical  literature  in  Western
Reserve  college  in  1833-'6.  He  held  Congregational
pastorates  at  Franeestown,  N.  EL,  in  1K36-'H.  and
Providence,  R.  1..  in  ls:{8-'40.  was  pastor  of  a
Unitarian  church  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,  in  is40_'6,
and  edited  the  "Christian  Register"  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  in  1K46-'H.  He  was  professor  of
biblical  literature  in  Mead  villa,  Pa.,  theological
seminary  in  1H4H-'61,  and  in  1862  was  a  teacher  in
Concord,  Mass.,  also  acting  as  pastor  of  a  church
there  in  ls<i?-'N.  In  1X7*}  he  removed  to  Boston.
Dr.  Folsora  has  contributed  to  current  literature.
and  has  published  "Critical  and Historical  Inter-

Siretation  of  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel"  (Boston,
.—His  son,  Charles  Follen.  physician,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  3  April,  1842,  was  graduated  at  I
Harvard  in  1862. He  taught  among  the  freedmen
in  the  south  from  1862  till  1865,  when  he  returned
to Massachusetts,  studied  medicine,  and.  after  his
graduation  at  Harvard  medical  school  in  1870,  l«--
.'■n.i-ul practice in Boston. In  1N7:{-V>  he  at-
tended lectures in  Vienna. Berlin,  and Munich.
toreron  hygiene  in  Harvard  in  1877—^M,
and  lecturer  and  assistant  professor  (»f  mental  dis-
eases from  |M7«)  till  ins-,\ He  has  been  secretary
of  the Massachusetts Imard  of health,  and  of  the
board  of  health,  lunacy,  and  charity,  and  has
been  a  member  of  the  national  board  since  li

i  i-  visiting  physician  to  various  hospitals

asylums,  and  i*  a  member  of  the  State  medical

id  of  nomerooa  medical  sooietiea Hi*


writings  have  been  chiefly  entitled  t,.  health  re-
port* and  article*  on  hvgicuc  and  mental  d incases.
nil  of  In*  lectures  have  l>eeu  reprinted,  one  of
(hem.  on  "  Mental  Disease*."  for  the  M*J  of  *tudcnl-
in  the  Harvard  medical  school.  This  was  first  pub-
liehed  in  Pepper's  "  American  System  <>f  Medicine."
He  has  written  papers  <>n  "  Limited  ElMSMMsV
liilitv."  "General  Paralysis,"  and  "Insanity  in
Kuguind  and  America  "  :  "Letters  from  Kuro|M«,"
which  ap|N*ansl  in  the  Boston  "  Medical  and  Surgi-
cal Journal,"  and  has  published  in  Imok  form
"The  Present  Asjiect  of  the  Sewage  (Question  a*
Applied  to  Boston  "  (Boston,  1*77).

FOLTZ,  Clara  Short  ridge,  lawyer,  h.  in  Hen-
ry eountv,  Ind..  16  July,  1K4!».  She  removed  to
M< unit  Pleasant.  Iowa,  with  her  father.  Rev.
Klias  \V.  Short  ridge,  and  was  educated  chiefly  at
Howe  -.miliary  in  that  town.  She  taught  in  1868
in  Mercer  county,  111.,  and  in  December,  1864,
married.  She  went  with  her  husband  to  Oregon
in  1M72,  and  soon  afterward  to  San  Jose,  Cal.,
contributing  to  tbo  "New  Northwest"  and  the
San  Jose  "  Mercury."  About  1876  she  was  thrown
on  her  own  resources,  and,  though  having  the  care
of  four  children,  she  determined  to  study  law.  aid-
ing herself  liv  lecturing.  She  went  Before  the
legislature  of  1877-'8,  secured  the  passage  of  an
act  permitting  women  to  practise  law,  and  was  the
lir-t  to  take  advantage  of  it,  being  admitted  to  the
bar  on  5  Sept.,  1878,  after  passing  creditably  a
strict  examination.  In  1880  she  was  clerk  of  the
assembly  judiciary  committee,  and  in  the  same
year  removed  to  San  Francisco,  where  she  spoke
for  the  Republicans  during  the  canvasses  of  1880,
1882,  and  1884.  In  1886  she  became  a  Democrat.
and  in  the  winter  of  that  vear  lectured  in  Wiscon-
sin, Illinois,  and  Iowa,  siie  has  been  successful  at
the  bar.  and  is  an  effective  public  sjM>aker.

FOLTZ,  Jonathan  Messersmith,  surgeon,  b.
in  Lancaster.  Pa.,  '2't  April,  1810;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia Pa.,  12  April,  1*77.  He  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  M  assistant  surgeon,  4  April,  1KH.  and  landed
with  the  storming  party  at  Qualah  Battoo,  Suma-
tra, being  specially  commended  in  ('apt.  Shubrick's
official  dispatch.  He  was  made  surgeon.  N  Dec.,
1838,  and  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Raritan."
of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in  1844-'7,  and  to  the
"Jamestown,"  of  the  same  squadron,  in  1851-'4.
He  was  fleet  Burgeon  of  the  Western  Qulf  equadron
in  1862-'3.  and  was  with  Farragut  on  the  "  Hart-
ford" in  all  his  battles  during  those  vears.  He
occupied  the  same  place  on  the  "  Franklin"  during
Farragut's  voyage  to  Europe  in  1867-'8,  and  in
1H7(>-'1  was  president  of  the  naval  medical  board.
He  liecame  medical  director  on  3  March.  1N71,  and
chief  of  the  bureau  of  medicine  and  surgery,  with
the  rank  of  commodore,  on  'J."»  Oct  of  that  year.
He  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.  Ml  April.  I
Dr.  Foltz  published  "  Kndemic  Influence  of  an
Kvil  Government  "  (New  York.  1843).

POLWELL,  William  Watts,  educator,  b.  in
Romulus.  Seneca  MX.  N.  V..  14  Feb..  l*'M.  He  was
graduated  at  Hobart  in  1857,  Mid  in  1859  became
adjunct  professor  of  mathematics  there.  He  spent
the  years  lHliO-'l  in  the  *tudy  of  philology  at  ltcr-
lin  and  in  travel,  and  during  the  civil  war  *<rved
in  the  BOtfa  N.  V.  engineers,  reaching  the  rank  of
major.  He  then  engaged  in  business,  but  in  lst'i!)
accepted  the  chair  of  mathematics  in  Keiiyoii  col-
lege, <»hio.  anil  in  the  same  year  was  appointed
to  the  presidency  of  the  Cniversity  of  Minnesota,
after  resigning  which  he  remained  professor  of  |h>-
litical  science  and  librarian.  He  ha*  published
-Public  Instruction  in  Minnesota"  (IN?."!),  ami
lures  on  Political  Kconoinv."


494


FONKRDKN


FONVIELLE


FONERDEN,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1H04;  (I.  in  New  York  city,  0  May,
18891  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the
University  of  Maryland  in  1898,  WM  city  physi-
cian of  Baltimore  during  the  cholera  epidemic  of
1882,  co-editor  of  the  Baltimore  "Colonization
Journal  "  in  ls:$.">,  professor  of  obstetrics  in  Well-
ington university,  Baltimore,  in  1845-'0,  and  resi-
dent physician  of  the  Marvland  hospital  for  the
Insane  from  1846  till  his  death.  He  wus  distin-
guished as  a  philanthropist,  particularly  in  his
t  real  merit  of  the  insane,  lie  published  a  "  Memoir
of  Dr.  Samuel  Baker"  in  the  "Baltimore  Athe-
naeum "  of  2  Jan.,  1830,  and  a  "  Report "  as  physi-
eian  of  the  hospital  for  the  insane  (I860).

FONSECA,  J  uan  Rodriguez  (fon-sa  -ka),  Span-
ish archbishop,  b.  in  Toro,  near  Seville,  in  1451 ;  d.
in  Burgos,  4  March,  1524.  He  was  successively
dean  of  the  chapter  of  the  cathedral  of  Seville,  bish-
op of  Badajoz.  of  Cordova,  of  Palencia,  of  Burgos,
and  archbishop  of  Rosanna,  When  Christopher
Columbus  applied  for  the  second  time  for  aid  to
enable  him  to  undertake  the  discovery  of  the  New
World,  Fonseca,  then  dean  of  Seville,  was  con-
sulted by  Isabella  as  to  the  feasibility  of  the  en-
terprise, lie  denounced  Columbus  as  a  visionary,
violently  opposed  the  consideration  of  the  propo-
sition, and  never  forgave  the  discoverer  for  ob-
taining consent  for  his  scheme.  He  solicited  and
obtained  from  the  queen  the  control  of  the  equip-
ment, of  the  expedition,  and  left  no  stone  unturned
to  secure  its  failure.  It  is  well  known  that  Fonse-
ca's efforts  nearly  succeeded,  the  crews  mutinying
more  than  once,  and  demanding  a  return  to  Spain.
After  the  death  of  Isabella,  Fonseca,  having  been
made  privy  councillor  to  King  Ferdinand,  was
able  to  vent  his  hatred  on  the  family  of  Colum-
bus. In  consequence  of  his  resentment  he  con-
ceived a  strong  natred  of  the  Indians  of  the  New
World,  and  proposed  to  the  council  the  most  san-
guinary measures  against  them.  It  being  his  duty
to  select  the  missionaries  for  the  New  World,  he
chose  bigoted  fanatics,  and  took  pains  to  impress
on  them  that  the  Indians  were  but  slightly  supe-
rior to  animals.  He  also  brought  his  malevolence
to  bear  against  Hernando  Cortes,  who  finally  ap-
pealed to  Charles  V.,  and  obtained  in  1520  the
dissolution  of  the  council  of  which  Fonseca  was
president.  He  was,  nevertheless,  a  member  of  the
new  council,  where  his  animosity  to  the  Indians,
if  less  prominent,  was  quite  as  active  as  before.  A
characteristic  saying  of  Fonseca's  was,  that  "  what
the  Indians  needed  was  not  a  baptism  with  water,
but  one  in  their  own  blood."  Fonseca's  acquire-
ments were  remarkable  for  the  time  in  which  he
lived,  and  he  was  considered  during  his  life  as  a
man  of  whose  learning  Spain  might  well  be  proud.

FONSECA,  Mariano  Jos6  Pereira  da,  Bra-
zilian statesman,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  18  May,  1773;
d.  there,  16  Sept.,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  the
royal  college  of  Mafra,  Portugal,  in  1793,  and  in
1794  matriculated  at  the  recently  founded  scientific
academy  of  Brazil.  On  4  Dec.  of  the  following
year  the  viceroy  caused  the  arrest  and  indictment
of  the  principal  members  of  that  school  for  sus-
pected conspiracy,  and  Fonseca  remained  in  strict
confinement  in  the  island  of  Das  Cobras  until  re-
leased by  a  royal  order  in  July,  1797.  He  then
went  into  business  until  1802,  when  he  was  elected
member  of  the  council  of  agriculture  and  com-
merce, and  censor  of  the  press.  He  was  elected  to
the  provisional  junta  in  1821,  was  appointed  min-
ister of  the  treasury  on  13  Nov.,  1823,  and  the
same  year  became  a  member  of  the  council  of  state,
and  was  one  of  the  authors  of  the  imperial  consti-


tution of  25  March,  1824.  He  was  one  of  the  first
founders  of  the  national  bank,  raised  the  credit  of
the  country  abroad,  organized  the  custom-houses,
and  co-operated  in  the  rearrangement  of  the  mail
service  and  in  the  improvement  of  commerce  and
agriculture.  He  left  the  cabinet  on  23  Nov..  1825,
and  on  22  Jan.,  1826,  was  elected  to  the  senate,
where  he  distinguished  himself  more  as  a  pro-
found thinker  than  as  an  orator.  He  was  created  a
viscount,  and  afterward  became  marquis  of  Marica.
His  philosophical  works  include  "Las  Maximas"
and  ••  I'ensainentos."

FONSECA  LIMA  t  SILVA,  Manoel  da,  Bra-
zilian soldier,  b.  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  10  July,  1793;
d.  there  in  1862.  At  a  very  early  age  he  entered
the  army,  became  captain,  and  took  part  in  the
campaign  against  the  revolution  of  Pernambuco
in  1817.  In  1823  he  organized  in  Bahia  the  em-
peror's battalion,  with  which  he  made  the  cam-
paign of  independence.  For  his  services  he  was
made  lord-chamberlain  of  the  emperor,  and  pro-
moted lieutenant-colonel.  In  1825  he  went  with
his  battalion  to  Montevideo  and  the  Argentine
Republic,  where  he  remained  in  active  service
until  1828,  when  he  was  promoted  brigadier.  Soon
afterward  he  took  part  in  the  pronunciamento  of
Campo  de  Sant  Anna,  and,  after  the  abdication  of
Dom  Pedro  I.,  adhered  to  the  government  and  the
Liberal  party.  He  was  minister  of  war  in  1831
and  1835,  and  also  minister  pro  tempore  of  the
navy,  until  November  of  the  following  year,  when
he  was  appointed  minister  of  interior,  but  resigned
in  1837.  He  organized  in  1848  the  national  guard
of  the  capital,  and  in  1851  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief, and  promoted  general.  In  1854
the  titles  of  baron  of  Suruhy  and  grandee  of  the
empire  were  bestowed  upon  him.

FONVIELLE,  Louis  Eugene,  knight  of,
French  filibuster,  b.  in  Thouars  in  1655 ;  d.  in  Rio
de  Janeiro,  18  March,  1711.  He  went  to  seek  for-
tune with  his  relative,  De  Pointis,  governor  of  St.
Christophe,  in  1674,  was  given  command  of  a  pri-
vateer, and  soon  acquired  such  a  reputation  that
Pointis,  jealous  of  his  popularity,  sent  him  away.
He  joined  the  buccaneers  in  1677,  was  elected  a
chief,  equipped  a  vessel,  and  made  a  successful
cruise  in  the  West  Indies  against  the  Spaniards.
On  his  return  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1678  he  found
the  colony  in  full  revolt  against  the  new  governor,
and  used  his  great  popularity  with  the  buccaneers
to  restore  peace.  Fonvielle  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant of  the  royal  navy  in  1779,  but  in  1781  re-
sumed his  privateering  expeditions,  and  became
supreme  chief  of  the  buccaneers.  Through  him
the  French  governor,  Ducasse,  could  always  obtain
the  assistance  of  the  filibusters.  When  De  Poin-
tis's  expedition  against  Cartagena  was  resolved
upon  in  1697,  Ducasse  received  orders  to  join  it,
and  Fonvielle  sailed  with  him,  with  a  strong  force
of  buccaneers.  After  the  capitulation  of  the  city,
Fonvielle  was  left  by  Ducasse  to  garrison  the  outer
fort  and  keep  the  buccaneers  away ;  but,  when  De
Pointis  tried  to  defraud  them  of  their  part  of  the
booty,  they  defied  his  authority,  and  plundered  the
city.  When  Philip  V.  became  king  of  Spain,
Fonvielle  served  his  cause  as  faithfully  as  he  had
fought  the  Spanish  before,  and  with  a  force  of
small  ships  assisted  Ducasse  in  1702  to  defeat  Ad-
miral Benbow,  and  carry  a  convoy  with  the  new
vicerov  into  Cartagena.  In  1710 "Fonvielle.  with
250  filibusters,  joined  the  expedition  of  Duclero
against  Rio  Janeiro,  and  on  19  Sept.  entered  the
city  with  the  French  troops ;  but  in  the  principal
square  they  were  surprised  by  a  cross-fire  fror
fortified buildings,  and retired to  the  custom-


#00


house, where  thev  were  surrounded by  superior
.-.  and  capitulated  on  tin-  following  day. Hut
the  terms  of  the  surrender  wan  nomad,  ami
Duclerc  ftiul  Konvielle  were  assassinated.

FOOT,  Jottouh  Ives,  clergyman,  h.  in  '
town.  Conn.,  l.  Nov..  1798;  &  near  KnoxviUe,
i  April,  l  —  * « ».  He  removed  with  Mi-
pan-iit-  in  1810  to  West  Granville,  Mass.,  and  was
educated  at  Phillip  AndoTer  academy  an<l  at
Union  college,  where  he  wan  graduated  in  1891.
He'  then  ?-t i !•  t i> •<  1  theology  at  Andover,  was  or-
dained on  80  Sept.,  1884,  and  lal>ored  us  a  homo
missionary  in  South  Carolina  and  Hew  Hampshire
in  1884  '•'..  II'-  was  pastor  of  OuogNMHBOnal
churches  in  West  Brookflel.l.  Mass.,  in

-  V..  in  1888-'5,and  in  Cortland,  N.  Y..
in  1888  '7.  He  then  removed  to  Westport,  OoniL,
where  be  united  with  the  Presbyterian  church, am
in  in;{ii  beearoe  pastoral  KnoxviUe,  Tenn.  In  July
of  that  year  ho  was  chosen  president  of  Washing-
ton college,  Tenn.,  bat  did  not  deride  to  accept
the  office  till  the  following  year.  He  was  on  his
way  to  the  college  when  he  was  thrown  from  his
carriage,  and  died  on  the  following  dav.  The
college  had  given  him  the  degree  of  I>.  1).  Dr.
i  published  various  sermons,  including  three
on  "  Perfectionism  "  (1834),  and  an  historical  dis-
course on  the  town  of  Brookficld  (1828),  and  con-
tributed to  the  "Literary  and  Theological  Re-
view," and  other  periodicals.  A  selection  from
his  manuscript  sermons,  with  a  memoir  by  his
brother,  the  Rev.  George  Foot,  was  published  after
his  death  (Philadelphia,  1841).

FOOT.  Samuel  Alfred,  jurist,  b.  in  Watertown,
N.  V..  17  Dec.,  1790;  d.  in  Geneva,  X.  Y..  11  Mav,
B.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1811,  stud-
ied law  in  Milton,  N.  Y.,  and  with  his  brother,
Kln-nezer  Foot,  of  Albany,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1813.  He  was  district  attorney  for
Albany  county  in  1 81 9— '21,  removed  to  New  York
city  iii  1825,  and  in  1844  to  Geneva,  N.  Y.  He
was  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1851,  and  in
1856-'7  served  two  terms  in  the  legislature,  where
be  introduced  resolutions  condemning  the  Dred
.Scott  decision.  Judge  Foot  became  a  member  of
the  African  colonization  society  in  1851,  and  was
president  of  the  American  Bible  society  in  1843-'7.
lb-  warmly  espoused  the  National  cause  in  1861,
and  had  five  ><>ns  in  the  armv,  three  of  whom  lost
their  lives.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  prob-
ably the  oldest  practising  lawyer  in  the  state.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1834,
and  from  Union  in  1853.  His  autobiography  was
printed  privately  (2  vols..  New  York,  1M73).

FOO'I ,  Sol  onion,  senator,  b.  in  Cornwall,  Addi-
son co..  Vt.,  19  Nov.,  1802;  d.  in  Washington.  D.
B  March,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Middle-
bury  in  1826,  was  principal  of  Castlcton.  \'t..
seminary  in  1826-'8.  tutor  in  Vermont  university
in  1827,  and  in  1828-'31  held  the  chair  of  natural
philosophy  in  the  Vermont  academy  of  medicine,

•  ton.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  lat-
ter year,  and  l**gan  practice  in  Rutland,  where  he
lived  until  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  lKf;t.  1  *:{<»-•*,  and  1M47,  speaker  of
the house in 1X17- 'H  and 1S47.  delegate to  the

e  constitutional  convention  in  1836,  and  state
attorney  for  Rutland in 1886-'42. He  was  then

•  d  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  served  from
till  1K47. He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate

for  clerk  of  the  house  in  1849.  was  then  chosen  V.
nator  from  Vermont,  and  served  from  1851
till  his  death,  becoming  a  Republican  in  1854  lb-
was  chairman  of  important  committees,  and  was
president  pro  tempore  of  the  seuate  during  a  part


of  ili.itutii  congress  and  the  whole  of  the  ;57tli.
tor  Fool  WM  prominent  in  deltate,  and  tn.k
an  active  part  in  the  discussions  on  the  admission
of  Kansas  to  the  Union  in  1HX.  lb-  was  chosen
president  of  the  HroMWiah  and  Florida  railroad
iom|uiny  al>out  1H.VI.  and  rhdted  England  to  ne-
gotiate the  bonds  of  the  ooenpany,

l  hoIK,  Arthur  William.  musician,  h.  in  Sa-
lem, Mass.,  5  March.  1888,  lb-  studied  com|H»itjoii
with  Stephen  A.  batty,  and  later  with  Prof.  John
K.  Paine  at  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in
ls71.  and  in  1898  took  the  degree  ..f  A.  M.  for  a
special  course  in  psjsJe,  He  then  settled  in  Boa-
ton,  and  studied  the  organ  and  piano-forte  under
H.  J.  I^ing.  His  published  works  include  aUnit
twenty  compositions  for  the  piano-forte,  songs,
vocal  quartettes,  three  pieces  for  violoncello  and
piano-forte,  three  pieces  for  violin  and  piano-forte.
a  string  quartette,  a  trio  for  piano- forte,  violin
and  violoncello,  which  was  played  at  the  meeting
of  the  Music-teachers'  national  association.  1  July,
Ixs'».  and  at  one  of  the  LtiOdotJ  Monday  popular
concerts  in  February,  1887,  and  a  scene  from
"  Hiawatha"  for  male  chorus,  solo,  and  orchestra,
produced  by  the  Apollo  club,  Boston,  in  May.
1886.  Among  his  unpublished  works  area  suite
for  string  orchestra,  plaved  in  one  of  the  Boston
symphony  concerts  in  May,  1886,  and  in  one  of
the  London  symphony  coneerta  in  January,  1887,
and  an  overture  for  orchestra,  "In  the  Moun-
tains." He  has  also  translated  Jean  Paul  Richter's
"  Fugue  "  (Boston,  187.0.

FOOTE,  Ellal  Todd,  physician,  b.  in  Gill,
Mass.,  1  May,  1796;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  17
Nov.,  1877.  He  went  with  his  parents  in  1798  to
Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  educated,  studied
medicine  there  and  in  New  York  city,  and  began
practice  in  Jamestown.  N.  Y.,  in  1815,  being  the  tir-t
physician  there.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1820  and  in  1826-'7,  associate  judge  of
common  pleas  in  1818-'23,  and  in  the  latter  vear
became  first  judge  of  Chautauqua  countv,  holding
the  office  till  1843,  when  he  retired.  He  owned
the  land  on  which  a  large  part  of  the  present  city
of  Jamestown  is  built,  and  was  active  in  public
improvements  there.  Three  churches  of  the  town
are  built  on  land  given  by  him  for  the  purpose.
Dr.  Foote  was  known  as  the  "father  of  Chautau-
qua county."  He  was  also  active  in  the  temper-
ance and  anti-slavery  movements.  He  removed  in
1845  to  New  Haven.  Conn.,  and  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  medicine.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  New
Haven  colony  historical  society,  and  a  member  of
many  other  societies.  He  collected  much  mate-
rial relating  to  the  early  history  of  Chautauqua
county,  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  history  of
that  county  bv  A.  W.  Young  (Buffalo,  18?:>i.

FOOTE,  Klisha.  commissioner  of  patents,  b.  in
Lee,  Ma>s..  1  Aug..  1K09;  d.  in  St.  Loafs,  Mo..  ■
Oct.,  1883.  He  was  educated  at  the  Albany  insti-
tute, and  studied  law  with  Judge  Daniel  Cady  in
Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  meanwhile  supporting  himself
by  teaching  and  surveying.  After  lieing  admitted
to  the  bar.  he  settled  in  western  New  York,  and
was  district  attorney  and  then  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  of  Seneca  county.  His  sjtecialty
was  patent  law,  ami  he  made  several  valuable  in-
ventions. In  1864  he  was  appointed  to  the  board
of  appeals  at  the  U.  S.  patent  office,  where  from
Julv,  186X,  until  April.  1888,  he  was  commissioner.

FOOTE,  George  Anderson,  phvsician.  b.  in
Warren  county.  N.  C.  lti  Dec.  lNoo.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Jelbrson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  in
1856,  and  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army
during  the  civil  war. He  was  publicly  thanked  by


496


POOTK


FOOTE


the  general  commanding  the  troops  at  Plymouth,
N.  ( '.,  for  his  gallantry.  He  VH  on  the  rain  ••  Al-
bemarle "  when  she  was  blown  up  by  Lieut.  Cash-
ing, and  as>isted  in  capturing  Outhing's  party.
He  has  been  president  of  the  North  Carolina  medi-
cal society,  and  has  contributed  to  periodical  lit-
erature under  the  pen-name  of  "CivK"  His  pul>-
lications  include  a  pamphlet  on  "Higher  Educa-
tion/1 and  an  article  on  "  Hypodermic  Medication."
POOTK,  Henry  Stuart,  senator,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  80  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
90  .May.  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington
college,  Lexington,  Va.,  in  1819,  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1822,  and  in  1824  went  to  Tuscumbia,  Ala.,
where  he  edited  a  Democratic  newspaper.  lie  re-
moved to  Jackson,  Miss.,  in  1N20,  and  acquired  an  ex-
tensive practice,  but  was  also  active  in  politics,  and
in  1844  was  a  presidential  elector. He  was  chosen

to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate as  a  Union-
ist in  1847,  took
part  in  favor
of  the  compro-
mise measuresof
1850,  and  served
as  chairman  of
the  committee
on  foreign  rela-
tions. He  re-
signed his  seat
in  the  senate  in
the  autumn  of
1852  to  canvass
his  state  as  a
Unioncandidate
for  the  govern-
orship, his  op-
Jonent  being
efferson  Davis,
who  had  been
persuaded  to  take  the  place  of  Gen.  John  A.  Quit-
man on  the  secession  ticket,  when  it  became  evident
that  the  latter  must  be  defeated.  Foote  was  elect-
ed and  served  one  term,  till  1854,  when  he  removed
to  California,  but  returned  to  Mississippi  in  1858,
and  practised  law  at  Vicksburg.  He  strongly  op-
posed secession  in  the  southern  convention  at
Knoxville  in  May,  1859,  and  when  the  question
was  seriously  agitated  in  Mississippi  he  removed
to  Tennessee.  But  he  subsequently  was  elected  to
the  Confederate  congress,  where  he  was  noticeable
for  his  hostility  to  Jefferson  Davis,  and  finally
for  his  opposition  to  the  continuance  of  the  war.
He  was  in  favor  of  accepting  the  terms  offered  by
President  Lincoln  in  1863  and  1864.  After  the
war  he  resided  for  a  time  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and
supported  the  administration  of  Gen.  Grant,  who
made  him  superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  mint  at  New
Orleans.  He  held  this  office  till  shortly  before  his
death,  when  failing  health  compelled  him  to  re-
turn to  his  home  near  Nashville.  Gov.  Foote  was
an  able  criminal  lawyer,  an  astute  politician,  and
a  popular  orator.  He  had  a  violent  temper,  and
during  his  political  career  fought  several  duels,
two  of  which  were  with  Sargent  S.  Prentiss,  one
with  John  A.  Winston,  and  one  with  John  F.  H.
Claiborne.  He  also  had  a  personal  encounter  with
Thomas  H.  Benton  on  the  floor  of  the  U.  S.  senate.
He  published  "Texas  and  the  Texans"  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1841);  "The  War  of  the  Rebellion,
or  Seylla  and  Charybdis"  (New  York,  1866);
"Bench  and  Bar  of  the  South  and  South  we>t  "
(St.  Louis,  1876);  and  "  Personal  Reminiscences."
FOOTE,  Henry  Wilder,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sa-
lem, Mass.,  2  June,  1838. He  was  graduated  at


Harvard  in  1858  and  at  the  divinity-school  in
1861,  and  entered  the  Unitarian  ministry,  beoom-
ing  in  that  same  year  pastor  of  King's  chapel.  Boa*
ton,  where  he  still  remains  (1887).  He  has  been
pieMil.nt  <>f  the  Boston  benevolent  fraternity  of
churches,  and,  besides  occasional  sermons,  sad
pamphlets,  has  published  "  Annals  of  King's  <  hap-
el"  a  vols..  Boston,  1882-'7).

FOOTE,  Samuel  Augustus,  senator,  b.  in  Che-
shire, Conn.,  8  Nov.,  1780;  d.  there.  15  Bent,  Is  in
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1797.  and  became  a
merchant  in  New  Haven.  He  served  in  the  legis-
lature for  many  years,  and  was  speaker  of  the
house  in  1825-,6.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  and  served  in  1819-'21,  and  again  in  1823-'5.
In  1827-'33  he  served  one  term  in  the  Y.  S.  senate,
but  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  re-election  by
Nathan  Smith.  He  was  in  congress  again  in
1833-'4,  but  resigned  on  being  elected  governor  of
Connecticut,  which  office  he  filled  for  one  tenn.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Clay  atid
Frelinghuysen  ticket  in  1844.  It  was  he  who  in
1829  offered  the  resolutions  "  on  the  public  lands  "
that  occasioned  the  great  debate  between  Hayne
and  Webster. — His  son,  Andrew  Hull,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  12  Sept.,  1806 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  26  June,  1863,  was  entered  as
midshipman,  4  Dec.,  1822,  on  the  elder  Com.  David
Porter's  squadron  that  was  sent  out  in  1823  to
break  up  the  piratical  nests  among  the  West  In<lia
islands.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant  in  1830,  and
in  1849  was  appointed  captain  of  the  brig"  Perry,"
in  which  he  cruised  off  the  African  coast  for  two
years,  doing  effective  service  in  the  suppression  of
the  slave-trade.  He  was  put  in  command  of  the
sloop-of-war  "  Plymouth  "  in  1856,  and  arrived  at
Canton,  China,  on  the  eve  of  the  hostilities  between
the  Chinese  and  English.  He  exerted  himself  to
protect  American  property,  and  was  fired  on  by
the  Barrier  forts  while  thus  engaged.  He  obtained
permission  from  Com.  Armstrong  to  demand  an
apology,  and  when  it  was.  refused  he  attacked  the
forts,  four  in  number,  with  the  "  Portsmouth  "  and
the  "Levant."  breached  the  largest,  and  carried
them  by  storm.  His  loss  was  40,  while  that  of
the  enemy  was  400.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  chosen  by  the  government  to  command
the  western  flotilla.  The  equipment  and  organizar
tion  of  this  flotilla  taxed  the  energies  of  Flag-
officer  Foote  to
the  utmost,  and
he  always  spoke
of  it  as  his  great-
est work.  In  the
beginningof  Feb-
ruary, 1862,  in
connection  with
the  land  forces
under  Grant,  he
moved  upon  Fort
Henry  on  the
Tennessee,  and
upon  the  6th,
after  a  hotly  con-
tested engage-
ment before  the
army  came  up,  he
carried  the  fort
with  his  gun-
boats. His  bra-
very and  conduct  were  conspicuous ;  and  this
proved  to  be  his  most  Important  aehievement  in
the  war.  The  same  impetuosity  marked  the  mk-
ceeding  action  on  the  14th,  in  the  combined  assault
upon  Fort  Donelson,  where  for  an  hour  and  a  half


POBBBB


m


Sgtd  the  fort  iiml  contributed  great  I  \
ilizatioii  "f  it-  garrison,  but  several  <>f  the
_-  been  disabled,  tin-  fleet  was  compelled
lo  withdraw,  and  Foots  himself  was  wounded.  1 1  »*
then  aided  FoM  n  tin*  Mississippi,  and,  after  a
tual  attempts,  Island  No.  10  was
surrendered  t«»  him  on  7  April.  Hi-  wound  be*
■MM  so  serious  that  he  was  obliged  to  give  up
In-  waatern  command.  On  18  June,  1*02.  he  ••-
thanks  from  OOQfTCM,  ami  Ml
made  a  rear-admiral,  and  OB  22  .lune  he  was
appointed  chief  of  tin-  hut-van  i>f  equipment  ami
recruiting.  On  4  June,  1888,  ht  Mi  <  hosen  to
anooeed  Rear-Admiral  Dupont  in  command  of  the
fleet  off  Charleston,  and  while  on  his  way  to  assume
tliis  command  he  died  in  New  York.  He  Ml
a  man  of  a  high  type  of  Christian  character,  with
most  genial  and  lovable  traits,  l>ut  uncompromis-
ingly tlrm  in  his  principles,  esj>ecially  in  regard  to
teui|>eranee  reform  in  the  navy,  where  he  was  tin-
means  of  aboUahing  the  spirit-ration.  Admiral
Smith  siid  of  him:  "  Hear- Admiral  Foote's  char-
acter is  well  known  in  the  navy.  One  of  the
strongest  traits  was  great  persistence  in  anything
he  undertiMik.  He  was  a  man  who  could  neither
be  shaken  off  nor  choked  off  from  what  he  at-
tempted to  carry  out.  He  was  trulv  a  pious  man,
severely  an  honest  man,  and  a  philanthropist  of
th.  tir-t  order.  He  was  one  of  our  foremost  navy
officers — none  before  him."  The  work  he  did  for
his  country  was  mainly  in  being  the  first  to  break
the  ( 'onfederate  line  of  defence,  and  in  an  hour  of
great  depression,  by  a  well-timed  and  brilliant —
even  if  minor — action,  to  raise  the  hope  and  pres-
tige of  success.  In  a  word,  he  was  a  oourageous
and  successful  officer,  thoroughly  devoted  to  his
profession,  and  uniting  the  best  characteristics  of
the  old  and  new  schools  of  the  l'.  S.  navy.  During
a  period  of  four  years  after  1852,  when  he  remained
at  home,  he  wrote  M  Africa  and  the  American  Flag"
(1854).  His  biography  has  been  written  by  Prof.
James  M.  Iloppin  (New  York,  1874).

FOOTK,  Thomas  Moses,  journalist,  b.  in  Clin-
ton. N.  Y.,  in  1809;  d.  in  Buffalo.  N.  Y„  20  Feb.,
1858.  His  father,  Moses  Foote,  a  captain  in  the
Revolutionary  army,  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Clinton  in  1787.  Thomas  was  graduated  at  Ham-
ilton college  in  1825,  and  received  his  medical  di-
ploma from  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
Fairfield,  N.  Y.,but  devoted  himself  to  journalism,
becoming  an  editor  of  the  Buffalo  "Commercial  "
in  |s::*>,  and  soon  afterward  a  proprietor,  re tai inn g
his  connection  with  it  until  nis  death.  He  was
charge  d'affaires  at  New  Granada  in  1849-'50,  and
in  1889  held  the  same  office  in  Vienna,  editing  in
the  interval  the  Albany  "State  Register."  Mr.
Foote's  editorial  writings  were  distinguished  for
wit  and  grace  of  diction.  He  was  a  man  of  exten-
■  ailing  and  an  entertaining  talker.

FOOTK,  William  Henrv,  dcrgvman,  b.  in  Col-
chester. Conn..  20  Dee..  17ii4;  d.  at  Romney.  W.
Ya..  Is*  Nov..  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  hi
lHHi.  taught  school  for  a  short  time  in  Winches-
ter,  Ya..  in  1S1M.  and  in  the  same  year  entered  the
theological  seminary  at  Princeton,  !>nt  vaj
palled  to  leave  by  unpaired  health.  He  was  then
licensed  to  preach,  and  engaged  in  missionary
lalx.r  among  the  backwoodsmen  of  the  northern
tieek  of  Virginia,  In  1884  he  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  Preahyteriail  church  at  Romney.  \\ .  Yn.,
and  established  at  the  same  time  a  school  for  l»oth
sexes,  which  became  a  large  and  proeperotM  m-ti-
tution.  in  1888  he  was  appointed  agent  "f  the
central  board  of  foreign  missions  <>f  the  !

church,  and  daring this  work,  which led
vol.  ii. — 32


him to \i-it inaiiv 00 unties m •  he  col-

tho  materials  for  his  sketches  of  Virginia.
I  he  returned  to  Romney  as  pastor  a |
perintendent  of  the  academy,  and  there  oontinned
till  l^tll,  when  he  became  agent  for  llain|»deii-
Sidney  college.  Although  he  was  a  I'nion  man
throughout  the  civil  war,  he  -hand  the  fate  of  his

adopted  state,  and  during  the  siege  of  Petersburg
was  chaplain  to  a  Confederate  regiment.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  returned  to  Roiuncy.  where  he
remained  till  his  tjtieth  Hampden-Sidnev  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1H47.  His  published
works  are  "Sketches,  Historical  and  Biographical,
of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Virginia ,  ^|  vols.,
Philadelphia,  in50-'5),  and  u8ketohei  in  North
Carolina  "  (New  York.  1K4»".i.

FOKAKKK,  Joseph  Benson,  governor  of  Ohio.
b.  near  Rainsborougn.  Highland  <-■>.,  Ohio,  5  .Inly,
1846.  He  worked  on  a  farm  in  his  boyhooo,
and  when  sixteen  years  of  age  enlisted  in  the  B8tk
Ohio  regiment,  and  served  in  the  army  of  the
Cumberland  until  tin-
close  of  the  war.  He
was  made  sergeant  on
26  Aug.,  1802,  1st  lieu-
tenant. 14  March.  1884
and  on  HI  March.  1888;
was  brevet  ted  captain
"  for  efficient  services
during  the  campaigns
in  North  Carolina  and
Georgia."  When  his
regiment  was  mustered
out  he  was  aide-de-
camp on  Gen.  Henry
W. Slocum's staff.  vrj^***^

After  the  war  he  sj>ent

two  years  at  Wesleyan  ^_^^9*L-,>£^»

university,  Delaware.  J^<*>**^rr***f»
Ohio,  and  then  entered ^^

(  ornell,  where  he  was  graduated  with  the  first  class
in  1869.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  same
year,  and  in  1879-'82  was  judge  of  the  Cincinnati
superior  court,  resigning  the  office  on  account  of
his  health.  He  was  the  unsuccessful  Republican
candidate  for  the  governorship  of  Ohio  in  1888,
but  was  again  a  candidate  for  the  office  in  1885,
when  he  was  elected.

FORAN,  Joseph  K.,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in
(J  recti  park  Aylmer,  province  of  Quebec,  in  1857.
He  was  sent  in  1867  to  St.  Joseph's  college,  Ottawa,
where  he  studied  ten  years.  After  graduation,  he
went  in  1877 to  I^aval  university.  Quebec,  and  stud-
ied law.  In  1881  he  was  called  to  the  Lower  Cana-
dian Iwr.  While  in  Laval  he  wrote  numerous  DOSJMi
which  were  published  in  British  and  Canadian
periodicals.  Among  his  principal  poems  afterward
were  a  "Lament  for  Lmgfellow"  and  "Indian
Translations."  Between  1*7!)  and  1883  he  pub-
lished a  series  of  essays  on  monuments,  coins,  art,
and  many  other  HlhJoOtl.  From  1883  till  1885  he
lived  among  the  Canadian  Indians.  jK-rfecting
himself  in  a  knowledge  of  their  dialects  and  cus-
toms. Since  his  return  he  has  delivered  many
lectures.  He  has  published  "An  Rssav  u|H.n  Ob-
ligations "(Toronto,  lHNTi):  "  Irish-Canadian  Repre-
sentatives, their  Peel  Act-.  I're-.nt  Stand,  and  Fu-
ture Prospects":  and  "The  Spirit  of  the  Age";
and  has  ready  for  publication  (1W?)  two  no
based  on  hi-  exi>erience.s  among  the  Indians,  en-
« it  led  "Tom  Kills,  a  Story  <»f  the  North- West  Re-
bellion," and  "Simon,  the  AU-nakis."

P0BBE8,  Charles  Kdwin.  philanthropist  b.
in  West  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  25  Aug..  17!»">:  d.  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  13  Feb..  188L M  wasgradu-


486


FORBES


FORBES


abd  at  Brown  in  1815,  studied  law  in  Enfield
him!  Northampton,  Mass.,  and  was  admit ted  to  the
Imr  in  1818.  He  was  county  attorney  and  also  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1888,  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  in  1847,  and  of  the  state
supreme  court  in  1848.  He  left  an  estate  of
$300,000,  most  of  which  he  bequeathed  to  estab-
lish a  free  public  library  in  Northampton.  This
library  was  incorporated  by  act  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature  on  3  Mav.  1881.

FORBES,  Edwin,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1839.  At  eighteen  years  of  in  he  began  the
■tody  of  art,  and  devoted  himself  to  animal  paint-
ing. In  1859  he  became  a  pupil  of  A.  F.  Tait.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  remained  in  the  south
as  special  artist  for  Frank  Leslie,  the  publisher,  till
1864.  His  sketches  of  his  experiences  during  this
period  were  preserved  in  a  series  of  copper-plate
etchings,  which  were  exhibited  at  the  Centennial
exposition  of  1876,  and  awarded  a  medal.  Gen.
YV.  T.  Sherman  bought  the  first  proofs  for  the
United  States  government,  and  they  are  now  in
the  War  Department  at  Washington.  "  The  Relia-
ble Contraband."  "Coming  through  the  Lines,"
and  the  "Sanctuary,"  are  the  most  effective  of
these  sketches.  Others  are,  "A  Night  March,"  "  Re-
turning from  Picket  Duty,"  and  "  The  Reveille."
His  "  Lull  in  the  Fight,"  a  scene  in  the  battle  of
the  Wilderness,  was  exhibited  at  the  National
academy.  New  York  and  at  the  Boston  athenaeum
(1865).  In  1*77  be  was  elected  an  honorary  mem-
ber of  the  London  etching  club.  His  studio  is  in
Brooklyn,  and  since  1878  he  has  devoted  himself
to  landscape  and  cattle  pictures.  His  later  works
are :  "  Early  Morning  in  an  Orange  County  Past-
ure "(1879);  "On  the  Skirmish  Line";  "Stormy
March  " ;  "  Roughing"  :  "  On  the  Meadows"  (1880) ;
and  "  Evening  in  the  Sheep  Pasture  "  (1881).

FORBES,  Eli,  clergyman,  b.  in  Westborough,
Mass.,  in  October,  1726;  d.  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,  15
Dec,  1804.  He  served  against  the  French  and
Indians  in  1745,  and  on  his  return  from  the  war
entered  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1751.
He  then  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained,  3
June,  1752,  as  the  first  minister  of  the  second
parish  in  Brookfield,  Mass.  In  1758-'9  he  twice
acted  as  chaplain  of  a  provincial  regiment,  and  in
1762  conducted  a  successful  mission  to  the  Oneida
Indians,  among  whom  he  established  a  church  and
two  schools.  In  March,  1776,  Mr.  Forbes,  having
been  charged  by  some  of  his  congregation  with
being  a  Tory,  asked  and  obtained  an  honorable
dismissal,  and  on  5  June  of  that  year  became
pastor  at  Gloucester,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
until  his  death,  also  officiating  frequently  in  va-
cant parishes  near  by.  Harvard  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1804.  Dr.  Forbes  published  vari-
ous sermons,  including  one  on  the  "  Character  of
Washington  "  (1800),  a  memoir  of  Joshua  Eaton,
prefixed  to  seven  of  the  latter's  sermons,  and  a
"  Family  Book,"  containing  discourses,  doctrinal,
evangelical,  practical,  and  historical  (1801).

FORBES,  Gordon,  British  soldier,  b.  in  1738;
d.  in  Ham,  Middlesex,  England,  17  Jan.,  1828.  He
became  an  ensign  in  the  33d  foot  in  1756,  captain
in  the  72d  in  1762,  and  served  at  Havana  and  in
Louisiana.  He  was  made  major  on  9  Nov.,  1776,
was  twice  wounded  in  Burgoyne's  expedition,  and
became  lieutenant-colonel  in  September,  1781.  He
then  served  in  the  East  Indies,  was  made  colonel
in  1786,  major-general  in  1794,  and  commanded
the  forces  at  Santo  Domingo  in  1798-1800.  He
was  promoted  to  lieutenant-general  in  1801,  and
received  a  general's  commission  in  1812.


FORBES,  James  Fraser,  Canadian  physician,
b.  in  Gibraltar  in  1820.  He  was  the  sori  of  an
officer  in  the  64th  regiment,  who.  after  retiring
from  the  service,  was  collector  of  customs  at  Yar-
mouth, Nova  Scotia.  Mr.  Forbes  has  been  coroner
and  health  officer  for  Liverpool  and  Queens  county,
N.  S.,  for  over  twenty-six  years,  and
president  of  the  bank  of  Liverpool  in  1874.  lb-
was  first  returned  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1867.  was  re-elected  in  1872, and  again  in  1874,  and
was  defeated  in  1878,  but  was  re-elected  in

FORBES,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  IVtin-
crief,  Fifeshire,  Scotland,  in  1710;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  11  March,  1759.  He  became  a  physician,
but  abandoned  his  profession  to  enter  the  army,
and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
greys  in  1745.  In  the  German  war  he  was  on  the
staff  of  Lord  Stair,  Gen.  Ligonier,  and  Gen.  <  'amp-
bell,  was  made  colonel  of  the  17th  foot,  25  1.1'..
1757,  and  acted  as  quartermaster-general  under
the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  He  was  appointed
brigadier-general  in  America,  28  Dec.,  1757,  and  waa
adjutant-general  in  the  expedition  against  Louis-
burg.  In  the  autumn  of  1758  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  expedition  against  Fort  Duquesne,
numbering  1,200  Highlanders,  350  royal  Ameri-
cans, and  about  5,000  provincials,  including  about
2,000  Virginians  under  the  command  of  Washing-
ton. When  Forbes  arrived  at  Raystown.  Pa.,  with
his  army,  in  September,  1758,  he  was  carried  in  a
litter,  as  he  was  already  prostrated  by  the  illness  .
that  shortly  afterward  caused  his  death,  but  his
head  was  clear  and  his  will  firm,  and  he  retained
command  of  the  expedition.  After  Bouquet's
disastrous  reconnoissance  (see  Bouquet,  Henry)
the  army  reached  Loyalhanna  on  5  Nov.,  and  it
was  decided  to  pass  the  winter  there,  when  news
of  the  weakness  of  the  fort  induced  Forbes  to
push  forward.  Passing  the  field  where  the  bones
of  Braddock's  men  lay  unburied,  the  expedition
finally  reached  Fort  Duquesne  on  25  Nov.  The
work  had  been  blown  up  and  abandoned  by  the
French  on  the  previous  day,  and  Washington's
men  marched  in  and  took  possession.  Forbes  re-
named the  place  Fort  Pitt  (now  Pittsburg),  in
honor  of  William  Pitt,  who  had  planned  the  <  .un-

faign,  and,  after  concluding  treaties  with  the
ndian  tribes  on  the  Ohio,  returned  to  Philadel-
phia, where  he  died  shortly  afterward.  He  was
noted  in  the  army  for  his  obstinacy,  and  was  nick-
named "  The  Head  of  Iron."

FORBES,  John,  librarian,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1771;  d.  in  New  York,  4  Oct.,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1794,  and  from  that
year  till  his  death  was  librarian  of  the  New  York
society  library,  being  prominent  during  that  time
among  literary  men  in  New  York  citv. — Hi-
Philip  Jones,  b.  in  New  York  city,  13  Jan.,  1807;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  L.  I.,  in  June,  1877,  entered  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1823,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated. From  1828  till  1855  he  was  librarian  of  the
New  York  society  library. — Philip  Jones's  son,
John,  b.  in  New  \ork  city,  24  April,  1846,  is  now
(1887)  assistant  librarian  in  the  same  institution.

FORBES,  John  Colin,  Canadian  artist,  b,  in
Canada,  23  Jan.,  1846.  He  was  entirely  self-taught
in  art,  until  the  production  of  his  first  work,  a
portrait  of  his  father,  after  which  he  spent  two
years  in  study  at  the  Royal  academy  in  London
and  elsewhere  in  Europe.  After  his  return  to
Canada  he  painted  "The  Foundering  of  the  II  i-
bernia,"  which  was  exhibited  at  the  Centennial  ex-
hibition in  Philadelphia  in  1876;  "The  Canon  ia
the  Roval  Gorge";  "The  Mount  of  the
Cross";  "Mount  Stephen";  " The  Glacier  of  the


kok


PORCH


4M


irk  ": "  f.  en"; and

e  Lilv."  He  has  also  painted  portraita  <>f
!  Dufferin,  Sir  .l.ilni  A.  Macdonald,  Alexander
\.n/if,  Edward  Blake,  Sir  Hector  Langerin.
Charles  Tii|>|H>r,  Sir David  L  Mcl'licrson,  and

Helen Itlm-kw 1.  daughter  of Lord Duf-

llc  is  a  member  <>f  t h.-  Royal  Canadian

mj  <>f  »rt«,  and  resides  at  Toronto.

FORBES,  Samuel Franklin,  surgeon,  b.  in

ton, Hartford co.,  Conn.,  8  Jun«>. l«21>. Ho

was  graduated  In  medicine  at  the  University  of  the

■  rk  in  1850,  and in 1S.V2  settled  in

do,  Ohio,  where  in  lN53-'8  be  was  U.  S.  marine

•■"u. lie  was  county  pbyabrian  in  1h.v>-'<;i,

"ii  .if  tin*  67th  Ohio  regiment  in  lH<!l-':{,  and

physician  in lMii?-'l». fn  1880  ho  was  mayor

[*oledo. Dr. Forbes  is  the  author  of  a  "New

Amputation through the Foot,"  which  was  de-

eoribed  in  a  paper  read  by  him  before  the  State

medical  sociotvin  IK?."),  and  is  now  taught  in  nearly

all  the  medical  colleges  of  the  United  States.

FORBES,  Stephen  Alfred,  naturalist,  b.  in
Silver  (reek.  111.,  20  May,  1H44.  Ho  was  educated
at  Beloit  academy  and  Rush  medical  college,  and
ml  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  Indiana
university.  During  the  civil  war  he  held  the
appointment  of  captain  in  the  Illinois  volunteer
cavalry.  In  1877  he  founded  the  Illinois  state
laboratory  of  natural  history,  and  became  its  di-
rector, winch  office  he  has  since  held.  Dr.  Forbes
also  instituted  the  natural  history  survey  of  I  Hi—
.  of  which  he  has  charge,  and  he  is  likewise
professor  of  zoology  and  entomology  in  the  uni-
Tersity  of  Illinois.  In  1882  he  became  state  ento-
mologist, and  is  the  author  of  the  "Annual  Re-
ports of  the  State  Entomologist  on  the  Noxious
and  Beiietiiial  Insects  of  the  State  of  Illinois"
(Springfield,  1882-'5).  Beside  many  zoological
and educational papers contributed to various

Journals,  he  has  published  "  Studies  of  the  Food  of
Jirds,  Fishes,  and  Insects  "  (Peoria,  1883) ;  "  Studies
of  the  Contagious  Diseases  of  Insects"  (1886);
and  has  edited  the  "  Bulletin  of  the  Illinois  State
Lal»oratory  of  Natural  History"  (vols.  L  and  ii.),
and  "  Keport  on  the  Natural  History  Survey  of
Dlinois"  (vol.  i..  Ornithology,  Springfield,  1887).

FORCE,  Peter,  historian,  b.  near  Little  Falls,
Bmex  co.,  N.  J.,  26  Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  28  Jan.,  1868. His  father,  William  Force,
was  a  veteran  of  the  Revolution,  and  in  talking
with  him  the  boy  acquired  a  fondness  for  the  his-
tory of  that  period. He  removed  with  his  parents
to  New  Paltz,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y..  and  afterward  to
Fork  city,  where,  on  leaving  school  at  the  age
teen,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer. While
foreman  of  an  office  in  Bloomingdale,  he  printed
the  second  edition  of Irving's  "  Knickerbocker's
History  of  New  York,"  and  in  1812  was  president
of  the  New  York  typographical  society. He  re-
moved to  Washington  in  November,  1815,  under
an  arrangement  with  his  employer,  W.  A.  Davis,
who  had  obtained  a  contract  for  the  government
printing,  and  in  1820-'8  compiled  and  printed  the
"  Biennial  Register,"  which  had  been  begun  under
of  congress  in  1816. The  name  of  "Blue
Book,"  suggested by  Mr. Force, was officially
ized in 1890  (and  the  title  has  since  been
adopted  by  the  English  government for  a  differ-
ent kind  of publication]. He  also  published  an
annual  "National  Calendar"  in  1821 >-':{(».  and in
1828  established the  "  National Journal.-'  which
ted  ami  published  till  1880,  supporting the
administration (>f John Quincy  Adams. Many
Tears  before  this  he  had  tiegun"  to  collect  book*
.|»enj  on  American  history  and  antiquities,


and  in  1*483  he  was  authorized  by  act  of  <  "ngreas
uipile  a  rati  work,  to  Im-  known  M  UM  •\\meri-
\rchives,  a  Documentary  History  of  the  Kngli-h
Colonies  in  North  America."  The  plan  embraced
•  Ties  of  six  or  more  volumes  each,  covering
the  period  from  the  discovery  of  Aineriea  to  the
final  ratification  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
tea,  Mr.  Force  at  once  liegan  a  personal  ex-
amination of  the  public  archives  in  the  thirteen
original  states,  and  by  means  of  his  agents  ran-
sacked the  country  for  pamphlets,  ran-  books,  let-
ter-, mwewinr  Ales,  and  maps  bearing  on  the
history  of  the  colonic-.  IfceM  lie  gathered  in
■even  rooms  adjoining  his  resilience  in  Washington,
one-  who  knew  him  says  of  this  library:  "  Except-
ing when  visited  by  the  friends  of  its  proprietor,
im-mlters  of  congress  addicted  to  historical  pur-
suits, or  literary  pilgrims  from  abroad,  its  risBBMM
was  only  broken  by  the  presence  of  an  assortment.
of  dogs  and  cats,  which  enjoyed  the  full  range  of
the  establishment,  and  whose  characters  seemed  to
have  been  influenced  bv  the  solemn  wisdom  of  the
tomes  among  whom  they  lived."  Between  1837
and  1853,  in  conjunction  with  .Matthew  St.  (lair
Clarke,  he  had  issued  the  whole  of  the  fourth  series
of  his  work  and  part  of  the  fifth,  comprising  nine
folio  volumes,  ana  covering  the  years  from  1765  to
1776;  but  in  1853,  owing  to  a  misunderstanding
about  the  law  authorizing  the  publication,  it  was
discontinued  by  Sec.  Marcv.  Mr.  Poroe,  though
cruelly  disappointed,  continued  to  increase  his
collection  of  material,  even  mortgaging  his  real
estate  for  means  to  do  so,  and  in  1867  it  was
bought  by  the  government  for  $100,000  and  placed
in  the  library  of  congress.  It  contains  22,000
books  and  40,000  pamphlets,  most  of  them  rare,
and  is  considered  by  some  the  most  valuable  col-
lect ion  of  its  kind  in  existence.  Mr.  Force  held
various  civil  and  military  offices  in  Washington,
rising  to  the  rank  of  major-general  of  militia,  and
being  mayor  of  the  city  in  1836-'40.  In  the  latter
year  he  was  the  first  president  of  the  "  National
institute  for  the  promotion  of  science."  Beside  the
volumes  that  constitute  his  life-work,  he  published
"  Tracts  and  other  Papers  relating  principally  to
the  Origin,  Settlement,  and  Progress  of  the  Colo-
nies in  North  America"  (4  vols.,  Washington,
1836-'46);  "Grinnell  Land:  Remarks  on  the  Eng-
lish Maps  of  Arctic  Discoveries  in  1850-'l  "  (1852) ;
"Notes  on  Lord  Mahon's  History  of  the  American
Declaration  of  Independence"  (London,  1855);  and
a  paper  in  the  Smithsonian  contributions  to  knowl-
edge, entitled  "Record  of  Auroral  Phenomena"
(Washington,  1856).— His  son,  William  Quereau,
scholar,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7  March.  L890:  d.
there.  15  Dec.,  1880,  was  graduated  at  Columbian
college  in  1839.  From  January,  1843,  till  July.
1845,  he  edited  and  published  the  "Army  and  Navy
Chronicle  and  Scientific  Repository.''  From  1857
till  1868  he  had  charge  of  the  department  of  meteo-
rology in  the  Smithsonian  institution.  Mr.  Force
was  a  trustee  of  Columbian  college  in  1851-'62.  and
was  for  several  years  its  secretary  and  treasurer.
He  published  "Builders'  (iuide"  (Washington,
1842)  and  "The  Picture  of  Washington"  (1848).
and  in  1845-'57  aided  his  father  in  preparing  the
■'American  Archives." — Another  son.  Manning
Ferguson,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington.  I).  ('.,  17
Dec.,  1824,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1845,  and
at  the  law-school  in  1848.  He  was  appointed  major
of  the  20th  Ohio  regiment  in  1861,  promoted  to
lieutenant-colonel,  and  engaged  at  Fort  Donelson
and  Shiloh.  He  was  then  made  colonel,  was  with
Gen.  Grant  in  his  campaign  in  southwestern  Ten-
and  his  expedition  into  northern  Mississippi


BOO


FORM


FORD


in  18(12—5.  took  part  in  the  siege  of  VloklbwA
and  on  11  Aug..  l8ts\  was  made  brigadier-general
<»f  volunteer-.  Hi  MM  with  Sherman  in  his  At-
lanta campaign  ami  his  march  to  the  sea.  was  bre-
villed  major-general  of  volunteers.  13  March,  1865,
and  commanded  a  district  in  Mississippi  till  he
was  mustered  nut  of  service,  11  Jan.,  186li.  lie
was  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Hamil-
ton county.  Ohio,  in  1867-77,  and  judge  of  the
mpeiior  court  of  Cincinnati  from  that  vear  till
1887.  He  has  published  "From  Fort  Henry  to
Corinth."  being  vol.  ii.  of  "Campaigns  of  the  Civil
War"  (New  V<»rk,  1881),  and  several  pamphlets,
mostly  historical,  including  "  Prehistoric  Man,"
•Darwinism  and  Deity,"  "The  Mound-Builders"
(Cincinnati.  1N73):  "Some  Early  Notices  of  Ohio
Indians";  "To  What  Race  did  the  Mound-Build-
ers belongf"  (1879);  "Marching  across  Carolina"
(1888);  "Personal  Recollections  of  the  Vicksburg
Campaign"  (1885);  "Letters  of  Amerigo  Vespuc-
ci." an  addrea  delivered  before  the  Ohio  historical
and  philosophical  society  (1885);  and  "Sketch  of
the  Life  of  Justice  John  McLean  "  (Cambridge,
1885).  He  has  edited  Walker's  "Introduction  to
American  Law "  (Boston,  1878),  and  Harris's  "  Prin-
ciples of  Criminal  Law"  (Cincinnati,  1880).

FORD,  Corydon  La,  physician,  b.  in  Lexing-
ton, Greene  co.,  N.  Y.,  29  Aug.,  1813.  He  removed
with  his  parents  to  Otsego  county  in  1815,  and,
after  attending  Canandaigua  academv  and  study-
ing with  several  physicians,  entered  Geneva  medi-
cal college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1842.  He
was  demonstrator  of  anatomy  there  in  1842-'8,  and
in  Buffalo  medical  college  in  1847-51,  professor
of  anatomy  in  Castleton,  Vt.,  medical  college  in
1849-'til,  and  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  Berk-
shire medical  institution,  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  in
1860-'7.  He  held  the  same  chair  in  the  Bowdoin
college  medical  school  in  1864-'70,  and  in  1854  ac-
cepted the  chair  of  anatomy  in  the  University  of
Michigan,  to  which  that  of  physiology  was  added
in  1860.  In  1868-'86  he  also  lectured  annually  in
Long  Island  college  hospital,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and
in  the  latter  year  became  professor  emeritus  in
that  institution.  Michigan  university  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1881.  Dr.  Ford  is  considered
one  of  the  ablest  teachers  of  anatomy  in  the  coun-
try, and  is  the  author  of  "  Questions  on  Anatomy,
Histology,  and  Physiology,  for  the  use  of  Stu-
dents "  (fast  ed.,  Ann  Arbor,  1878) ;  "  Syllabus  of
Lectures  on  Odontology,  Human  and  Compara-
tive "  (1884) ;  and  "  Questions  on  the  Structure  and
Development  of  the  Human  Teeth  "  (1885).

FORI),  Edward  Lloyd,  publisher,  b.  in  Oswes-
try, Shropshire.  England,  10  March,  1845;  d.  in
Morristown,  N.  J.,  16  Dec.,  1880.  He  came  to  New
York  in  early  youth,  and  studied  for  a  few  years
under  Prof.  J.  II.  Patton.  He  enlisted  in  the"99th
regiment  of  Pennsylvania  volunteers  in  1861.  and
within  a  year  was  promoted  to  a  lieutenancy,  and
detailed  on  Gen.  Meade's  staff.  He  was  taken
prisoner  at  Chancellorsville,  2  May,  1863,  and  sent
to  Libby  prison,  Richmond,  but  was  exchanged
early  in  the  September  following,  and  returned  to
his  post  of  duty.  In  1863  he  was  discharged  from
the  volunteer  service,  promoted  to  a  captaincy  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Birney,  and  served  in  the  10th
army  corps.  Broken  health  forced  him  to  leave
the  army  in  December,  1864.  In  1867  he  became  a
partner  in  the  newly  established  publishing-house
of  J.  B.  Ford  &  Co.,  and,  by  his  business  ability
and  fertility  of  invention,  contributed  largely  to
the  success  of  the  "Christian  Union."  He  had  a
genius  for  mechanics,  and  made  many  improve-
ments in  printing,  notably  in  devices  for  the  rapid


delivery  of  sheets  from  a  printing-machine.  He
invented  and  patented  folding  combinations,  foil-
ing and  pasting  apparatus,  and  devices  for  print-
ing two  sheets  simultaneously,  and  for  folding  and
pasting  one  within  the  other.

FORD,  Gordon  Lester,  lawyer,  b.  in  LefaNMMfc
Conn..  16  Dec.  1823;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y..  14
Nov.,  1801.  He  studied  law  in  New  York  city,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  in  1850.  In  185]  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  New  London.  Willimantie,
and  Palmer  railroad  company.  In  1869  he  received
the  appointment  of  collector  of  U.  S.  internal  reve-
nue in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  From  1873  till  1881  he
was  the  business  manager  of  the  New  York  "  Tri-
bune," and  in  1883  became  president  of  the  Brook-
lyn, Flatbush,  and  Coney  Island  railroad. — His
wife,  Emily  Ellsworth,  author,  b.  in  Greenfield,
Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1826,  is  a  daughter  of  Prof.  Will-
iam C.  Fowler.  She  has  published,  besides  poewi
stories,  and  essays,  a  volume  of  verses  entitled
"  My  Recreations  "  (New  York,  1872).  A  later  vol-
ume was  printed  privately. — Their  son.  Wort  h  i  utr-
ton  Channcey,  author,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16
Feb.,  1858,  prepared  a  revised  edition  of  Wells's
"  Natural  Philosophy,"  compiled  the  "  American
Citizen's  Manual  (New  York,  1883),  and  has  pub-
lished "The  Standard  Silver  Dollar"  (1884)  and
other  economic  tracts.  For  a  year  and  a  half  he
was  a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New
York  "  Herald."  In  September,  1885,  he  became
chief  of  the  bureau  of  statistics  in  the  department
of  state  at  Washington,  D.  C. — Another  son,  Paul
Leicester,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  23  March,  1865,
has  published  a  bibliography  of  the  works  written
by  and  relating  to  Alexander  Hamilton  (Brooklyn,
1887),  and  a  volume  on  the  genealogy  of  his  great
grandfather,  Noah  Webster.

FORD,  John  Thomson,  theatrical  manager,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  16  April,  1829.  In  1852  he  be-
came manager  of  a  minstrel  troupe,  and  was  after-
ward manager  of  the  old  Richmond,  Va.,  theatre
and  the  Holliday  street  theatre,  Baltimore,  which
he  twice  rebuilt.  In  1858  he  was  elected  president
of  the  city  council,  and  for  two  years  was  acting  j
mayor.  He  also  built  three  theatres  in  Washington,  |
D.  C.,  including  Ford's  theatre,  of  which  he  was  the
manager  at  the  time  of  President  Lincoln's  assas-
sination.  He  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of  com-
plicity in  that  crime,  but,  after  being  detained  forty
days  in  Carroll  prison,  was  released,  as  there  was
not  the  slightest  evidence  against  him.  He  has
since  been  manager  of  various  theatres.  Mr.  Ford
was  the  first  to  bring  Mary  Anderson  into  public
notice.  He  has  been  a  state  director  of  the  Mara
land  penitentiary  for  eighteen  years,  and  is  active
in  philanthropic  work  in  Baltimore.  He  has  writ-
ten much  for  the  periodical  press.

FORD,  Joshua  Edwards,  missionary,  b.  in
Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  3  Aug.,  1825;  d.  in  Geneseo,
N.  Y.,  3  April,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1844,  and  at  Union  theological  seminar}
York,  in  1847,  and  in  that  year  sailed  for  Syria,
under  the  auspices  of  the  American  board  of  com-
missioners for  foreign  missions.  His  first  station
was  at  Aleppo,  where  he  was  also  forwan ling-
agent,  postmaster,  and  banker  for  several  other
stations.  Ho  spent  six  months  there,  and  when
the  Turkish"  mission  was  formed  was  tran-
to  Beirut,  where  he  remained  for  four  yean,  and
then  removed  to  Sidon.  He  went  to  England  in
lhlil  to  present  the  claims  of  the  Syrian  mission^
and  in  1865  returned  to  the  United  States  on  ac-
count of  illness  in  his  family.  He  edited  -
lx>oks  in  the  Arabic  language,  and  wrote  a  work  in
that  tongue,  entitled  "  Fasting  and  Pi


km;  i


;,<»i


FORD, Philip, Rnglish merchant, <1.  about

lli>  was  a  Quaker,  ami  was  b«r  several  years
mi  IVnn's  agent  in  London. IVnn,  liceoining
■ nilnmnfiil,  signed  a  i|i-i-i|  of  sttli'  <>f
i.  ami look from him a loam
for  three  \.  it-. I'. mi  afterward  paid  him  I'lT.lKMi,
I. ui  Ford  claimed  that  £10,500  more  were  due  him,
mul  his  M>n  ami  widow  arrested IVnn  in  January,
avoid  their  extortion,  IVnn  nut himself
in  the  limits  of  Fleet prison,  ami  the Fords
unsuccessfully  petitioned  the  ipiccii |0  |'iit them
in pomMklB  Of Pennsylvania,  at the same tinn-
ing to  sell  it  to  [«MA  Norris  for  £8400. IVnn
inl  Inst  his  ease  in  the  court  of  chanccrv.
FORD,  Samuel  Howard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mis-
souri in  1898. He  was  educated  at  the  Uulvwdtjf
Missouri,  in 1843  was  ordained  to  the  Baptist
ministry  and  lH>camc  pastor  in  Jefferson  City,  Mo.,
ami  was  afterward  connected  with  churches  in  St.
-  and  Ca|H»  Giradeau,  Md.,  and  Louisville,  Ky.
In  1853  he  became  associated  in  the  editorship  of
the  "Western  Recorder"  and  "Christian  Rcjiosi-
tory." At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  re-
moved to  .Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  in  1804  was  pastor
of  the  St.  Francis  street  Baptist  church  in  Mobile,
Ala. He  then  returned  to  Memphis,  and  was  pas-
tor there  till  failing  health  compelled  his  resigna-
tion in  l*7:f. He  now  (1887)  resides  in  St.  Louis.
—  His  wife,  Sally  Rochester,  author,  b.  in  Roches-
Springs,  Boyle  co.,  Ky.,  in  1828, Her  maiden
name  was  Rochester. She  was  graduated  at  the
female  seminary  in  Georgetown,  Ky.,  in  1849,  and
in  1856  married  Mr.  Font,  with  whom  she  has  edit-
ed "The  Christian  Repository"  and  "The  Home
Circle '"  since  that  date. Mrs."  Ford  is  president  of
the  Woman's  missionary  society  of  the  south. She
has  published  "Grace  Truman"  (New  York,  1857);
"Marv  Bunvan"  (1859);  "Morgan  and  his  Men
(Mohi),.,  Ala'.,  and  New  York,  1804);  and  "Ernest
gmst"  (N.-w  York,  1877).

FORD,  Seahurv,  governor  of  Ohio,  b,  in  Chesh-
ire, Conn.,  1")  Oct*.,  lsoi  ;  ,1.  in  Burton,  Ohio,  8
ls.Vi.  He  removed  to  Burton  when  a  boy,
and  after  his  graduation  at  Yale  in  1825  practised
law  in  that  town.  He  was  in  the  Ohio  legislature
most  of  the  time  from  1830  till  1847,  was  presid-
ing officer,  at  different  times,  of  both  its  branches,
ami  was  also  at  one  time  major-general  of  militia.
He  was  elected  governor  of  the  state  in  1848,  and

•  stl  in  1849-'5().  Immediately  after  the  expira-
tion of  his  term  he  had  a  paralytic  shock,  from
the  effects  of  which  he  died.  He  was  an  ardent
friend  of  Henry  Clay,  and  was  instrumental  in  car-
rying the  state  of  Ohio  for  him  in  1844.

Foul),  Thomas,  governor  of  Illinois,  d.  in
ria,  III.,  in  January,  1851.  His  parents  emi-
ted  to  Illinois  in  1804,  when  he  was  a  child,  and

•  came  a  successful  lawyer  there,  and  was  ac-
tive in  politics  almost  from  the  organization  of  the
state,  lie  was  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,
ami  governor  in  1K4'„'  '•',.  He  published  a  "  History
of  Illinois  from  1818  to  1847  A  (Chicago.  lHo-li.

FORD.  Timothy,  lawyer, b, in Morristown,

.4 [)eo„ 1702;  d.  7  Dec., 1830. His  family

lence  was  used  by  Washington M  his  head-

quarters in  1777. In 1780  he  volunteered in  a

'.any  of  Washington's  body-guards, and  was

inded  in  a  brief  action  at  Springfield,  N.  .1. He

graduated  at  Princeton  in  17Xi.  studied  law  in

k,  and  then removed to  South  Carolina.

where he  became  eminent, practising for many

only  in  the  Equity  court. He  was  a  member

legislature  ami  the  Charleston  city  council.

i  of  Charleston  ooUege,  president  of  various
ies,  and  a  founder  of  the  Charleston


Bibl.  brother,  Gabriel  Hogarth.

jurist,  b.  in Morristown, N J., '■'•  Jan.. 1 7 •  i -~» ;  <  1 .

then-, 'J7 Aug.  graduated  at  MM

in  17X4.  stuilii-d  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  May,  1780.  He  Ncame  presiding  judge  of
the  court  of  common  pJeM  for  the  eastern  district
of  the  state,  ami in  ITM  ■  justice  of  the

supreme  court.— Gabriel  Hogarth's  son,  Lewis  d>
Saasaare,  physician,  b.  in  Morristown.  N.  J.,  80
1801  ;  d.  fal  Augusta.  <ia..  tl  Aug.,  1888.  was
graduated  in  medicine  at  the  college  of  physicians
ami  surgeons.  New  York  city,  in  \X'2'2.  and  in  the
same  year  removed  to  Hamburg,  S.  C.  He  went
to  Augusta,  (ia..  in  1*27.  ami  tMHted  in  organizing
there  the  Medical  college  of  (Jeorgia.  in  which  he
afterwanl  held  the  chairs  of  chemistry  and  l»ra<
of  medicine.  He  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate
army  from  lstil  till  the  end  of  the  civil  war.  and
had  charge  of  hospitals  in  Richmond  Mid  elsewhere
He  was  twice  mayor  of  Augusta.  The  Cni verity
of  Georgia  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL,  I),  in  1868.
Dr.  Ford  contributed  many  valuable  essays  on  par-
tial fevers  to  the  "Suit  hern  Medical  and  Sur-
gical Journal"  in  1830-'45.

FORD.  William  Henry,  physician, b.  in  Phila-
ilelphia.  Pa..  7  Oct..  I888;  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1857,  and  at  Jefferson  medical  col-
lege. Philadelphia,  in  lKtiO,  and  in  1861  was  ap-
pointed an  acting  medical  cadet  in  the  U.  S.  armv.
lie  liecame  assistant  surgeon  of  the  44th  Pennsyl-
vania regiment  in  1803,  was  soon  afterward  pro-
moted to  surgeon,  and  served  until  after  the  battle
of  Gettysburg.  He  studied  in  Kurope  in  1805-'*,
was  an  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Medical  Times  "
in  1870-'l,  assistant  demonstrator  in  the  Philadel-
phia school  of  anatomy  in  lXoit-'71.  and  compiler
of  vital  statistics  for  the  city  in  lN72-'5.  He  was
chairman  of  the  Centennial  medical  commission's
committee  on  sanitary  science  in  1870.  and  a  mem-
btrof  the  Philadelphia  board  of  health  in  1871-87,
serving  as  its  secretary  in  1875-'7  and  as  its  presi-
dent in  1877-9  and  1888-'7.  He  is  a  mem  tier  of
numerous  medical  and  charitable  societies,  and  has
contributed  to  medical  journals,  principally  on
sanitary  subjects.  He  is  the  author  of  the  treatise
on  "Soil  and  Water"  in  Buck's  "Hygiene  and
Public  Health"  (New  York.  1870).  and  of  "Healthy
Dwelling-Houses,  and  how  to  Build,  Drain,  and
Ventilate  them"  (Philadelphia,  1885).

FOREMAN,  Stephen,  clergyman,  h.  in  Oo-vou-

filogie,  near  Rome,  Ga.,  22  Oct.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Park
lill,  Indian  Territory,  M  Dec.  1KM1.  Ufa  mother
was  a  full-blooded  Cherokee,  his  father  white.  His
first  teaching  was  in  the  mission-school,  and  he
afterward  spent  a  year  and  a  half  at  Union  semi-
nary. He  spent  one  year.  1881-%  at  Princeton,
then  two  years  m  the  theological  department  of
Marvsville  college,  Tenn.,  was  licensed  by  Union
presbytery,  Tenn.,  in  Deptember.  IXM,  and  two
years  later  ordained  as  an  evangelist.  From  1834
iil!  ls:W  he  labored  among  his  [teoplc  at  Candy's
Creek  church.  In  the  latter  year  his  nation  was
compelled  to  remove  to  Arkansas,  where  he  followed
them  and  served  as  their  pastor  until  the  lx-gin-
ning  of  the  civil  war,  when  he  became  missionary
in  Texas,  then  returned  to  his  former  home  among
his  jHoiile,  where  he  lived  for  the  remainder  of  his
life. He  was  in part ■upPOTtad by  the  American

board  oi  ooaunhatoDen  for  foreign  missions,  and
during  the  last  years  of  his  life  built  a  church  out
of  his  funds,  and  preached  in  it.

FORKSTI.  Fleutario  Felice.  Italian  jwitriot,
b.  in  Coiisclice.  near  Ferrara,  Italy,  in  17!»:<:  d.  in
(ieiioa.  Italy.  14  Sept..  1868.  II--  ITM  graduated  at
the  University  of  Bologna,  studied  law,  and  en-


008


FORESTIER


FOHMl'.s


tend  mi  the  practice  nf  his  profaaaion  in  Fcrrara.
In  18K1  ha  •*■  made  pracoc  of  Creaja'no,  and  soon
entered  prominently  into  political  affairs.  In  1816
he  became  a  memlier  of  the  Carbonari,  and  was
■IIMtoti  and  imprisoned.  After  two  years  in  a
dongeOD,  and  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  take  his
own  life,  tie  was  condemned  to  die  on  the  public
square  of  Venice,  but  when,  with  others,  he  was
taken  out  for  execution,  the  sentence  was  changed
H  ••(•arctre  iluro"in  Spielberg  for  twenty  years.
From  the  scaffold  he  and  his  companions  were
transferred  to  the  island  of  St.  Michael.  On  the
death  of  the  reigning  emperor,  Foresti  and  others
wan  liberated,  bat  condemned  to  perpetual  exile
in  the  United  States,  whither  they  were  shortly
sent.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  New  York,  Foresti
became  professor  of  Italian  in  Columbia,  and  was
a  popular  teacher  for  more  than  twenty  years.  In
1858  he  received  the  appointment  of  IT.  S.  consul
at  Genoa.  The  degree  of  LL.  I),  was  conferred  on
him.  He  wrote  "  Twenty  Years  in  the  Dungeons
of  Austria,"  for  the  "  Watchman  and  Crusader"  in
1850,  and  also  published  "  Chrestomazia  Italiana"
(1840)  and  edited  an  edition  of  Ollendorff's  Italian
grammar  (New  York,  1840).

FORESTIER,  Henri  Joseph,  French  painter,
b.  in  Puerto  Hincado,  Santo  Domingo,  in  1787;  d.
in  Paris,  23  Dec,  1874.  His  father,  a  rich  planter
of  the  Spanish  part  of  Santo  Domingo,  sent  him  to
Paris  in  1809  to  study  art.  After  studying  under
David  and  Vincent,  in  1810-'12,  he  went  to  the
school  of  the  fine  arts,  where  he  took  the  second
prize  in  1812.  and  in  1813  the  gold  medal  for  his
picture  "  The  Death  of  Jacob."  After  two  years
in  Rome  he  returned,  in  1810,  to  his  own  country,
where  he  remained  for  two  years,  and  settled  after-
ward in  Paris.  Then,  owing  to  the  insecurity  of
the  government,  he  sold  everything  he  possessed,
retired  to  Petit-Bourg,  Guadeloupe,  ana  devoted
himself  to  his  art.  t  orestier  was  considered  one
of  David's  best  pupils.  He  had  all  the  technique
of  his  master,  added  to  the  fire  of  the  ardent  creole
nature.  His  best  pictures  are  scenes  of  colonial
life  and  tropical  landscapes.  Among  his  works
are  "Saint  Pierre  delivre  par  l'ange"  (1827);  "  Un
negre  buvant  le  premier  tafia,"  which  took  a  medal
at  the  Paris  salon  (1827);  "Ecce  Homo"  (1831);
*'  Funerailles  de  Guillaume  le  conquerant"  (1841);
"  Paysages  de  Saint-Domingue  "  (1854) ;  "  Coucher
de  soleil  sous  les  tropiques"  (1855) ;  "  Le  bon  sa-
maritain,"  ordered  for  the  prefecture  of  the  Seine ;
and  **  Une  vierge  a  la  creche,"  in  the  cathedral  of
Fort  de  France,  Martinique.  His  "Jesus  Christ
gucrissant  une  possede  "  (1827)  was  purchased  by
the  French  government,  and  placed  in  the  national
museum  in  the  palace  of  the  Luxembourg.  This
picture  gained  for  the  artist  the  cross  of  the  legion
of  honor.  Forestier  was  also  for  some  time  a  colo-
nel in  the  national  guard.

FOREY,  Elie  Frederic,  French  soldier,  b.  in
Paris,  10  Jan.,  1804;  d.  there,  20  June,  1872.  He
studied  at  the  Louis  le  grand  lyceum  in  Paris,
and  in  1822  entered  the  military  school  of  Saint
Cyr.  He  left  it  in  1830  and  served  as  sub-lieuten-
ant in  the  2d  light  dragoons,  of  which  he  was
drill-master.  After  distinguishing  himself  in  Al-
giers he  ret  urned  to  France  for  his  health,  in  1844,
with  the  rank  of  colonel.  He  became  a  major-
general  in  1848,  formed  with  his  command  part  of
the  garrison  of  Paris,  and  was  one  of  the  gener-
als who,  at  the  eoup&JkUol  2  Dec.  1861  helped
place  Napoleon  III.  on  the  throne.  On  22  Dec,
1N.V2,  he  was  made  lieutenant-general  and  grand

officer  of  the  legion  of  honor. In  1854  he  c -

manded  the  reserves  of  the  army  of  the  east,  and


was  for  a  time  commander-in-chief  of  the  whole
French  army  before  BebattopoL  He  fought
through  the  campaign  in  Italy  in  1859,  and  on  10
Aug.  was  made  senator  of  the  empire,  and  deco-
rated with  the  grand  cross  of  the  legion  of  honor.
When  Napoleon  resolved  to  send  out  his  expedi-
tion to  Mexico,  Forey  was  made  general-iiwhief  of
the  invading  army,  31  Oct.,  1801.  From  the  first
he  was  opposed  to  the  expedition,  his  good  Mis-
leading him  to  see  that  it  would  probably  prove
disastrous;  but  Louis  Napoleon  intimated  to  him
that  only  by  accepting  the  command  could  ha  ob-
tain the  staff  of  a  marshal  of  France.  He  landed
at  Vera  Cruz  in  January,  1802,  with  30,000  men
admirably  equipped.  On  29  Jan.  he  issued  a
proclamation  saying  that  he  had  only  come  to  re-
store order,  that  life  and  property  should  be  re-
spected, and  that  the  Mexicans  should  be  free  to
choose  the  form  of  government  that  best  suited
them.  This  proclamation  had  a  favorable  effect.
The  government  of  the  United  States  approved
highly  of  it,  but  Napoleon  was  greatly  exasperated.
He  wrote  with  his  own  hand  to  Gen.  Forev,  repri-
manding him  severely,  and  threatening  him  with
an  immediate  recall  if  his  future  acts  should  be  in
accordance  with  his  promises.  Forey,  on  receipt
of  this  mandate,  suppressed  all  sympathy  with  the
Mexican  cause,  and  confiscated  the  property  of  all
Mexicans  who  would  not  aid  him.  After  the  sur-
render of  Puebla  by  the  Republicans,  17  May,
1803,  Forev  marched  on  Mexico,  which  was  taken
by  Gen.  Bazaine,  12  July.  1803.  After  the  fall  of
Puebla,  Gen.  Forey,  becoming  disgusted  with  his
task,  demanded  to  be  recalled,  and  hi-  request  was
granted.  On  2  July  he  formed  a  provisory  gov-
ernment, composed  of  three  Mexicans,  Almonte,
the  archbishop  of  Mexico,  and  Gen.  Salas.  On  1
Oct.  he  delivered  the  command  of  the  army  to
Gen.  Bazaine,  and  sailed  from  Vera  Cruz  for
France.  He  was  made  marshal  and  commander  of
the  2d  division  of  the  army,  24  Dec,  1803.  On  va-
rious occasions  he  spoke  long  and  eloquently  in  the
senate  in  behalf  of  the  Mexicans,  and  in  the  session
of  10  Feb.,  1800,  boldly  declared  that  to  subjugate
Mexico  it  would  be  necessary  to  send  thither  an
army  of  150,000  men,  and  if  that  could  not  be
done  the  project  would  have  to  be  abandoned.
Napoleon  chose  the  latter  alternative.

FORMAN,  David,  soldier,  b.  near  Englishtown,
N.  J. ;  d.  about  1812.  He  commanded  the  New
Jersey  militia  at  Germantown,  and  was  known  by
the  nickname  of  "  Black  David  "  among  the  Jersey
loyalists,  owing  to  his  excessive  cruelty  toward
those  who  did  not  favor  the  Revolution.  After  the
war  he  was  a  judge  of  the  countv  court,  and  a
member  of  the  council  of  state.  He  was  also  one
of  the  original  members  of  the  order  of  Cincinnati.

FORMES,  Charles  John,  singer,  b.  in  MQhl-
heim,  Germany,  7  Aug.,  1810.  He  is  popularly
known  as  Karl  Formes.  He  received  his  early
musical  education  in  Cologne  and  Vienna,  and
sang  in  church  choirs  till  1841,  when  he  attracted
attention  in  Cologne  as  a  concert  singer. His  ap-

Eearance  in  opera  soon  followed,  and  in  1843  he
pcame  a  member  of  the  Mannheim  theatre,  and  in
1844  joined  the  opera  in  Vienna.  Incautious  ex-
pressions of  sympathy  with  revolutionary  move-
ments caused  his  sudden  retirement,  and  after  an
engagement  in  Hamburg  he  was  invited  to  join  a
German  opera-company  in  London,  when',  in  184B,
he  first  performed  at  Drury  Lane.  In  1850,  Formes
became  a  member  of  the  Italian  opera  of  Covaol
Garden,  and  in  the  same  year  sang  at  the  Phil-
harmonic concerts.  At  this  time  it  was  the  opin-
ion of  critics  that  for  volume,  compass,  and  sonor-


FORNlRIfl


i-'ok:


BOS


l> baas  was nit'

sjsjqiiellotf In  "Robert h  Diablo,"  "Don  Gio-
vanni." and  tin-  "Huguenots,"  be  dwarfed  all  com-
petition. Hi- -lately  preeeoeeeiid  intuitively  tine
>n,  Uitii  in  nmii'dv  mill  tragedy,  add-
ed to  tbe  completeness  of  I » i -^  representations.  Nor
less  imposing  in  rosjdorinf.  the  dramatic
•  Kolti-rt  Franx,  Sehulicrt,  and  other  German
composers,  ami  in  the  oratorios  of  Handel,  Haydn,
-ohn. In  1  h.'» 7  lie  came  to  i hit  United
States,  making  his  first  appearance  in  Meverbwr's
: |e Diahle,"  at toe  Academy  of  "Mu-ic  in

•rk  city.  He  subsequently  sang  with  much
soocees  in  the  principal  cities  of  tin-  Uttkm,  After
a  time  his  representations  suffered  from  careless-
ness, ami  his  business  affairs  seemed  to  lack  proper
management  ;  1 1  i -~  voice  also  was  impaired  ny  fre-
quent hoarseness  and  habitual  flatness  of  intona-
tion. These  conditions  lost  him  pre-eminence,  and
his  last  years  in  New  York  city  were  spent  as  a
teacher  of  venal  music.  Of  late  years  Formes  has
resided  chiefly  in  this  country,  and  is  now  (1887)
an  inhabitant  of  the  far  west.

FOKNARIS,  Jose  (for-nah'-res),  Cuban  poet,
b.  in  Bayamo,  Cuba,  in  1886,  He  studied  at  the
I'nivcr-itv  of  Havana,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1868,  settled  in  that  city,  and  devoted  himself  to
literature  and  teaching.  1 1  is  first  volume  of  poems
was  published  in  1851 ;  a  second  volume  (1857)
made  him  popular  throughout  the  island.  A
third,  under  the  title  of  "  Flores  y  Ijagrimas,"  was
published  in  1862,  and  shortly  afterward  his
"Cantos  del  Siboney,"  in  which  the  habits  and
traditions  of  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  Cuba  are
described.  "  I*a  Hija  del  Pueblo,'*  a  drama  (1805).
ami  "  Amor  y  Sacnficio,"  a  drama  (1866),  were  his
next  productions.  In  1*71  Fornaris  travelled  in
KuroiM'.  and  in  1878  published  in  Paris  "  El  Arpa
del  Hogar,"  and  later  another  volume  of  poems
under  the  title  of  "Cantos  Tropicales."  lie  re-
turned to  Havana  in  1881,  where  he  still  lives(lHM7).
FORNEY.  John  Weiss,  journalist,  b.  in  Lan-
jMter.  1'a-.  80  Sept,  1H17;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  9
s,si. He  began  life  as  a  shop-boy  in  a  vil-

n\  but,  being  ambitious,  save  up  the  work
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  entered  the  printing-office
of  the  Ijaneaster,  Pa.,  "Journal."  In  his  twen-
tieth year  he  purchased  the  Lancaster  "  Intelli-
Kenier.*'  a  strongly  Democratic  journal,  and  in  1N40
e  published  the  paper  in  whose  office  he  had  en-
tered as  apprentice  seven  years  before,  in  connec-
tion with  Ins  previous  purchase,  under  the  name  of
the  ••  Intelligencer  and  Journal."  His  journal  at-
tained a  wide  reputation,  and  in  1845  President
Polk  appointed  him  deputy  surveyor  of  the  port  of
Philadelphia.  He  then  disposed  of  his  paper,
bought  a  half  share  in  the  "Pennsylvania,"  one  of
the  most  derided  of  the  Democratic  journals  in  the
state,  and  conducted  it  editorially  until  1K51.  In
that  rear  he  was  chosen  clerk  of  "the  house  of  rep-
resentatives and  re-elected  two  years  later,  sailing
until  1H.V).  During  this  term  of  office  he  con-
tinued to  write  for  the  "  Pennsylvania,'1  and  edited

kshington  "  Union,"  the  foremost  Demo-
cratic paper  at  the  capital.  While  olerk  of  the
house  of  representatives  it  became  Mr.  Forney's
duty  t<>  preside  during  the  protracted  struggle  for
•be  speakership  in  1855,  which  resulted  in  the  elec-
tion of  Nathaniel P. Hanks,  when,  by  his  tact  as

ng  officer,  he  won  the  applause  of  all  par-
lies. In 1886 he returned to Pennsylvania  and

•sen  chairman  of  the  Democratic  state  .  .ni-
ln  .January.  IN.*)7.  he  was  thf Democratic
candidate  for U.  S.  senator,  but was  defeated  by

Bison  Cameron. In  August.  is."i7.  be  began  the


publication  of  the  "  Press."  an  independent  Demo-
cratic  journal  in  Philadelphia.  Having  exhausted
In-  fund  in  the  politionl  campaign,  he  purchased  the
II  credit,  and  the  paper WOJ printed  for  months
in  the  otlice  of  the  •Sunday  Di-pat<  h."  The
-  Presj M  ardently  espoused  the  opinions  of  Stephen
A.  Doiigla-.  and  supported  Buchanan's  ndmim-tra-
tion  up  to  the  adoption  of  the  Leoompton  constitu-
tion, and  the  effort  to  secure  the  admission  of
Kansas  into  the  I'nion  under  it.  Mr.  Forney  reso-
lutely opposed  that  measure,  and  hi-  action  caused
a  disruption  of  the  friendly  relations  which  had
previously  existed  between  the  president  ami  him-
self. Few  men  in  the  country  contributed  more
than  Mr.  Forney  to  strengthen  the  Republican
party,  and  to  prepare  it  forthe  contest  of  (SKA  In
Deeataher,  1N.">!I,  m  was  again  elected  clerk  of  the
house  of  representatives, and  soon  afterward  started
in  Washington  the  "Sunday  Morning  Chronicle,"
which  was  afterward,  in  October,  1862,  converted
into  a  daily.  He  was  elected  secretary  of  the  C.  S.
senate  in  1861,  and  for  six  years  was  one  of  the
most  influential  supporters  of  the  administration.
On  the  death  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  Mr.  Forney  support cd
Andrew  Johnson  for  a  short  time,  but  afterward
became  one  of  the  foremost  in  the  struggle  which
resulted  in  the  president's  impeachment.  He  sold
the  -Chronicle''  in  1870,  and  in  March,  1871,  be-
came collector  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia.  He
held  the  office  but  one  year,  but  during  that  time
perfected  the  system  of  direct  transportation  of  im-
ports in  bond  without  appraisement  and  examina-
tion at  the  port  of  original  entry.  When  the  Cen-
tennial exhibition  was  proposed:,  he  was  one  of  its
most  active  promoters,  ana  went  to  Europe  in  its
interests  in  1875.  On  his  return  he  sold  his  inter-
est in  the  "  Press,"  and  in  1879  established  "  The
Progress,"  a  weekly  paper,  in  Philadelphia.  In
1880  he  supported  W infield  S.  Hancock  for  the
presidency.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Letters  from
Europe  "'(Philadelphia,  1869);  "What  I  saw  in
Texas"  (1872);  "Anecdotes  of  Public  Men"  .2
vols..  New  York,  1873) ;  "  A  Centennial  Commis-
sioner in  Europe  "  (Philadelphia.  1876) ;  "  Forty
Years  of  American  Journalism"  (1877);  and  "The
New  Nobility  "  (New  York,  1882).

FORNEY.  Peter,  soldier,  b.  in  Lincoln  count  v.
N.  C,  in  April,  1756;  d.  there,  1  Feb.,  1834.  He
was  of  Huguenot  descent,  and  during  the  war  of
the  Revolution  served  in  the  American  army.  He
afterward  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  iron,  and
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  North  Carolina  in
1794-'6,  and  of  the  state  senate  in  1801-'2.  He  was
elected  to  congic-s  from  North  Carolina,  and  served
from  24  May.  lsi:U  ill  3  March,  1815.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Jefferson,  Madison,  Monroe,
and  Jackson  tickets. — H is  son.  Daniel  M.,  soldier,  b.
in  Lincoln  county.  N.C.in  May.  17N4;d.in  Lowndes
county,  Ala.,  in  October,  1847.  He  was  a  major  in
the  war  of  1812,  and  was  elected  a  representative
in  congress  from  North  Carolina  for  two  successive
terms,  serving  from  4  Dec..  1*15.  till  1N1H,  when  he
re-igned.  He  was  appointed  by  President  Monroe
in  1820  a  commissioner  to  treat  with  the  Creek  In-
dians, and  was  a  MfsJtOf  Of  the  state  senate  of
North  Carolina  in  lN23-'6.  He  removed  to  Ala-
bama in  1884.— His  grandson,  William  Henry,
soldier,  b.  in  Lincolnton,  N.  C,  9  Nov.,  is-.'::,  lie
was  graduated  at  the  I'nivcr-itv  of  Alabama  in
1S44.  and  during  the  war  with  Mexico  served  as
1st  lieutenant  in  the  1st  Alabama  volunteers.  H,.
afterward  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  Ixir  in
1848,  and  engaged  hi  practice  for  twenty-five  years.
He  s  I  to  the  legislature  in  1860, entered

the  Confederate  army  as  captain  in  1861,  and  rose


.-)(»}


FORRES


FORREST


to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  surremliTcd
with  Lm  at  Appomattox  in  186B,  and  in  1865-'6
was  a  state  senator.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as
a  Democrat  in  1M74,  and  has  served  by  successive
re-elections  till  the  present  time  (1887).

FORRES,  Juan  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spain;  d.
in  Nicaragua  in  1  ."5IJ0.  He  was  named  vicar-general
of  the  province  of  Nicaragua,  the  monks  of  which
were  supposed  to  have  relaxed  from  the  austerity
of  their  rules.  He  had  full  powers,  in  case  he  did
not  succeed  in  restoring  tne  ancient  discipline
among  them,  to  send  them  to  Spain  and  confiscate
their  movable  property  for  the  benefit  of  the  stricter
Dominicans  of  Guatemala.  The  Dominicansof  Nic-
aragua claimed  that  the  climate  did  not  permit  a
rigid  observance  of  the  rule,  that  they  had  rendered
great  services  to  the  country,  and  that  they  were
punctual  in  observing  necessary  rules.  He  did  not
reply  to  their  protest,  and.  when  the  rigorous  ordi-
nances he  issued  were  not  observed,  he  emptied  all
the  convents  of  their  inhabitants,  whom  he  sent  back
to  Spain,  and,  taking  possession  of  the  valuables  in
them,  returned  to  Guatemala.  The  father-general
of  the  order  was  far  from  approving  the  severity
with  which  Forres  acted,  and  summoned  him  to
Rome.  The  latter  received  new  instructions  and
returned  to  Nicaragua  in  1559.  He  then  showed
as  much  zeal  in  providing  the  Dominicans  for  the
vacant  convents  as  he  had  exhibited  energy  in
turning  the  monks  out  of  their  homes  before.
After  his  death,  however,  in  the  following  year,
the  Dominicans  abandoned  Nicaragua.

FORREST,  Edwin,  actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
9  March,  1800 ;  d.  there,  12  Dec,  1872.  He  was
descended  from  Scottish  ancestry.  His  father
died,  leaving  the  support  of  the  family  to  the
mother,  a  German  woman  of  humble  birth  but  of
fine  mental  endowments,  who  developed  qualities  of
hardihood  that  were  reproduced  in  her  gifted  son.
Edwin  was  educated  at  the  common  schools  in
Philadelphia,  and  early  evinced  a  taste  for  the
theatre.  Kean  was  at  that  time  in  the  meridian  of
his  fitful  career;  Conway,  Cooper,  and  the  elder

Booth  were
playing  under
the  manage-
ment of  Wood
and  Warren,
both  actors  of
great  merit.
Constant  at-
tendance at
the  perform-
ances of  these
artists  fired
Forrest's  am-
bition and
aroused  his  en-
thusiasm for
the  dramatic
profession,  to
the  deep  grief
of  his  pious
mother.  At
an  early  age
he  had  given
pain  to  his  pa-
rents by  tak-
ing an  humble  part  in  a  dramatic  performance.
Unable  to  withstand  the  attractions  of  the  myste-
rious calling,  he.  in  1820,  made  his  first  regular  ap-
pearance on  the  stage  as  Douglas  in  John  Home's
tragedy  of  that  name.  His  success  was  immediate
His  youth,  his  robust  and  manly  physique,  his  clear,
resonant  voice,  his  fair  and  handsome  face,  won  the


great  audience  at  once.  He  then  Wgan  the  pro-
fessional career  that  was  as  severe  in  its  hardanipi
as  it  was  brilliant  in  its  results.  The  theativ- ..f
New  York  and  Philadelphia  were  already  crowded
with  trained  and  successful  actors;  Forrest  there-
fore set  out  at  once  for  the  south  and  west.  Hi-
tour  through  a  rough  country,  with  the  inconve-
niences of  long  distances,  the  necessity  of  present-
ing his  plays  in  rude  halls,  an  insufficient  support,
and  poor  scenery,  was  not  altogether  succes-fnl ;
but  the  discipline  to  mind  and  body  was  felt  in
all  his  subsequent  career.  After  a  few  years  of
this  hard  novitiate  he  emerged  once  more  into  the
scenes  where  his  later  glories  were  to  culminate.
In  November,  1826,  he  made  his  first  metropoli-
tan experiment  as  Othello  at  the  old  Bowery  t  he-
atre,  and  gained  an  instant  success.  The  manage-
ment employed  him  at  a  salary  far  below  his
worth,  and  he  was  at  once  offered  increased  pay-
ment at  another  theatre ;  but  he  refused  to  break
his  word,  and  carried  out  the  contract  to  his  own
detriment.  This  strict  sense  of  honor  was  char-
acteristic of  him  throughout  his  career.  His  New
York  success  was  repeated  in  every  city  he  visited,
and  after  a  few  years  of  profitable  labor,  during
which  he  had  encouraged  native  talent  by  liberal
offers  for  new  American  plays,  he  went  to  Europe
for  rest  and  travel  and  larger  observation,  and
was  received  with  much  courtesy  by  actors  and
scholars.  He  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  1831,  and
played  there  and  in  New  York  and  elsewhere  with
triumphant  success  until  September,  1836,  when  he
sailed  for  England,  this  time  professionally,  and
made  his  first  appearance  as  Sparticus,  in  the
tragedy  of  "  The  Gladiator,"  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,
London.  The  play  proved  unpopular,  but  his  own
role  was  a  distinguished  success.  During  a  season
of  ten  months  he  performed  in  that  historic  theatre
the  parts  of  Macbeth,  Othello,  and  King  Lear.  His
social  triumphs  were  as  great  as  were  his  profes-
sional ;  he  was  entertained  by  Macready  and  Charles
Kemble,  and  at  the  end  of  the  season  was  compli-
mented by  a  dinner  at  the  Garrick  club,  presided
over  by  Talfourd.  During  this  engagement  he
married,  in  June,  1837,  Miss  Catherine  Norton  Sin-
clair, daughter  of  John  Sinclair,  the  popular  singer.
He  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  November  of  the
same  year  and  began  an  engagement.  His  wife
made  a  deep  impression  wherever  she  was  presented,
and  it  was  argued  that  domestic  happiness  would
be  the  fitting  crown  of  his  public  career.  But
these  predictions  were  disappointed.  The  marriage
proved  unhappy,  and  a  divorce,  followed  by  public
scandal,  ensued.  He  visited  London  a  second  time
in  1845,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  who  was  welcomed
in  the  intellectual  circles  of  English  and  Scotch
society.  He  acted  at  the  Princess's  theatre  in  Lon-
don. He  met  with  great  success  in  Virginius  and
other  parts,  but  when  he  attempted  to  personate
Macbeth,  a  character  unsuited  to  his  physique  and
style  of  acting,  the  performance  was  hissed  by  tl
audience.  Forrest  attributed  the  hissing  to  tl
professional  jealousy  and  machinations  of  Macready,
although  that  artist  had  been  kind  and  helpful  to
him  when  he  first  came  before  London  audiences.  A
few  weeks  later,  when  Macready  was  playing  Ham-
let in  Edinburgh,  Forrest  stood  up  in  a  private
box  and  hissed  the  English  actor.  This  act  of  spite-
ful resentment  evoked  contemptuous  reproaches
from  the  British  press  and  destroyed  the  respect  '
which  he  had  been  held  by  the  public.  An  atfl
monious  letter  that  he  printed  in  the  "Times'
aggravated,  instead  of  justifying,  his  offence.
portion  of  the  American  public  In-lieved  tl
national  jealousy  and  professional  intrigue  had


FORH


BOB


'


t«rf<  ri«i  witli  thi  suceeaaof  their  favorite  tragedian
•land. In  '.  when Macread

Macbeth  iti  the  A-t<>r  place  opera-house,  the
Manas  <>f  Forrest  hissed  and  interrupted  t In-  |ht-
<■.  The  AfltOf  place  n->t  en-md,  which
resulted  in  tin-  ili-nth  <>f  t wenty-t wo  mrii  ami  t In-
Wounding  of  thirty-six  other*.  In  the  succeeding
t  brought  her  suit  f«>r  diroroa,
which  her  huaband  met  with  11  oroi  Bttit  The
upied  the  courts  for  two  years,  and  was
finally  decided  in  favor  of  the  wife  on  all  |>oints
decree  for  the  payment  of  $8,000  alimony
per  annum.  In  this  trial  Charles  OX/OOOr,  the
i-ounscl  for  the  defendant,  won  a  national  reputation
by  winning  the  ease  against  John  Van  Bun-ii.  and
securing  for  the  lady  an  honorable  verdict  and  a
lilx-ml  alimony.  Forreat  left  the  court-room  de-
feat.>l  ami  calumniated,  but  was  lionized  by  the
masses.  (>n  his  appearance  during  the  last  period
of  the  lawsuit  at  the  Broadway  theatre  as  Damon,
the  house  wa-  crowded  to  suffocation,  ami  his  suc-
oess  for  sixty  nights  exceeded  anything  ever  known
in  the  history  of  the  theatre.  Hut  the  wealth  that
pound  in  upon  him  and  the  applause  of  his  fol-
lowers did  not  soften  a  temper  soured  by  domestic
sorrow.  His  quarrel  with  Mac  ready  and  hi- part
in  the  A st or  place  riot  had  added  to  his  notoriety,
while  thev  weakened  his  fame,  and  still  further
embittered  his  temper.  In  1858  he  played  Mae-
U-tii.  with  a  strong  cast  and  fine  scenery,  at  the
Broadway  t  heat  re  for  four  weeks — an  unprecedented
run  at  that  date — and  at  the  end  of  this  engagement
he  retired  from  the  stage  for  several  years.  He  be-
came interested  in  politics,  being  spoken  of  as  a
candidate  for  congress,  and  did  not  return  to  pro-
fessional life  until  1880,  when  he  appeared  at
Niblo's  Garden,  New  York,  as  Hamlet,  and  played
the  most  successful  engagement  of  his  life,  lle-
reditarv  gout  developed  itself  in  a  malignant  form
in  I860,  during  an  engagement  at  the  Holliday
street  theatre,  Baltimore,  the  sciatic  nerve  was  para-
lyzed, and  he  never  regained  the  use  of  his  hand
or  his  steadv  gait.  His  California  tour  in  I860  was
a  failure.  He  played  his  last  New  York  engage-
ment in  February,  1H71,  the  plays  being  "  Riche-
lieu "  and  "  Ix>ar;' ;  the  weather  was  cold,  and  the
houses  empty.  On  the  night  of  25  March,  1871,  he
appeared  in  Boston  at  the  Globe  theatre,  as  I  .<  .1  r.
played  this  part  six  times,  and  was  announced  for
Richelieu  ami  Virginius;  but  on  the  intervening
Sunday  caught  cold.  He  struggled  through  the
former  role  on  Monday  night,  and  rare  bursts  of  elo-
quence lighted  the  gloom,  but  he  labored  piteously
against  the  disease  which  was  fast  conquering  him.
Being  offered  stimulants,  he  signed  them  away,
with  the  words.  -If  1  die.  I  will  still  be  my  royal
self."  This  was  his  hist  appearance  as  an  actor.
He  recovered  from  the  severe  attack  of  pneumo-
nia; but  the  craving  for  public  applause,  which
was  his  only  happiness,  induced  him  to  give  read-
ings from  Bhakeapeare  in  several  large  cities.  The
scheme  failed,  and  was  abandoned,  to  his  deep
mrtiflcation.  A  stroke  of  paralysis  ended  his  life
suddenly  ami  without  pain.  ifis  servant  found
him  dead,  alone,  and  apparently  asleep,  in  his
home  m  Philadelphia.  The  large  sums  that  he  had
earned  on  the  stage  were  judiciously  and  fortu-
nately in  ve-teit,  ami  resulted  in  his  amassing  a  large
fortune.  He  had  purchased,  about  1850,  a  site  on
the  banks  of  the  Hudson,  on  which  be  erected  a

castellated  structure.  This  estate,  which  he  named
Konthill,  he  afterward  sold  at  a  large  advance  for
a  convent.  In  1855  he  purchased  11  mansion  in
Philadelphia,  to  which  he  retired  after  hi-  tem-
porary abandonment of  the  stage, There  he  col-


lie largest  dramatic  library  in  the  1'nited
States.  By  avoiding  New-  York  and  by  legal  era-
-ion-  he  -nerccded  in  e-caping  the  payment  of
alimony  t..  hi-  wife,  but left his  estate  heavily  in


• ■ -t  _  /


her  debt.  His  will.  Iiesides  bequests  to  his  friends,
contained  a  plan  by  which  his  fortune,  in  the
hands  of  trustees,  was  to  be  used  in  the  erection
and  support  of  a  home  for  aged  actors,  to  which
purjiose  he  devoted  his  Philadelphia  home ;  but
the  claims  of  his  living  wife  crippled  the  legacy,
and  some  awkward  provisions  of  the  will  weak-
ened the  purpose  of  the  testator.  Edwin  For-
rest was  what  his  own  inherited  nature  and  the
bias  of  his  life  made  him.  He  was  turbulent,
colossal,  and  aggressive,  but  allied  to  humanity  by
a  great  tenderness  of  soul.  His  greatest  parts  were
Lear,  Othello,  and  Coriolanus.  The  characters  of
Tell  and  Virginius  were  also  suited  to  his  powers.
A  favorite  part  with  himself  was  Aylmere  in  "  Jack
Cade,"  a  tragedy  written  for  him  by  Judge  Rolx-rt
T.  Conrad,  which  he  first  played  in  New  York
soon  after  his  marriage.  The  Roman  died  with
him.  With  him  properly  begins  the  royal  line  of
American  dramatic  monarchs.  A  "  Life  of  Edwin
Forrest "  was  published  by  J.  Rees  (Philadelphia,
1H74),  and  one  by  William  EL  Alger  (1875).  See
also  his  biography,  by  Lawrence  Barrett,  in  "  The
American  Actor  Series  "  (Boston.  1888).

FORREST,  French,  naval  officer,  »>.  in  Mary-
land in  1796;  d.  in  Georgetown,  I).  C,  22  Dec.,
1866.  He  became  a  midshipman,  9  June,  1811,
and  fought  bravely  in  the  war  of  1812,  distinguish-
ing himself  under  Com.  Perry  in  the  battles  on
Lake  Erie,  and  in  the  action  between  the  "Hornet"
and  the  "Peacock"  on  24  Feb.,  1813.  He  was
advanced  to  a  lieutenancy,  5  March,  1817,  made
commander.  9  Feb.,  1887,  and  captain,  30  March,
1844.  During  the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  adju-
tant-general of  the  land  and  naval  forces,  and
superintended  the  transportation  of  troops  into
the  interior  of  that  country.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  when  Virginia  seceded,  he  joined  the
Confederates,  and  was  given  the  command  of  the
navy.  He  took  charge  at  Norfolk  navy-yard,  and
afterward  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
James  river  sipiadron.  He  then  became  acting
assi-tant  secretary  of  the  navy.

FORREST.  Nathan  Bedford,  soldier,  h.  in
Bedford  county.  Teini.,  13  July.  1821  ;  d.  in  Mem-

tihis,  Tenn..  29  Oct..  1S77.  While  yet  quite  young
le  removed  with  his  family  to  Mississippi,  where
his  father  soon  afterward  died,  leaving  Nathan
mainly  responsible  for  the  support  of  the  house-
hold. In  1848  he  removed  to  Hernando.  Mi—..
ami  established  himself  as  a  planter,  remaining
there  till  about  1852,  when  he  went  to  Memphis.
Tenn..  and  became  a  real  estate  broker  and  dealer
in  slave.-.  When  the  civil  war  broke  out  In-  had
amassed  I  considerable  fortune.  In  June.  188L  he
joined  the  Tennessee  mounted  rifles,  and  in  July


606


FORREST


FnKSTKK


fallowing  he  raised  and  equipped,  at  the  request  of
Bar,  Hums,  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  whs  made
llflntl— nt  nolorKM In  October  he  moved  with  his
men  to  Fort Doiii-lson,  where  he  remained  until
the  approach  of  Gen.  (J runt,  and  whence  he  was
allowed  to  escape  with  his  men  before  the  flag  of
truce  was  sent. After  a raiding  excursion,  dur-
ing  which  he  visited Nashville,  Hnntsville,  and
Iuka.  he  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh. He  mi
assigned  to  the  eoninmnd  of  the  cavalry  at  Chatta-
nooga in  the  following  June,  participated  in  the
attack  on  Murfreesboro  on  13  July,  1862,  and  on  21
July  was  made  brigadier-general. In  September
he  was  in  command  at  Murfreesboro.  and  on  81
Dec.  was  engaged  at  Parker's  Cross-  Roads. He
fought  at  Chickamauga  on  19  and  20  Sept.,  1863,
and in November  was transferred to  northern
Mississippi. In  the  following  month  he  was  made
major-general  and  assigned  to  the  command  of
Forrest's  cavalry  department. He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  Con-
federate forces  that
attacked  Fort  Pil-
low in  April,  1864,
and,  while  negotia-
tions for  the  sur-
render of  the  fort
were in progress
under a flag of
truce,  moved  troops
into  favorable po-
sitions that they
could not have
gained  at  any  other
time. Maj. Brad-
ford, the  command-
er of  the  fort,  re-
fused to surren-
der, whereupon  the
works  were taken
by  assault,  and  the
garrison,  consisting  mainly  of  colored  troops,  were
given  no  quarter. The  excuse  given  by  Forrest's
men  was,  that  the  flag  of  the  fort  had  not  been
hauled  down  in  token  of  surrender. During  the
operations  of  Hood  and  Thomas  in  Tennessee  he
proved  a  great  source  of  annoyance  to  the  National
commanders,  and  in  February,  1865,  he  was  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general. He  was
finally  routed  bv  Gen.  James  II.  Wilson  on  2  April,
1865,  and  on  9  May  he  surrendered  at  Gainesville.
After  the  war  he  was  president  of  the  Selma,  Ma-
rion, and  Memphis  railroad,  but  resigned  in  1874.
He  was  a  delegate  from  Tennessee  to  the  New  York
Democratic  national  convention  of  4  July,  1868.
Some  of  Gen.  Forrest's  official  documents  are  very
amusing  for  their  peculiar  orthography  and  phrase-
ology. In  his  dispatch  announcing  the  fall  of  Fort
Pillow,  the  original  of  which  is  still  preserved,  he
wrote : "  We  busted  the  fort  at  ninerclock  and
scatered  the  niggers. The  men  is  still  a  cillanem
in  the  woods." Accounting  for  prisoners,  he  wrote :
"  Them  as  was  cotch  with  spoons  and  brestpins  and
sich  was  cilld  and  the  rest  of  the  lot  was  payrold
and  told  to  git."  See  "  Campaigns  of  N.  B.  Forrest,"
by  T.  Jordan  and  J.  B.  Pryor  (New  York,  1868).

FORREST,  Uriah,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Mary's
county,  Md.,  in  1756;  d.  near  Georgetown,  D.  C,
in  April,  1805.  He  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  in
the  Maryland  line  during  the  Revolution,  received
a  wound'  at  the  battle  of  Germantown.4  Oct.,  1777,
from  the  effects  of  which  he  never  recovered,  and
lost  a  leg  at  the  Brandywine.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Continental  congress  from  1786  till  1787,
and  from  1793  till  1795,  when  he  resigned. He


cx^&-&~\


was  then  appointed  general  of  militia,  and  was
frequently  a  member  of  the  Marvland  legislature.
From  1H<X>  till  1805  he  was  clerk  of  the  circuit
court  of  the  District  of  Columbia.

FORK  V,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Berlin.  Fa..  g|
June,  1811;  d.  8  Nov.,  1844.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  ten  years
in  the  U.  S.  army  as  assistant  surgeon  and  surgeon.
He  afterward  practised  his  profession  in  N-w
York  city.  He  contributed  many  articles  to  medi-
cal journals,  originated  and  conducted  f«.r  two
years  the  New  York  "Journal of  Medicine."  and  in
1844  received  from  Harvard  the  Boylston  prize  for
an  essay  on  vaccine.  He  is  the  author  of  "The
Climate  of  the  United  States  and  its  Endemic  influ-
ences "  ( New  York,  1842)  and  "  Meteorology  "

FORSHEY,  Caleb  Goldsmith,  engineer,  h,  in
Somerset  county,  Pa.,  18  July,  1812  ;  d.  in  Carroll-
ton,  La.,  25  July,  1881.  He  was  educated  at  K.  n-
yon  college,  Ohio,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  entered  in  1833,  but  was  not  graduated.
He  was  professor  of  mathematics  and  civil  engineer-
ing at  Jefferson  college,  Miss.,  in  1836-'8,  ami  was
from  that  time  engaged  for  many  years  in  engineer-
ing works  in  Mississippi.  Louisiana,  and  Texas.  He
was  in  charge  of  the  U.  S.  survey  of  the  Mississippi
delta  in  1851-3,  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Galves-
ton, Houston,  and  Henderson  railway  in  1853-'5,
and  designed  the  bridge  across  Galveston  West
bay.  In  1855  he  established  the  Texas  military  in-
stitute and  conducted  it  till  1861,  when,  though
opposed  to  secession,  he  entered  the  Confederate
service  as  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers.  He
was  employed  on  the  James  river  and  as  chief  en-
gineer on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Magruder,  and  planned
the  defences  of  the  Texas  frontier  and  the  opera-
tions for  the  recapture  of  Galveston  and  the  Texas
coast.  Since  the  war  he  has  been  engaged  in  rail-
way construction  in  Texas,  on  the  improvements
at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  during  1874-'5
was  in  the  U.  S.  engineer  service  on  the  Red  river
and  Galveston  bay.  He  was  the  first  vice-presi-
dent and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  Orleans
academy  of  sciences,  and  has  contributed  largely  to
scientific  journals.  He  assisted  in  the  preparation
of  "The  Physics  of  the  Mississippi  River  (Wash-
ington, 1861 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1876).

FORSTER,  Archibald  McDonald,  Canadian
inventor,  b.  in  Markham,  Ont.,  11  May,  1843.  He
was  educated  in  the  Markham  and  Uxbridge  gram-
mar-schools, and  after  leaving  school  went  to  work
in  his  father's  foundry  and  machine-shop.  In  1866
he  invented  a  preparation  for  cleaning  scale  from
steam  boilers,  and  in  1868  a  self-oiling  cup  for  ma-
chinery. In  1877  he  established  a  brass  foundry
in  Hamilton,  in  which,  in  addition  to  other  arti-
cles, he  manufactures  several  of  his  own  inventions.

FORSTER,  William,  missionary,  b.  in  Totten-
ham, England,  in  1784  ;  d.  in  Knox  county,  Tenn.,
in  1854.  In  1803  he  became  a  minister  of  the
society  of  Friends,  and  thenceforth  his  life  was
devoted  to  missionary  and  benevolent  labors
throughout  the  British  Isles,  the  continent  of  Eu-
rope, and  the  United  States.  He  first  visited  the
latter  country  in  1820,  again  about  1840.  and  for
the  last  time  in  1853,  when  he  had  interviews  with
the  president  and  several  governors  of  southern
states  about  the  condition  of  the  slaves.  II e  was
wealthy,  noted  for  his  benevolence,  and  was  the
Intimate  friend  of  Elizabeth  Fry.  Sir  Powell  Bux-
ton, and  Joseph  John  Gurney.  He  was  the  father
of  the  British  statesman.  William  Edward  Fors-
ter.  He  published  "A  Christian  Exhortation  to
Sailors,  etc."  (London.  1856).  See  "Memoirs
William  Forster"  (London,  1865).


-V'l'll


PORT


ft  i?


FORSYTH,  H<  n.i.uiilti.  soldier,  b.  it.  -

I.  mar  <  t  Id  town,  \  '»  .  28  Jane,  isi ».
lb vui  member  of  th»-  legislature  of  North  (
Una,  i-  appointed  ■  lieutenant  of  in-

fantry from  North  Carolina  in  April.  Ixoh.  and  be-
a  captain  "f  nth-men in  July  of  that  I
unmandcd  in  thfl  loeosssful  assault  on  Gaua-
noque,  Upper  Canada,  in  September,  1819. and  also
at  the  capture  of  the  Itrit i>h  guard  at  Elisabeth-
.  Canada,  in  February,  1818. For  the  latter
service  he  wai  breretted lieatenant-ooloneL lb
also  distinguished  himself  at the  capture  of  Fort
ge.  27  May.  1818,  and  at  the  attack  M Y«.rk
OB  &1  April  of  the  same  year. He  was  killed  in  a
battle  with  a  superior  force  of  British  ami  Indian-.
—  His  only  -on.  J  utiles  N..  after  his  father's  death,
was  adopted  as  a  child  of  the  stat.'  by  the  legisla-
ture of  North  ( 'arolina,  and  provision  was made
for  In-  education  at the  public  ex|»ense. lie  en-
I  the  university  in  1824,  subsequently  was  ap-
notnted  a  midshipman in the  navy,  and  was  on
board  the  sloop  "  Hornet,"  which  was  lost  at  sea.

FORSYTH,  James  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  Ohio  about
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  D.  S.  military
academy  in  1851!,  and  assigned  to  the  infant rv.
He  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant  on 1"> March.

.  was  for  two  months  assistant  instructor  to
a  brigade  of  Ohio  volunteers,  and  on  '24  Oct.  was
made  captain.  He  was  on  Gen.  McClellan's  staff
during  the  peninsular  and  Maryland  campaigns,
was  brevetted  major  on  SO  Sep}..  lKiM,  for  gal-
lantry at Chickamauga,  and in 1864-'5  was  as-

int  adjutant-general  of  volunteers  and  chief*
of-staff  to  Gen.  Sheridan.  He  took  part  in  the
Richmond  and  Shenandoah  campaigns,  and  was
Ian  try  at  Opequan,  Fisher's  Hill,  and  Middletown,
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  for  gal-
1!'  Oct.,  1884;  colonel  in  the  regular  army,  1  April,
1885,  for  services  at  Five  Forks,  and  brigadier-gen-
eral on  9  April,  for  services  during  the  war.  He
was  given  the  full  commission  of  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  19  May,  and  in  1866-'7  was  assist-
ant insjM'ctor-general  of  the  Department  of  the
Gulf.  He  was  aide  to  Gen.  Sheridan  in  186»-'73.
military  secretary  of  the  division  of  the  Missouri
in  1S73-'N,  and  was  then  assigned  to  frontier  duty,
taking  part  in  the  Bannock  campaign  of  1878.
In  lsMti  he  became  colonel  of  the  7tn  cavalry.  He
has  published  "Report  of  an  Expedition  up  the
Yellowstone  River  in  1875"  (Washington,  1875).

FORSYTH.  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Frederick
eoonty,  Va..  22  Oct.,  1780;  d.  in  Washington,  D.C.,
II  <><t..  1841.  His  father  was  an  Englishman.
but  fought  in  the  American  army  in  the  Revolu-
tion. John  removed  to  Georgia  with  his  family
when  he  was  four  years  old.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1799.  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  in  is<>2.  He
was  elected  attorney-general  in  1H08.  and  was  after-
ward chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  lsi:t  till  1S1H.  when  he  became  U.  S.  senator.
He  resigned  in  1819,  having  lieen  appointed  minis-
ter t..  Spain,  and  conducted  the  negotiations  which
ted  in  the  cession  of  Florida  to  the  United
He  tarred  in  congress  again  from  l*j:i
till  1827,  when  he  was  elected  governor  of  Georgia,
and  in  lv.x.i  was  again  chosen  u.  s.  senator  in  place
of  J.  M.  Berrien,  who  had  resigned.  He  opposed
nullification,  voted  for  Henry  ('lay's  compromise

of  1888,  and  supported  Jackson  in  the  debate
regarditu:  the  removal  of  deposits  from  the  I 3
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  anti-tariff

lion at Millcdgeville,  Ga.. in 1882. but  with-
the  ground  that  it  did  not  fairlj  re|
pie  of  Georgia. He  resigned  his  senator*


ship  on  27  .June,  1884,  to  become  secretary  of  state
under President Jackson,  and  continued to  senre
under  Van Buren till :» March, Ifi
John,  editor.  i>.  in  Quanta  in  1H 1-1 ;  d.  in  Mobile,
Ala..  2  May.  lv.  :  main  years  0M  of  the

foremost  Democnitl litors  of  the  south. In

hi  was  appointed  minister  to  Mexico,  !>ut  in
ilernauded  his  passports,  ami  withdrew  fn-m  the
legation.  In  1881,  with  Mar-hall  J.  Crawford,  of
Georgia,  he  represented  the  Con  federals  states  as
commissioner  to  the  National  government,  but  hi*
n-ipiest  for  an  unoflicial  interview  with  See.  Seward
Was  declined.  He  removed  to  Mobile  after  the
civil  war  and  engaged  in  journalistic  work  until
feeble  health  compelled  him  to  retire.

FORSYTH.  John,  clergyman,  l>.  in  Newbury.
N.  Y..  in  1811:  d.  there.  17  Oct..  L88&  II-
graduated  at  Rutgers  in  IflftfL  studied  theology
at  the  I'niversity  of  Edinburgh,  umler  the  I
Thomas  Chalmers,  and  in  Glasgow,  under  Dr.
Thomas  Dick,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  April.
18:13,  by  the  presbytery  of  Aberdeen,  Sot  land.  lb-
then  returned  to  the  Hutted  States  and  was  or-
dained in  1884  by  the  presbytery  of  New  York.  He
held  pastorates  in  Philadelphia  in  lH34-'6,  and  in
Newburg.  N.  Y.,  in  1888-'47| oeennyina? al  the  same
time  the  chair  of  biblical  liteniture  in  the  theo-
logical seminary  of  the  Reformed  church  at  that
place.  He  was  professor  of  l^atin  at  Princeton
from  1847  till  1858,  again  professor  at  Newburg
in  1858-'5,  and  in  18<>0-':{  bald  the  chair  of  the
BngHah  language  and  literature  in  Rutgers.  He
was  appointed  chaplain  and  professor  of  moral
philosophy  at  West  Point  in  1871,  and  served
there  till  1881,  when  he  was  retired  with  the  pay
Of  colonel.  He  was  for  many  years  president  of
the  Board  of  education  of  Newburg.  and  is  the  au-
thor of  numerous  pamphlets  and  sermons,  an
American  edition  of  Dick's  "Theologv."  with  a
life  of  the  author  (2  vols..  New  York,  1n3<>) ;  -  His-
tory of  the  Public  Schools  of  Newburg"  (New-
burg, 1863);  "Lives  of  the  Early  Governors  of
New  York,"  published  in  the  Newburg  "Daily
Union"  in  1863:  and  a  translation  and  enlarge-
ment of  Moll's  "Exposition  of  the  Psalms"  (in
Lang's  "Commentary,"  1871).  He  also  contril>-
uted  largely  to  current  literature.

FORT,  George  Franklin,  governor  of  New
Jersey,  b.  in  Pemberton,  N.  J.,  in  May,  18(«»;  d.  in
New  Egypt,  Ocean  co.,  N.  .1..  U  April.  1878,  lb-
was  educated  in  his  native  county,  ami  was  gradu-
ated in  medicine  at  the  I'niversity  of  Pennsylvania
in  1830.  He  became  a  successful  practitioner,  and,
while  actively  engaged,  was  elected  to  the  assem-
bly from  Monmouth  county.  In  1844  he  was  a
im-mlier  of  the  State  constitutional  convention,
and  was  subsequently  elected  to  the  state  senate.
In  1850  he  was  elected  governor  of  New  ,b ■>-
serving  two  terms,  till  1854.  and  was  afterward  a
judge  of  the  court  of  errors  and  appeals.  He  held
other  public  offices,  and  was  an  active  memU-r  of
the  prison  reform  committee.  Princeton  gave  him
the  honorary  decree  of  A.  M.  in  1847.  He  was  the
author  of  ••  Early  History  and  Antiquities  of  Fn-e-
ina-oiirv"  (Philadelphia,  I878\

FORT.  Green  berry  Lafayette,  soldier  and
politician,  b.  in  French  Grant.  Scioto  co..  Ohio.  11
Ort.,  1888;  ,1.  i„  1*000,  III..  13  Jan..  1888.  In
May.  1884)  his  parents  left  Ohio  and  settled  in
Marshall  county.  III.,  where  he  was  brought  an  m
a  farm  and  attended  SOhooL  He  then  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  l>egan  practice  in  La»
con.  where  he  was  elected  sheriff  in  1880,  WM  clerk
Of  the  circuit  court  in  181ft.  and  county  judge  in
1851 fli In hi*  tir-T  case  Abraham Lincoln  was


;,os


FORT


FORWARD


the  opposing  eoun»cl.  ami  David  Davis  the  presid-
Im  jiiilp'.  On  tin-  first  call  for  troops  in  1861,  he
volunteered  in  the  National  a nnv,  server!  in  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee  on  both  field  and  staff  duty
through  all  its  campaigns,  and  was  chief  quarter-
master of  the  15th  army  corps  on  the  march  from
Atlanta  to  the  sea,  and  until  the  final  surrender  of
Johnston's  army.  He  was  afterward  ordered  with
Sheridan's  command  to  Texas,  where  he  was  mus-
tered out  as  colonel  and  brevet  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  at  Galveston  in  1860.  He  was  elect-
ed to  the  state  senate  of  Illinois  in  that  year,  and
was  afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  from  1873  till  1879.

FORT,  Tomlinson,  physician,  b.  in  Warren
count  v,  Ga.,  11  Julv,  1787;  d.  in  Milledgeville,
( hi.,  11  May,  1859.  His  father  was  a  soldier  of  the
Revolution.  Tomlinson  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1810,
and  practised  in  Milledgeville,  where  he  acquired
distinction  as  a  physician.  He  commanded  a
company  in  the  Indian  campaign  in  Florida  in
1812,  and  was  wounded  in  the  knee.  He  was  for
several  years  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  served  in  congress  from  1827  tdl
1829,  having  been  elected  on  a  general  ticket.  He
then  resumed  practice,  was  chosen  president  of  the
state  bank  of  Georgia  in  1832,  and  held  the  office
till  his  death.  He  published  a  work  on  "The
Practice  of  Medicine (Milledgeville).

FORTIN,  Pierre,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Vercheres,  Quebec,  in  December,  1823.  He  was
educated  at  Montreal  seminary  and  at  McGill  col-
lege, where  he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1845.
He  served  as  a  surgeon  at  Grosse  Isle  during  the
prevalence  of  the  fever  in  1847-'8.  In  1849  he
aided  in  forming  a  special  mounted  constabulary
force  for  quelling  disturbances  in  Montreal  and  its
vicinity,  and  commanded  a  troop  of  this  force.
In  1852  he  was  appointed  stipendiary  magistrate
for  the  lower  river  and  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  and
organized  the  service  for  the  protection  of  the  sea
and  river  fisheries  in  that  district.  He  was  en-
gaged in  this  service  from  1852  till  1867,  when  he
resigned,  and  had  under  his  command  the  armed
steamer  "  Doris  "  and  the  armed  schooner  "  La  Ca-
nadienne,"  in  which  latter  vessel  he  was  wrecked
in  November,  1861.  In  1858  he  was  instructed  by
the  Canadian  government  to  visit  officially  the
French  colonies  of  St.  Pierre  Miquelon  and  Long-
lake,  and  that  portion  of  the  seaboard  of  New-
foundland known  as  the  French  coasts,  and  to  re-
port the  conditions  under  which  the  French  fish-
eries and  fish  trade  were  carried  on.  In  1859  he
established  on  all  the  coasts  and  in  the  rivers  of  the
province  of  Quebec  a  system  of  licenses  for  salmon
fishing,  and  in  1802  he  began  a  series  of  descrip-
tions from  nature  of  the  marine  animals,  fishes,
mollusca,  and  crustacea  of  the  lower  river  and  the
Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  which  were  printed  in  some
of  his  annual  reports  to  the  government.  He  was
a  member  of  the  executive  council  and  commis-
sioner of  crown  lands  for  the  province  of  Quebec
in  1873-'4,  and  was  elected  speaker  of  the  legisla-
tive assembly  in  November,  1875,  but  resigned  in
1870.  While  speaker  he  founded  the  marine  library
of  the  province  of  Quebec,  and  was  also  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Geographical  society  of  Quebec
and  its  first  president.  He  represented  Gaspe  in
the  Canadian  parliament  from  1807  until  the  gen-
eral election  of  1874,  when  he  retired  in  order  to
confine  himself  exclusively  to  the  legislative  assem-
bly, in  which  he  sat  from  1807  until  1881.  He  wa-
re-elected to  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1878  and
1882. He  is  a  Conservative.


FORTfQFK.  Mariano  Fernandez  (for -t.-  k.i).
Venezuelan  bishop.  I>.  in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  in
1790;  'I.  there  in  NoveinWer.  1866.  He  studied  at
the  seminary  of  Santa  Rosa  and  the  University  of
Venezuela.  He  spoke  and  wrote  Latin  with  remark-
able correctness,  as  well  as  French  and  other  m.  idem
languages.  In  1815  he  was  ordained  a  presbyter,
and  in  1834  was  appointed  rector  of  the  pari-h  of
San  Pablo,  and  also  synodical  examiner.  In  the
same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  national  legislature.
In  1842  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Guayana.  At
various  times  during  his  life  he  was  senator,  presi-
dent of  congress,  and  state  counsellor.  He  secured
the  endowment  of  the  much-needed  Seminary  of
Caracas.  His  few  literary  productions  reveal  vast
learning  and  a  noble  character.

FORTOUL,  Pedro  (for-toal),  Colombian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Rosario  de  Cucuta,  Colombia,  in  May,
1780;  d.  there,  5  Jan.,  1837.  He  was  of  French
descent,  entered  the  Cucuta  militia  as  a  lieutenant
in  August,  1810,  and  by  successive  promotions  at-
tained the  grade  of  general  of  division,  30  Oct.,
1829.  He  was  with  the  forces  that  operated  in
the  north  of  New  Granada  in  1812,  and  his  bravery
won  him  distinction.  He  took  part  in  the  follow-
ing battles:  San  Antonio  de  Cucuta,  1812;  Capacho
and  Carrillo,  1813;  Balaga,  1814;  Cachiri,  1815;
Yagual  and  Apure,  1816;  Barinas,  1818;  Pantano
de  Vargas  and  four  others  in  1819.  In  that  year
he  was  the  leader  of  the  campaign  in  the  north,  and
in  1822  and  1824  commander-in-chief  of  the  cam-

Eaign  in  Cucuta.  At  the  close  of  this  campaign
e  became  governor  of  the  province  of  Bovaca,  and
held  the  office  for  five  years.  Gen.  Fortouf  suffered
great  hardships  during  his  campaigns.  After  the
battle  of  San  Antonio  de  Apure  in  1816,  he  emi-
grated toward  Casanare,  accompanied  by  his  wife
and  children  and  others  equally  unfortunate.
Many  died  of  hunger  and  fatigue,  and  the  survivors
saved  themselves  by  eating  human  flesh.  Fortoul
was  reduced  to  extreme  poverty  by  the  destruction
of  his  propertv  during  the  war.

FORWARD,  Walter,  statesman,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1786;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,
1852.  He  received  an  academic  education,  re-
moved to  Pittsburg,  and  became  the  editor  of  the
"  Tree  of  Liberty,"  a  Democratic  newspaper.  He
then  studied  law,
was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  180(5,
and  practised  till
1822,  when  he
was  elected  to
congress  as  a
Democrat  to  fill
a  vacancy,  and
served  till  1825.
In  the  presiden-
tial elections  of
1824  and  1828  he
supported  John
Quincy  Adams,
and  was  thence-
forward identi-
fied with  the
Whig  party.  Ib-
was  active  in  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1837,  and  in
1841  was  appointed  by  President  Harrison  first
comptroller  of  the  treasury.  Berving  till  his  appoint-
ment by  President  Tyler  to  the  treasury  portfolio
in  September  of  the  same  year.  On  retiring  1 1< >n»
the  cabinet  in  March.  1848,  he  resinned  his  practice
at  the  bar.  President  Taylor  made  him  ofaaifll
d'affaires  in  Denmark  in  November,  1849,  but  he


pyy-ownstx^yC


600


restp'  i«<i'l>t  the  office  of  president -

thf  <1i->I ri<-t «•< .iirl of Alleghany  cunty.
to  which  hi>  had  been  elected. Re  publish
rt .>n tin- tariff  tliut IM  considered  Ml  able
document  (Washington,  1449).

I  OR  WOOD, »  illiam Stump, physii

ington,  Harford  <■«>..  Md.,  87  .Ian.. 1880.

II. -t inlitii medicine  iti Harford  county,  IN  WU

i  at tin' University  <>f  Pennsylvania  in

i.  ami  also  in  the  same  year  f mm I  >r.  Joseph

rington's  obstetric institute  in Philadelphia.

lie  began  practice  in  Darlington.  Md..  ami  contiu-

when,  after  living  in Philadel-

.in t.  i^7"».  he  remoTM  la  Seaport,

.  Ala.,  luit  in  1*7:5  returned  t..  Darling-
ton, where  ho  still  (1887)  resides.  In  INiMi  he
aided  in  organizing  the  Medical  society  of  Harford
iv,  of  which  he  became  president,  ami  was  fur
several  years  its  secretary.  He  also  aided  in  the
mization  <»f  the  Clarke  county,  Ala.,  medical
ty.  ami  was  its  first  president.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  union
medical  association  in  1NN2,  and  is  a  member  of
iiihiiv  other  medical  societies.  He  was  president  of
the  Harford  historical  society  at  its  organization
in  1885,  and  still  (1887)  holds  that  office.  During
I  he  read  valuable  papers  before  the  society,
including  "The  Historvof  Harford  County"  and
"The  History  of  the  Passage  of  Gen.  Lafayette
with  his  Army  through  Harford  County  in  1781."
In  is<>7  and  i*7<>  he  made  extended  explorations
in  Mammoth  Cave,  Kentuckv,  and  afterward  pub-
lished "An  Historical  and  Descriptive  Narrative
of  the  Mammoth  Cave  of  Kentucky"  (Philadel-
phia. 1*70;  4th  .-.I.,  enlarged,  1875).

FOSDICk.  William' White-man,  poet,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  28  Jan.,  1825  ;  d.  there,  8  March,  lwi-J.
Hi->  mother,  Julia  Drake,  was  an  actress.  He  was
graduated  at  Transylvania  University  in  1845,
studied  law  in  Louisville,  and  began  practice  in  Cov-
ington, Ky.,  and  afterward  in  Cincinnati.  About
this  time  Mr.  Poadick  gained  some  distinction  as
a  jKH't  by  a  dramaentitled  "  Tecumseh."  He  trav-
elled in  Mexico  in  1847-9.  and  from  1KT>1  till  1*58
practised  law  in  New  York  city.  He  then  returned
to  Ohio,  and  edited  in  Cincinnati  the  "Sketch
<lul>."  an  illustrated  paper  that  was  supported  by
the  artists  of  that  city.  He  published  "  Malmiztie
theToltec,"  a  novel  (Cincinnati,  1N51),  and  "  Ariel,
ami  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1855).

FOSS,  Cyrus  David,  M.  K.  bishop,  b.  in  Kings-
ton, X. Y., 17  Jan., 1834. His  father  was  an

itinerant  Methodist
preacher  of  Hugue-
not extraction.  The
son  was  graduated
atWesleyan  univer-
sity in  1854,  and
for  three  years  he
was  employed  as  an
instructor  in  Ame-
nia  seminary,  N.  Y.,
the  latter  "part  of
that  time  as  its
principal. He  Ml*

ten-il  the  travelling

ministry  in  the  New
York  conference  in
the  spring  of  1857,
and  was  stationed
jo iC\ J  ,. _^  at  Chester.  Orange

C  . *--* T  **  ^~'> eo.,N.Y..inlHS

lie  was  then  trans-
ferred to  New  York  east  conference,  and  was  for
tile  next  six  years  in  the  city  of  Brooklyn,  and


afterward  in  several  churches  in  New  York
from  1886  till  1878.  In  the  Utter  year  he  was
eh-etcd  president  of  Weslevan  university,  and
served  in  that  office  with  marked  ability  ami  suc-
cess till  the  general  conference  «>f  May,  1888,  when
he  was  elected  and  ordained  a  Mshoix  His  real-
deii-e  has  sjn.e  Ih'i'ii  at  Minma|M»lis,  Minn.,  but  his
ei.iseopal  duties  have  called  him  to  travel  through
all  parts  of  the  country,  and  also  to  visit  the  fori
missjnns  ,.f  his  church  in  BnfOJM  and  in  India.
Bishop  Foss  is  recognized  as  a  man  of  MpMKV
abilities,  an  able  preacher,  ami  an  earnest  and  de-
vout Christian,  lie  was  a  mcmlicr  of  the  general
conference  in  1872,  1*7<».  and  Ikho.  He  received
the  decree  of I >.  D.  from  Weslevan university  in

1870, and  that  ol  LL,  I>.  from  Cornell ooOege,  Iowa,

in  1M79.  He  hat  contributed  to  current  literature,
and  has  published  sermons  and  addresses,  includ-
ing "  Solids  in  the  Night,"  a  Thanksgiving  sermon,
(New York. lNli'J).  and his inaugural address  as

( (resident  of  Weslevan  university  (1876).  —  His
■other,  William  Jay,  uImjjhmb,  b.  in  Ycrlmuk.
N.  Y..  2:1  Nov..  \KM;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  1
.lime,  1859,  was  graduated  at  Weslevan  university
in  1856,  and  was  a  teacher  in  Amcnia  seminary,
N.  Y..  in  the  same  year.  In  1857  he  became  a  pas-
tor of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Portland.
Conn.,  ami  a  tutor  in  Weslevan  university.  In
1858  he  ioined  the  New  York  conference,  and  was
stationed  at  Lake  Mahopac,  N.  Y.,  in  1859,  and
later  in  Poughkeepsie,  that  state.

FOSTER,  Ahiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  AndofWT,
Mass.,  8  Aug..  1735;  d.  in'  Canterbury.  N.  EL.  6
Feb.,  1806,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1756,
studied  theology,  and  was  a  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  in  Canterbury,  N.  H.,  for  eighteen
years.  After  1780  he  was  frequently  in  the  New
Hampshire  legislature,  was  a  delegate  from  that
state  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1783-'5,  and
in  1784  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  for  Rockingham  county,  of  which  he  be-
came chief  justice.  He  was  elected  a  representa-
tive in  the  1st  congress,  and  served  from  August.
1789,  till  March,  1791.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
State  constitutional  convention,  and  was  president
of  the  state  senate  in  1793-'4.  He  was  then  again
elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  17!>">  till  ls<>:i.

FOSTER,  Asa  Belknap,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Dummerton,  Vt„  in  1817;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,
2  Nov.,  1877.  He  was  educated  in  Ijower  Canada,
to  which  he  removed  in  1821,  and  settled  in  Frost
Village.  In  1841  he  engaged  in  railroad  construc-
tion in  Massachusetts,  Maine,  and  Vermont,  and
on  his  return  to  Canada  in  1856  engaged  in  the
same  business  there.  He  was  elected  a  member
t"  the  Canada  assembly  from  Bneflord  county.
Lower  Canada,  in  18.V<.  hut  resigned  in  1860.  and
was  returned  to  the  legislative  council  for  Bedford
district.  After  the  confederation  he  was  called  to
the  senate  of  the  Dominion,  but  retired  from  it  in
1878,  when  he  received  the  contract  for  the  Geor-
gian Bay  branch  of  the  Canadian  Pacific  railway.

FOSTKR.  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dan-
vers.  Mass.,  12  June,  1750;  d.  in  New  York  city,
M  An:;..  1788.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  I
and  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister  in  Leicester,
Mass.,  in  ()ctol>er,  1776,  remaining  there  till  1788.
He  subsequently  held  pastorates  in  Dan  vers  and
Newport,  and  bom  ITMH  till  his  death  was  pastor
of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  New  York  city,  lb-
was  an  accomplished  scholar,  jwrticularly  in  the
k,  Hebrew,  and  the  Chaldean  languages,  and
was  eminent  as  a  preacher.  During  the  prevalence
of  yellow  fever  in  1798  in  New  York  city,  ho  de-
clined to  have  his  post, and  while  visiting  the  sick


510


FOSTKR


FOSTER


VM  exposed  I"  (In-  pestilence,  ami  r  1  i i •<  1 .  after  an
illm»  of  ii  few  days,  OM  month  after  his  wife's
death  l»v  i  In-  MM  malady.  Brown  gave  him  the
degree  <>f  1>.  D-  lo  17!>2.  He  was  the  author  of
"The  Divine  Right  of  Immersion";  "Primitive
Baptism  Defined**:  and  "A  Dissertation  on  the
Seventy  Weeks  of  Daniel "  (Newport,  1787).

FOSTER,  Charles,  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  near
Tiffin.  Ohio,  12  April.  lM'js.  He  was  taken  by  his
father  in  his  fifth  year  to  what  is  now  Fostoria,
Ohio,  then  a  wilderness.  After  receiving  his  edu-
cation at  Norwalk  academy  he  became  a  successful
merchant  He  was  also  interested  in  politics,  but
held  no  office  till  1870,  when  he  was  chosen  to  con-
gress us  a  Republican,  and  three  times  re-elected,
though  his  district  gave  a  Democratic  majority
each  time  on  the  general  ticket.  While  he  was  a
member  of  the  committee  of  ways  and  means  he
was  active  in  bringing  to  light  the  Sanborn  con-
tract frauds,  and  in  the  movement  that  resulted  in
the  repeal  of  the  moiety  laws.  Early  in  1874  he
visited  New  Orleans  as  chairman  of  an  investigat-
ing committee,  and  in  his  official  report  he  severely
criticised  the  methods  of  both  parties  in  that  state.
He  was  elected  governor  of  Ohio  in  1879,  and  re-
elected in  1881,  holding  office  from  January,  1880,
till  January,  1884.  His  administration  was  marked
by  efforts  to  regulate  the  sale  of  intoxicating
liquors.  The  constitution  of  the  state  forbade  the
issuing  of  licenses,  and  Gov.  Foster,  in  his  messages
to  the  legislature,  recommended  the  submission  to
the  people  of  amendments  that  should  establish
either  prohibition,  high  license,  or  local  option.
Before  this  was  done  the  "  Pond  bill,"  imposing  a
tax  on  liquor-dealers  and  declaring  that  such  tax
was  not  a  license,  became  a  law  in  the  spring  of
1882.  This  was  declared  unconstitutional  by  the
supreme  court,  but  in  1883  the  "  Scott  law,"  of  a
similar  character,  was  passed  and  sustained  by  the
courts.  In  the  election  of  this  year  two  constitu-
tional amendments  were  submitted  to  the  people,  as
had  been  advised  by  Gov.  Foster,  but  both  were  de-
feated. The  whole  agitation  was  marked  by  much
excitement,  especially  in  the  canvass  of  1883.  In
1891  he  became  secretary  of  the  treasury.

FOSTER,  Charles  James,  journalist,  b.  in
Bicester,  England.  24  Nov.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Astoria,
N.  Y.,  12  Sept.,  1883.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1847,  resided  in  Boston  for  some  years,
then  went  to  Cincinnati  and  Columbus.  Ohio,  and
finally  settled  in  New  York  city.  He  edited  Wood-
ruff's "  Trotting  Horse  of  America "  in  1868,  and
again  in  1875,  also  Bogardus's  "  Field,  Cover,  and
Trap  Shooting "  in  1874.  He  wrote  for  "  The
Spirit  of  the  Times,"  and  in  1876  established  the
"New  York  Sportsman."  He  was  considered  to  be
the  best-informed  man  in  the  country  on  the  sub-
ject of  racing.  He  was  the  author  of  the  sketch  of
J.  H.  Hackett  in  his  "  Notes  upon  Shakespeare's
Plays  and  Actors"  (New  York,  1863).

FOSTER,  Ellen  Horton,  temperance  advocate,
b.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  3  Nov.,  1840.  She  is  a  daugh-
ter of  Jotham  Horton,  was  educated  at  Lima,  N.  Y.,
removed  to  Clinton,  la.,  and  in  1869  married  E.  C.
Foster.  She  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
practice  in  1874,  and  argued  a  case  in  the  supreme
court  in  1875.  Since  1875  she  has  been  a  success-
ful leader  in  the  temperance  cause,  and  has  lec-
tured in  almost  every  state  and  territory  of  the
Union,  and  has  also  been  counsel  for  the  Woman's
Christian  temperance  union  of  the  United  States.
She  is  the  author  of  various  pamphlets  and  maga-
zine articles  on  the  subject  of  temperance.

FOSTER,  Ephraim  H.,  senator,  b.  about  1795;
d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  4  Sept.,  1854. He  studied


law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in
Nashville.  In  L8M  he  was  sj>eaker  of  the  Tennes-
see house  of  representatives.  He  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  1837  as  a  Whig,  but  n
in  1839  rather  than  obey  instructions  of  the  legis-
lature. In  1843  he  was  re-elected,  and  in  1845.  was
the  unsuccessful  Whig  candidate  for  governor.

KOSTKR.  (.eor-e  Kulas,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Wakefield,  Carleton  co.,  New  Brunswick.  :i
Sept.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  New  Brunswick  in  June,  1868,  and  in  1
studied  at  the  universities  of  Edinburgh  and  Hei-
delberg. He  then  taught  school  for  scv cm.
was  principal  of  the  Ladies'  high-school,  Frederic-
ton,  New  Brunswick,  and  held  the  professorship  of
classics  and  history  in  the  University  of  New
Brunswick  from  1872  till  January,  1879.  when  he
resigned.  He  has  been  a  leader  in  temperance  agi-
tation both  in  Canada  and  the  United  States,  and
is  president  of  the  International  temperance  asso-
ciation. He  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment in  1879,  resigned,  and  was  re-elected  in  1882,
and  in  December,  1885,  became  minister  of  marine
and  fisheries.  He  is  a  Liberal-Conservative,  and
favors  a  civil-service  system  conforming,  as  far  as
possible,  to  that  of  Great  Britain.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  the  " Prohibitionist's  Hand-Book"  (1880),
and  has  also  published  various  speeches.

FOSTER,  Hannah,  author,  b.  in  1759;  d.  in
Montreal,  Canada,  in  1840.  She  was  a  daughter
of  Grant  Webster,  of  Boston,  and  married  John
Foster,  a  minister  in  Brighton,  Mass.,  from  1784
till  1827.  Mrs.  Foster  published  "The  Coquette,
or  the  History  of  Eliza  Wharton,"  founded  on  fact
(new  ed.,  with  a  preface  by  Mrs.  Jane  E.  Locke,
1855);  "The  Boarding-School"  (1796);  and  "Les-
sons of  a  Preceptress (1 798).

FOSTER,  Henry,  English  navigator,  b.  in
Woodplumpton.  Lancashire,  in  1797:  d.  in  Panama,
5  Feb.,  1831.  He  entered  the  royal  marines,  but
after  the  peace  of  1815  devoted  his  time  chiefly
to  astronomical  studies.  The  gold  medal  of  the
Royal  society  of  Great  Britain  was  presented  to
him  for  his  services  in  the  arctic  expedition  of
Capt.  Ross,  1818-'19.  On  27  April,  1828,  he  set
sail  in  the  "Chanticleer"  as  commander  of  an  ex-
pedition for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  forma-
tion and  outline  of  coasts  and  the  direction  o*  the
principal  ocean  currents  in  both  hemispheres.  He
touched  at  the  islands  of  Madeira,  Teneriffe,  St.
Anthony,  and  Sao  Fernando  de  Noronha,  and  re-
mained a  month  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  thence
went  to  Santa  Cataliua,  Montevideo,  and  Staten
Land.  Having  rounded  Cape  Horn,  he  bore  to
the  south,  and,  after  taking  notes  of  the  position  of
several  islands,  he  touched  at  Trinity  island,  which
he  christened  and  of  which  he  took  possession  in
the  name  of  England.  He  afterward  visited  St.
Helena,  Ascension  island,  and  the  West  Indies,
made  several  excursions  on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,
and  then  sailed  for  Colon,  which  he  reached  on  5
Feb.  He  was  drowned  while  exploring  Chagres
river.  He  was  buried  on  the  shore,  where  the  Eng-
lish government  has  erected  in  his  honor  a  superb
mausoleum.  He  was  the  first  European  that  ex-
plored and  obtained  exact  data  on  the  formation
of  the  islands  south  of  Cape  Horn.  Surgeon
Webster,  authorized  by  the  English  government.
published  Foster's  journal  of  the  expedition,  com-
pleted from  his  own  notes  after  his  death,  "  Rela-
tion of  a  Journey  through  the  South  Atlantic,
made  upon  the  Roval  Corvette '  Chant  icleer '  during
the  Years  1828-'31 "  (2  vols.,  8vo,  with  maps  and
illustrations,  London,  1834).  This  work  was  trans-
lated into  French  by  A.  de  Lacaze  (1849).


FOBTKK


:.n


■


I  os  |  |  R, ||,  ,,,-> V 1 1,  ii.  senator,  b.  in llnrt-

f.  rd  ' Mi-  removed  t"  Caas-

ly  life,  nml.  after  r tiring  a

education,  entered  tin-  law  offli
I  15.  .lolins.ni.  Mini  wiia  admitted  to  the  l»ar  in
Id-  ffM  a  mcmlier  of  tin*  state  serial ■•  from
,i..l  again  from  1841  till  1844.
a  representative  in  oongraai  ban  1*37  till

1  having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat,  ami  in
]s.||  wh-s  Hj>jK)inted  United  States  senator  in  place

Mla«  Wright.  Jr..  serving  till  1*47.  Prom  1863
till  1MB  In-  lull!  tin-  office  of  judge  of  the  fifth
district  of  the  supreme  court,  lie  has  rcsidtnl  for
inatiN  rears  in  Koine,  N.  Y.

I  us  |  |  |;.  Isaac,  physician,  h.  in  Chariest  own.
Ma**.,  iilNuit  171**:  d.  in  February,  17*1.  Me  was
iiHtnl  at  Harvard  in  17.V<,  ttndied  meilicine  in
this  country  and  abroad,  and  settled  in  Charles-
lown,  where  he  pra.tis.il  for  several  years.  He
egate  ti>  the  convention  of  the  county
of  Middlesex  in  August.  1774.  anil  to  the  first  pro-
vincial congress  "1  Massachusetts  in  October  of
that  year. Dr.  Foster  was  appointed  a  surgeon  in

i,  and  was  for  some  months  at  the  head  of  the
military  medical  department,  while  Gen.  Ward
commanded  at  Cambridge,  and  Ix-fore  the  arrival
of  Gen.  Washington.  <>n  2<>  April,  the  day  after
the  battle  of  Concord,  by  urgent  request  of  (Jen.
Ward  and  Mr.  Warren,  he  attended  the  men  who
had  been  wounded,  and  gave  up  his  private  prac-
tice, which  was  very  large.  <»n  1H  June,  the  day-
after  the  battle  of  bunker  Hill,  he  was  appointed

hy  tin mmittoe  of  safety  to  attend  those  who

had  been  wounded  there,  and  was  afterward  given
the  |K>st  of  surgeon  of  the  state  hospital,  then  just
opened.  In  October  he  was  appointed  by  Gen.
Washington  director-general  pro  tempore  of  the
American  hospital  department.  ( 'ongress  shortly
afterward  appointed  Dr.  Morgan  to  that  place,  but
l)r.  Foster  was  still  the  oldest  surgeon  in  the  hos-

Cital.  Again,  in  1777,  Gen.  Washington  appointed
im  to  take  charge  of  the  hospitals  in  the  eastern
dejiartment.  Me  retired  from  public  life  in  17s<>.
bans  in  feeble  health,  but  did  not  resign  his  com-
mission. Several  men  eminent  in  the  medical  pro-
fession studied  with  Dr.  Foster,  among  them  Will-
iam Eustis  and  Josiah  Bart  let  t.  the  younger.

FOSTKK,  James  P.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Bullitt
county.  Ky..  8  June,  1827;  d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,
2  June.  1869.  He  removed  with  his  family,  in
childhood,  to  Hloomington,  Ind.,  and  entered  the
naw  in  1S4<>.  He  had  reached  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant in  1S»H.  and  in  July,  1862,  was  commissioned
a  lieu  tenant -commander,  and  in  October  of  the  same
year  was  ordered  to  the  Mississippi  squadron,  com-
manded by  Admiral  1'orter.  Me  was  placed  in
command  of  the  "  Neosho,"  from  which  he  was
soon  transferred  to  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Chillicothc."
and  in  March.  18«3.  distinguished  himself  by  the
valuable  service  performed  by  his  vessel  during
the  Yazoo  expedition.  Ijater  in  the  year  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  gun-boat  "Lafayette,"
and  rendered  valuable  assistance  during  the"  bom-
bardment and  siege  of  Vicksburg.  After  the  war
*as  ordered  to  the  naval  academy,  and  placed
in  charge  of  the  training-ships.  He  was  then  pro-
moted to  commander,  ordered  to  the  "Osceola,"
and  joined  the  Brazilian  squadron,  where  he  con-

d  the  disease  fr  >lll  which  he  died.

POSTER, Jedcdiah, jurist, b. in Andover,

Mass..  10  Oct, 1 7'J<i:  d.  in Brookfleld,  Mass.. 17

'. He  was  graduated  al  Harvard  in  1714

Stndied  law,  and  practised  at BrookhYld. He  wa>

xt  of  the  Worcester  county  convention  in

ugust,  1774,  and  a  delegate  to  the  provincial  con-


in  the  siime  year. At  I  his  time  he  was  elected

o||e  of  ihe  e\ecut|\e  council liV the  house  of  p

M\es.  and  with  several  others  he  was  nega-
tived l.v  (Jov.  (Jace.  but  re-elected  in  177Y  l|,
was  an  act i\e  and  useful  representative,  and  served
on  most  of  the  committees  of  each  provincial  con-
gress. In  177*i  he  was  appointed  in  conjunction
vith  others  to  visit  Late  Champlain  mih!  \icinity
as  an  invest igating  agent.  In  1 77«"  he  was  ap-
POtatod  a  judge  of  the  sii|Hriorcourt.  was  for  BOM
time  a  judge  of  pniluile  and  a  justice  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  in  Worcester  county,  and  a  mem-
bar  of  the  convention  that  framed  the  constitution
of  Massachusetts. — His  son.  Theodore,  lawver,  b.
in  Brookfleld.  Vpril. l7W;d.  in Provi-

dence.  ]{.  I..  13  Jan..  M8|  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  177<>.  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  Providence,  K.  I.  For  several
years,  as  one  of  the  overseers  of  Brown,  he  was
among  its  most  active  friends.  He  was  a  memlier
of  the  state  house  of  representatives  jtl  1771;
was  town  clerk  of  Providence  for  many  years,  and
was  appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  admiralty  la
May,  178.5.  lie  was  elected  l'.  S.  senator  from
Rhode  Island  in  171K),  and  was  twice  re-elected,  his
term  of  service  expiring  in  1803.  He  was  again  a
memberof  the  legislature  from  1812  till  181*5,  from
the  town  of  Foster,  which  bore  his  name.  He  was
an  antiquarian  student,  and  collected  the  materials
for  a  "  History  of  Rhode  Island."  but  never  com-
pleted it.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.
in  1786.— Another  son,  l)wlghl,  jurist,!),  in  Brook-
field.  Mass.,  7  Dec.,  1757;  d.  there,  29  April.  18N,
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1774,  studied  law  with
his  brother  Theodore  in  Providence,  and  afterward
in  Northampton.  Mass.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1778,  in  Providence,  and  was  commissioned
a  justice  of  the  peace  there  in  1779.  On  his  father's
death  in  that  year  he  removed  to  Brookfleld,  and,
although  only  twenty-two  years  of  age,  was  at  once
chosen  to  fill  the  former's  place  in  the  constitutional
convention.  He  was  made  justice  of  the  peace  for  the
countv  of  Worcester  in  1781,  and  in  1792  was  made
special  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  In
June  of  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  high  sheriff
of  the  county.  He  served  in  each  liranch  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature,  and  in  1793-'9  was  a
representative  in  congress,  having  ban  chosen  as
a  Federalist.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  con-
stitutional convention  in  1799,  and  in  the  same
year  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of
Samuel  Dexter,  resigned,  serving  from  1800  till
1803,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  chief  justice  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  for  Worcester  countv,
from  1801  till  1811,  and  in  1818  a  menberof  the
Massachusetts  executive  council.  Judge  Foster
also  held  other  offices  of  public  trust,  but  his  last
years  were  spent  in  retirement.  Harvard  conferred
on  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1784.

FOSTER.  John  Grav,  soldier,  b.  in  Whitefleld,
N.  II..  -27  May.  1823:  .1.  in  Nashua,  N.  II.  I  Sept.,
1*74.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1846,  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps,
and  served  in  the  Mexican  war  under  (ien.  Scott,
being  engaged  at  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro  (iordo,  Con-
treras.  ChurulniMo.  and  Molino  del  Rev,  where  he
was  severely  wounded.  He  received  the  brevets  of
1st  lieutenant  and  captain  for  gallantry.  He  was  as-
sistant engineer  in  Maryland  in  1848-'52,  and  on
coast-survey  duty  in  Washington.  D.  C.  in  1n.YJ-'4,
and  after  promotion  to  a  1st  lieutenancy  act.il  as
assistant  professor  of  engineering  at  West  Point  in
1855-'7.  At  the  lieginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
stationed  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  safely  removed
the  garrison  of  Fort  Moultrie  to  Fort  Sumter  dur-


612


PER


FOSTER


ing  the  night  of  26-27  Dec.  1860.  He  was  bre-
vctted  major  for  the  distinguished  part  he  took  in
this  transfer,  and  was  one  of  the  defenders  of  the
fort  daring  its  subsequent  bombardment.  II*-  un-
made brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  23  Oct.,  1881,
commanded  h  brigade  in  Burnside's  North  Caro-
lina expedition,  and  received  the  brevet  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel for  his  services  at  Roanoke  isl-
and. While  in  command  of  the  Department  of
North  Carolina,  with  the  rank  of  major-general  of
volunteers,  in  lsi>2-'3,  he conducted  several  impor-
tant expeditions.  He  had  charge  of  the  combined
departments  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina  from
July  till  November,  1863,  and  afterward  of  the
army  and  department  of  the  Ohio,  which  he  relin-
quished in  December,  1864,  on  account  of  severe
inj  urics  from  the  fall  of  his  horse.  After  the  termi-
nation of  his  sick  leave  he  commanded  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  co-operating  efficiently  with
Gen.  Sherman,  and  preparing  to  assist  in  the  re-
duction of  Charleston  under  Sherman's  orders,  when
suffering  caused  by  his  old  wound  obliged  him  to
transfer  the  command  to  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore.
In  1865  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army  for  gallant  services  in  the  capture  of
Savannah,  Ga.,  and  major-general  for  services  in  the
field  during  the  rebellion.  He  was  in  command  of
the  Department  of  Florida  in  1865-'6,  and  on  tem-
porary dutv  in  the  engineer  bureau  of  Washington
in  1867.  He  afterward  served  as  superintending
engineer  of  various  river  and  harbor  improve-
ments. His  submarine  engineering  operations  in
Boston  and  Portsmouth  harbors  were  conducted
with  great  ability  and  were  eminently  successful.
He  contributed  articles  to  periodical  literature
on  engineering  topics,  and  published  "  Submarine
Blasting  in  Boston  Harbor  "-(New  York,  1869).

FOSTER,  Jacob  Post  Uiraud,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  8  April,  1827;  d.  there,  26  Feb.,
1886.  He  was  graduated  with  the  first  honors  at
Columbia  in  1844,  studied  law  in  Harvard  law-
school,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848.  He
practised  in  New  York  city,  and  gained  a  high
reputation,  especially  as  an  insurance  lawyer.

FOSTER,  John  Watson,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Pike  county,  Ind.,  2  March,  1836.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Indiana  state  university  in  1855,  and,
after  one  year  at  Harvard  law-school,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  and  began  practice  in  Evansville.  He
entered  the  National  service  in  1861  as  major  of
the  25th  Indiana  infantry.  After  the  capture  of
Fort  Donelson  he  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  subsequently  was  made  colonel  of  the
65th  Indiana  mounted  infantry.  Later  he  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  136th  Indiana  regiment.
During  his  entire  service  he  was  connected  with  the
western  armies  of  Grant  and  Sherman.  He  was
commander  of  the  advance  brigade  of  cavalry  in
Burnside's  expedition  to  East  Tennessee,  and  was
the  first  to  occupy  Knoxville  in  1863.  After  the
war  he  became  editor  of  the  Evansville  "Daily
Journal,"  and  in  1869  was  appointed  postmaster
of  that  city.  He  was  sent  as  U.  S.  minister  to
Mexico  by  President  Grant  in  1873,  and  reap-
pointed by  President  Hayes  in  1880.  In  March  of
that  year  he  was  transferred  to  Russia,  and  held
that  mission  until  November,  1881,  when  he  re-
signed to  attend  to  private  business.  On  his  return
to  this  country,  Col.  Foster  established  himself
in  practice  in  international  cases  in  Washington,
D.  C,  acting  as  counsel  for  foreign  legations  before
courts  of  commissions,  in  arbitrations,  etc.  Presi-
dent Arthur  appointed  him  minister  to  Spain,  and  he
served  from  February,  1883,  till  March,  1885,  when
he  resigned  and  returned  to  the  United  States,  hav-


ing negotiated  an  important  commercial  tr<  aty  with
bhfl  Spanish  government.  This  treaty  elicited  gen-
eral discussion  and  was  strongly  opposed  in  the
senate.  That  body  failed  to  confirm  it,  and  it  was
afterward  withdrawn  by  President  Cleveland  for
reconsideration.  Some  weeks  later  Gen.  Foster
was  instructed  to  return  to  Spain  to  reopen
tiations  for  a  modified  treaty.  This  mission,  how-
ever, was  unsuccessful,  and  Mr.  Foster  remained
abroad  but  a  few  months.

FOSTER,  John  Wells,  geologist,  b.  in  I'.rim-
field,  Mass.,  4  March,  1815;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  29
June,  1873.  He  left  the  Wesleyan  university  in
1834,  having  completed  the  scientific  course,  and,
removing  to  Zanesville,  Ohio,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1835.  His  scientific  studies  were  continued
in  moments  of  leisure  from  his  legal  practice.  In
1837  he  became  an  assistant  in  the  geological  sur-
vey  of  Ohio,  and  made  a  very  thorough  report  on
the  great  central  coal-bed  of  Ohio,  with  a  detailed
section  of  the  carboniferous  limestone  near  Colum-
bus as  far  as  the  uppermost  bed  of  coal  near
Wheeling.  He  was  occupied  with  this  work  until
1844,  when  he  returned  to  Massachusetts  and  fol-
lowed civil  engineering,  meanwhile  giving  attention
to  the  study  of  metallurgy  and  geology.  In  1845
he  was  sent  to  the  Lake  Superior  region,  in  the  in-
terests of  several  mining  companies,  and  examined
the  copper  deposits  then  recentlv  discovered.  Two
years  later,  with  Josiah  D.  Whitney,  he  was  ap-

?ointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  assist  Charles
'.  Jackson  in  a  geological  survey  of  the  Lake  Su-
perior region,  and  in  1849  the  completion  of  the
work  was  intrusted  to  them.  The  results  were
published,  by  direction  of  congress,  as  a  "  Report
on  the  Geology  and  Topography  of  a  Portion  of
Lake  Superior  Land  District  in  the  State  of  Michi-
gan; Part  I.,  Copper  Lands"  (Washington,  1850),
and  Part  II.,  "  The  Iron  Region,  together  with  the
General  Geology"  (1852).  These  reports  first
clearly  established  the  richness  and  variety  of  the
mineral  resources  of  that  region,  and  still  remain
an  authority.  Subsequently  Mr.  Foster  returned
to  Massachusetts,  and  became  one  of  the  organize  re
of  the  "  Native  American "  movement ;  but  in
1855,  as  he  differed  with  them  on  the  slavery  ques-
tion, he  withdrew  with  Henry  Wilson,  and  was
active  in  the  formation  of  the  Republican  party.
In  1855  he  was  a  candidate  for  congress  from  the
Springfield  district,  but  was  defeated  by  a  small
majority.  Three  years  later  he  removed  to  Chicago,
and  for  some  time  was  land  commissioner  for  the
Illinois  Central  railway.  He  spent  much  time  in
studying  the  mounds  and  other  evidences  of
ancient  races  in  the  Mississippi  valley.  Mr.  Fos-
ter was  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,
and  for  some  time  president  of  the  Chicago  acade-
my of  sciences.  In  1869  he  was  president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  the  subject  of  his  presidential  address
was  "  Recent  Advances  in  Geology."  He  con-
tributed papers  to  scientific  journals,  and  pub-
lished monographs  on  American  ethnology  and
antiquities,  and  also  "  The  Mississippi  Valley,  its
Physical  Geography,  including  Sketches  of  the  To-
pography, Botany,  Climate,  Geology,  and  Mineral
Resources;  and  of  the  Progress  of  Development
in  Population  and  Material  Wealth  "  (Chicago  and
London,  1869):  "Mineral  Wealth  and  Railroad
Development "  (New  York,  1872) ;  and  "  Prehistoric
Races  of  the  United  States  "  (Chicago,  187:5 1.

FOSTER,  Lafayette  Sabine,  statesman,  b.  in
Franklin,  Conn.,  22  Nov.,  1806; d.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  19  Sept., 1880. His  father,  (apt. I
was  an  officer  of  the  Revolution,  who  was  descended


FOSTER


B18


on hi* mot! I  f r> 'in Miles Standish.  and

distinction  at the  battles  of  White
i  * water,  un<l  Saratoga. The  sou  earned

tin- menus for his (-ducat i< >n by teaching, wait
graduated  with  the  first  honors  at  Brown
i  law, and  wm  admitted  to  the  Uir

Md.,  while  conducting  an academy there

0. lie  returned  t"  Connecticut,  completed
hie  legal  studies  in the  oilier  of  Calvin  (ioddard,
who  had  1n.ii  hi*  tir*t PWOaptor,  WM  admitted  to
neetieut  Imr  in  NovemUr,  1  Hit  1, and  opened
■B  office  in Hampton  in 1888,  but in  1884  settled
at  Norwich. Hi-  took  an  active  interest  in  politics
the  out-ct of  hi*  professional  life,  was  the
editor  "f  the  Norwich  ••  Republican,*'  a  Whig  jour-
nal, in  1885,  and  in  1839  and  1840  was  elected  to
_:*laturv. Me  was  again  elected  in  1H4((  and
■eeding  vear>,  and  was  chosen  speaker.

•  l he  received  the  degr f  1.1..  I),  from

university.  In  1  H."»  1  -'2  he  was  mayor  of
Norwich.  He  was  twice  defeated  as  the  Whig
candidate  for  govern-
or, and  in  1854  was
■gain  sent  to  the  as-
scinhly,  chosen  speak-
er, and  elected  to  the
l'.  S.  senate  on  lit  .May.
1*54,  by  the  votes  of
the  Whigs  and  Free-
soilers.  Though  op-
posed by  convict  ion  to
slavery,  he  resisted  the
efforts  to  form  a  Free-
soil  party  until  the  pas-
sage of  the  Kaiis.i-
Nebraska  bill.  He
delivered  a  notable
speech  in  the  senate
on 25 June. 1850.

rinst  the  repeal  of
Missouri  compro-
mise, and  opposed  the
Lecompton  constitution  for  Kansas  in  1858.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Republican  party  from  its
organization  in  1856,  and  in  I860  was  again  elected
to  the  senate.  In  December,  1860,  he  spoke  in
approval  of  the  Powell  resolution  to  inquire  into
the  distracted  state  of  the  countrv,  though  he  was
one  of  the  few  who  at  that  time  believed  that  the
southern  leaders  would  force  a  disruption  of  the
Tnion.  and  was  in  favor  of  resisting  the  exten-
sion of  slavery  beyond  the  limits  recognized  in  the
constitution,  even  at  the  cost  of  civil  war.  Mr.
Foster  was  intimately  connected  with  the  adminis-
tration, and  was  often  a  sp)kesman  of  Mr.  Lin-
coln's view*.  On  11  March.  1861,  he  moved  the
•■pulsion  of  Senator  Lewis  T.  Wigfall,  of  Texas.
In  ismt  he  advocated  an  appropriation  for  the
gradual  manumission  <>f  slaves  in  Missouri.  In
1864,  on  the  question  of  the  repeal  of  the  fugitive
■lave  act,  he  spoke  in  favor  of  preserving  the
earlier  law  of  17!t:{.  and  thereby  incurred  the  re-
proaches of  the  radical  memlx-rs  of  his  party.  He
also  opposed  the  bill  granting  the  voting  fran-
chise to  colored  citizens  of  the  District  of  Colum-
bia without  an  educational  qualification.  He
served  on  the  committee*  on  Indian  affairs  and
land  claims,  arid  was  chairman  of  the  committee
-ion*,  and  during  the  civil  war  of  that  on
relation*.  In  1st;.",  he  was  ohossfl  prcsi-
'  the  senate  pro  tempore.  After  Andrew
M  Itccame  president,  >1  r.  Foster  was  acting
resident  of  the  I'nited  States.  During  the
losequent  recess  be  travelled  on  the  plait
U-r  of  a  special  commission  to  investigate  the
vol.  ti—33


condition  of  the  Indian*.  His  senatorial  term  of
ofli<  e  expired  in  March,  1867.  and  he  was  succeed-
ed by  Benjamin  P.  Wade  in  the  ofiic©  of  vice-
pre*ident.  Ob  account  <«f  hi*  moderate  and  con-
servative course  in  the  senate  his  re-election  was
Opposed  by  ■  majority  of  the  Republican*  in  the
Connecticut  legislature,  and  he  withdrew  hi*  name,
though  he  was  urged  M  *tand  as  an  Independent
candidate,  ami  was  assured  of  the  support  of  the

Democrat*.  He  declined  the  ntnfismiisnhi  of  law
at  fall  in  i*'i!»,  but  after  his  retirement  from  the
bench  in iN?t»  delivered  ■  ooaiw  of  lectures  on

'•  Parliamentary  LlMi  and  Methods  of  Legislation."
In  1*7»»  he  again  represented  the  town  of  Norwich
in  the  assembly,  ana  was  chosen  speaker. II-

signed  in  .lune  of  that  year  in  order  to  take  his
seat  on  the  liench  of  the  supreme  court,  having
been  elected  by  a  nearly  unanimou*  vote  of  both
branches  of  the  legislature.  His  most  noteworthy
opinion  WM  that  in  the  case  of  Kirt land  against
Hotchkiss.  in  which  he  differed  from  the  dtnfcanti

of  the  majority  of  the  court  (afterward  confirmed
by  the  U.  S.  supreme  court)  in  holding  that  rail-
road bonds  could  not  be  taxed  by  the  state  of  (  ..n-
necticut  when  the  property  mortgaged  was  situated
in  Illinois.  In  1879  he  Joined  the  Liberal  Bepnb*
licans  and  supported  Horace  Greeley  as  a  candidate
for  the  presidency.  In  1H74  he  was  defeated  as  a
Democratic  candidate  for  congress.  He  was  a
judge  of  the  Connecticut  superior  ooort  from  1870
till  1876,  when  he  was  retired,  having  reached
the  age  of  seventy  years,  and  resumed  the  practice
of  law.  In  1878-'9  he  was  a  commissioner  from
Connecticut  to  settle  the  disputed  boundary  ques-
tion with  New  York,  and  afterward  one  of  the
three  commissioners  to  negotiate  with  the  New-
York  authorities  for  the  purchase  of  Fisher's
Island.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  commission
appointed  in  1878  to  devise  simpler  rules  and
forms  of  legal  procedure  for  the  state  courts.  By
his  will  he  endowed  a  professorship  of  English
law  at  Yale,  bequeathed  his  library  to  the  town
of  Norwich,  and  gave  his  home  for  the  free  acad-
emy there.  See  "Memorial  Sketch"  (printed
privately.  Boston,  1881).

FOSTKK,  Randolph  Sinks,  clergyman,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  Ohio.  2)  Feb..  1820.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Augusta  college,  Ky..  and  in  1837  entered
the  itinerant  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  the  Kent  inky  conference,  was  transferred
soon  afterward  to  the  Ohio  conference,  and  in
1850  to  New  York.  From  1887  till  1800  he  was
pastor  of  churches  in  EUUaboro,  Portsmouth,  Lan-
caster. Springfield,  and  Cincinnati,  and  from  1800
till  185?  in  Row  York  and  Brooklyn.  In  1856  he
W|t  elected  president  Of  the  Northwestern  univer-
sity, Evanston.  111.;  but  three  years  later  he  re-
sumed the  pastorate,  and  was  stationed  in  New-
York  and  Sing  Sing.  The  general  conference  of
1868  appointed  him  delegate  to  the  British  W
leyan  conference,  and  in  the  same  year  he  was
elected  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  Drew
theological  seminary, Madison.  N.  .1. In 1870  he


was  appointed  preafilonl  <>f  thi*  institution,  retain-

ne  chair  of  theology. He  was  a  delegate  to
eneral  conferences  "of 1864, 1*08,  an-:


the  gi

In  May.  IST'J.  he  was  elected  bishop  of  the  M.  E.
church,  and  soon  afterward  was  chosen  to  make
episcopal  visitations  in  Norway,  Sweden.  Denmark,
(n-nnany.  Switzerland,  Italy.  India,  and  .South
America.  He  subsequently  resided  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  and  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  has  published
•'<  >bjectiotis  to  Calvinism  as  it  is."  a  |>oleniieal  work,
which  grew  out  of  a  controversy  (Cincinnati.  1849);
"Christian  Purit  i rk.  1851 ;  revised  ea..


514


IKK


FOSTER


1869);  "Ministry  for  the  Times"  (1852);  and
"Thei-m."  in  tlif"  Ingham  Lectures"  (IN?-'). Hfl

is  also  the  author  of  "Beyond  the  Oravc."  En  which

h<-  di-»cii*>es  with  force  and  freedom  profound  ques-
tions in  ( 'hri-t lan  cschatology  ( 1*7)1) ;  "Centenary
Thoughts  for  the  Pulpit  and  the  Pew  of  Method-
i>m"  (1884);  and  -Studies  in  Theology  "  (1886).

FOSTER,  Robert  Sandford.  soldier,  l>.  in  Vw
lion.  Jennings  <<>•,  Ind.,  2?  .Ian..  is:{4.  He  was
educated  at  the  Vernon  coiniiioii-scliool.  During
the  civil  war  he  fought  with  Indiana  troops,  and
WM  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  12
June,  1863.  lie  was  brevetted  major-general  of
volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,  resigning  on  25
Sept..  and  being  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  27th  regular  infantry,  hut  declined.  Since  the
war  he  has  resided  in  Indianapolis,  was  its  treas-
urer from  1867  till  1872.  He  was  U.  S.  marshal
for  the  district  of  Indiana  from  1881  till  1885.

FOSTER,  Stephen,  educator,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  11  Jan.,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1821.  and
at  Andover  seminary  in  1824,  was  ordained  at  Box-
ford,  Mass.,  on  30  Sept.,  1824,  went  as  a  teacher  to
Virginia,  and  after  remaining  two  years  near  Estill-
ville,  Scott  co.,  was  chosen  professor  of  Latin  and
Greek  in  Greenville  college,  Tenn.  In  1827  he
took  the  same  chair  in  East  Tennessee  college  (now
the  University  of  Tennessee),  at  Knoxville,  and  be-
came president  of  the  college  in  1834.

FOSTER,  Stephen  Collins,  song-composer,  b.
in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  4  July,  1826;  d.  in  New  York
city,  13  Jan.,  1864.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was
sent  to  school  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  and  afterward  to
Athens,  Pa.  At  fifteen  he  entered  Jefferson  col-
lege at  Cannonsburg,  Pa.,  but  soon  returned  to  his

native  place  to
pursue  his  fa-
vorite studies
with  private  tu-
tors. Possessing
a  natural  fond-
ness for  music,
he  learned,  un-
aided, to  play
on  the  flageolet,
and  thrummed
the  guitar  and
banjo  as  an  ac-
companiment to
ditties  of  his
own  composi-
tion. But  he
soon  realized
the  limitations
of  musical  self-
instruction,  and
thereafter  devoted  several  years  of  study  to  the
voice  and  to  piano-forte  music.  In  1842,  when  he
was  a  merchant's  clerk  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  his  first
song,  "  Open  thy  Lattice,  Love,"  appeared  in  Balti-
more, Md.  Two  others,  "  Uncle  Ned  "  and  "  0  Su-
sannah !"  were  immediately  taken  up  by  travelling
negro  minstrels,  and  became  universally  popular.
This  success  fixed  Foster's  destiny ;  he  relinquished
his  career  in  business  and  devoted  himself  entirely
to  musical  composition.  In  1850  Foster  married
and  removed  to  New  York  city,  but  the  couple  soon
tired  of  their  new  home  and  returned  to  Pittsburg.
About  this  time  he  composed  his  "  Old  Folks  at
Home."  For  the  privilege  of  singing  it  in  public,
Christy's  minstrels  paid  him  $500.  In  1861  ap-
peared "Old  Black  Joe,"  the  last  of  his  negro
melodies ;  thereafter  he  confined  himself  to  the
composition  of  sentimental  ballads. In  1860  Fos-


oZ%^C^£^,


ter.  with  his  wife  and  child,  returned  to  New  York
city,  where  the  family  remained  until  lie  died.  Be
wrote  in  succession  about  125  pieces,  one  fourth  of
which  wen-  negro  ditties,  and  the  others  home
ballads.  So  popular  did  many  liecome,  both  here
and  abroad,  that  they  were  introduced  at  oonpstti
by  the  most  eminent  vocalists,  and  rendered  into
foreign  Languages.  Of  "0  Susannah!"  "Nelly
was  a  Lady,""  Uncle  Ned,"  "Nelly  lily."  "Old  Dog
Tray,"  "Old  Kentucky  Home.'*  "  Willie,  we  have
missed  You,"  and  "Old  Folks  at  Home,"  hundreds
of  thousands  of  copies  were  printed.  The  last-
named  was  by  far  the  most  profitable  j >i.
published  in  this  country.  Foster  wrote  both  the
words  and  music  of  all  his  pieces.  His  method  of
composition  was  to  jot  down  the  melody  as  it
came  to  him,  and  thereafter  invent  suitable  words.
He  adhered  to  simple  chords  for  accompaniments,
and  kept  the  airs  within  the  range  of  ordinary
voices.  The  subjects  appeal  to  home  life  and  popu-
lar taste,  and  the  versification  is  smooth  and  musi-
cal. His  negro  ditties  are  characterized  by  arch-
ness, humor,  and  unusual  refinement.  In  some  of
his  compositions,  notably  so  in  the  beautiful  sere-
nade "  Come  where  my  Love  lies  Dreaming,"  Foster
rises  to  a  higher  plane  than  that  of  a  writer  of  dit-
ties, and  commands  the  admiration  of  scientific
musicians.  He  was  a  man  of  culture,  familiar  with
the  French  and  German  languages,  and  a  re-
spectable artist  in  water-colors.

FOSTER,  Stephen  Symmids,  abolitionist,  b.
in  Canterbury,  N.  H.,  17  Nov.,  1809;  d.  near
Worcester,  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1881.  He  learned  the
carpenter's  trade,  then  studied  with  the  intention
of  becoming  a  minister,  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1838,  and  studied  theology  in  the  Union
theological  seminary,  New  York ;  but,  because  he
was  precluded  from  advocating  abolition  in  the
pulpit,  he  deserted  that  profession  in  order  to  en-
gage in  the  anti-slavery  contest.  He  was  an  earnest
orator,  a  master  of  denunciation  and  invective,  and
was  frequently  the  victim  of  mob  violence.  He  is
described  in  one  of  Lowell's  anti-slavery  poems  as
"  A  kind  of  maddened  John  the  Baptist,
To  whom  the  harshest  word  comes  aptest,
Who,  struck  by  stone  or  brick  ill  starred,
Hurls  back  an  epithet  as  hard,
Which,  deadlier  than  stone  or  brick,
Has  a  propensity  to  stick."
While  in  the  theological  seminary  he  induced  some
of  his  classmates  to  join  with  him  in  a  meeting  to
protest  against  the  warlike  preparations  then  going
on,  arising  from  the  dispute  with  Great  Britain
over  the  northeastern  boundary.  The  refusal  of
the  faculty  to  allow  the  chapel  to  be  used  for  such
a  meeting  made  him  dissatisfied  with  the  churches
because  they  countenanced  war,  and  when  he  be-
came an  anti-slavery  agitator  of  the  moral-force
school,  instead  of  a*  Congregational  minister,  he
directed  his  attacks  chiefly  against  the  church  and
the  clergv,  because  thev  upheld  slavery.  Since
the  people  of  the  New  England  towns  could  not
be  induced  to  attend  anti-slavery  lectures,  he  was
accustomed  to  attend  church  meetings  and  claim
there  a  hearing  for  the  enslaved,  and  was  often  ex-

Selled  by  force,  and  several  times  imprisoned  for
isturbing  public  worship.  Other  alnilitionists
adopted  the  same  plan  of  agitation,  which  w
effective.  He  lived  for  manv  years  on  a  farm  in
the  suburbs  of  Worcester.  He"  published  articles
in  periodicals  on  the  slavery  question,  and  in  1*43
a  pamphlet  entitled  "The  Brotherhood  of  Thieves,
a  True  Picture  of  the  American  Church  and  Clergy,"
in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  Nathaniel  Barm
print of  which  was  issued by  Parker Pillsbury


F06TFI:


IN  IKK


r.i.-i


rd,1886i  \bhyKelley,  reformer.

b.  Ill  I'i'lllllIM,  Mil  .  1  hi  1  ;  (LinWi

Ham.,  14  Jan..  i*s; i i •  - i-  ptrenta,  who  «

i  <junkir>.  wowd  to  Worcester
while  -On-  whs  hii  infant.  Ibr  education  mi-  tin
ished  at  tin-  Friends'  school  in  Providence.  |{.  I.,
after  which  die  taught  for  several  vears  in  W
tiTiiml  Millbury.  and  in  h  Priendr  SOhooJ  in  I. \iiii.
Mass.  Shu  resigned  her  \*>sl  about  1*17,  ami  U--
gan  laotUflllg  M  an  anti-slavery  advocate,  Itcing
tho tlr»t woman t<>  address  mixed audiences  in

fnvur  <>f  abolition, Though  einosra  in  horoonrio-

MM  ami womciily  in her dcli\cry. she suffered

manv  Indignities  in  Oonneotleul  daring  her  lectures.

While  shaking  in  Pennsvlvania,  she  met  Stephen
S.  Foster,  whom  she  married  in  New  Brighton,  I'a.,
■  I  ».<•..  1848.  Thetw Mitinucd  their  public  ad-
dresses, and  on  one  tour  in  Ohio  .Mrs.  Poster  spoke
lay  for  six  weeks.  They  settled  on  a  farm
near  WorOMtor,  which  WM  their  boon  OB  to  the
time  of  Mr.  Filter's  death.  About  1*50  Mrs.
K«»ter  began  to  be  actively  interested  in  the  cause
of  woman  suffrage,  making  many  ipoiohoi  in  its
advocacy,  ami  that  of  |>rohiliition.  She  took  an
extreme  view  of  these  questions,  and  in  argument
was  pronounced  and  aggressive.  Alike  in  their
belief  regarding  woman  suffrage  and  the.ir  protests
against  taxation  without  representation,  both  Mr.
ami  Mrs.  Poster  refused  to  pay  taxes  on  their  home
estate  because  the  wife  was  not  permitted  to  vote,
and  this  resolution  was  followed  by  the  sale  of  the
home  for  two  consecutive  years,  but  it  was  bought
in  by  friends,  end  finally  redeemed  by  Mr.  Poster.
Mrs.  Foster's  last  public  work  was  an  effort  made
to  raise  funds  to  defray  the  expenses  of  securing  the
adoption  of  the  15th  amendment  in  the  doubtful
states.  In  June,  188(1,  she  attended  an  anti-slavery
reception  in  Boston.  The  day  preceding  her  fatal
illness  she  finished  a  sketch  of  her  husband  for  this
work.  Personally  Mrs.  Foster  was  amiable  and
unassuming,  but  never  lacked  the  courage  to  pro-
claim and  defend  her  advanced  opinions.  James
Russell  Lowell  pays  this  tribute  to  Mrs.  Foster:
••  A  Judith  there,  turned  (Quakeress,
Sits  A l>l iv  in  her  modest  dress.
No  nobler  gift  of  heart  or  brain.
No  life  more  white  from  spot  or  stain,
Was  e'er  on  freedom's  altar  lain
Than  hers — the  simple  Quaker  maid."
FOSTKK,  Thomas  Flonrnoy,  lawyer,  b.  in
Qreenslwrough,  (ia.,  £1  Nov..  17!M>;  d.  in  Colum-
bus, (ia.,  in  1x47.  lie  was  graduated  at  Franklin
college  in  1812, attended  law  lectures  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1816,  and  prac-
tised in  (Jreensborough.  lie  was  for  many  years  a
member  of  the Georgia legislature. In 1806 '

ted  a  representative  in  congress,  ami  was
twice  re-elected. In  1835  he  removed  to  Columbus,
and  in  1H41  was  again  sent  to  congress,  and  served
out  his  term, lie  delivered  a  notable  speech  in  de-
of  state  rights,  in  answer  to  a  memorial  for
release  of  the  missionaries  Worcester  and  But-
r,  who  were  imprisoned  under  a  judgment  of  the
state  courts,  and  still  held  in  custody,  although  the
supreme  court  of  the  United  States  had  reversed
the  decision. Thisspeech  was  published  (Washing-
ton, IKV2). He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  con-
crsy  over  the  removal  of  the  debits  from  the
bank,  and  in  other  questions  before  congress.
FOSTER,  William  Sewell,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Hampshire;  d.  in  Baton  Rouge,  Lev,86  Noi

was  appointed  a lieutenant of  infantry  oo |0

Lois,  became  ■  captain  a  rear  later,  and

brevetted  major  for  gallantry  in  the  defence

Fort  Frie. He  was  promoted  major  on  7  July,


1898,  and  lieutenant-colonel  on  8  June,  1830. <  >n

<■<:.  in:»7.  be  received  the  brevel  of  colonel  for

distinguished  isfTiOl  in  Florida,  particularly  in  the

battle  of  <  >kechol>ee.

KOI  t  II  Kit, Jean, explorer, b. in Cambrai.
Flanders, in 1808; d. in Fntre 1;  ntine

Kepubiic.  m  1887, lie  was  in  the  expedition  that

accompanied  Sebastian  Cabot  when  he,  after  going
up  the  Parana  river. discovered  the  Paraguay, lb-

fixed  his  abode  at  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  da  la

Plata,  where  he  earned  a  hard  living  as  a  pilot  for
nil  years,  but  returned  to  his  native  country
in  18881  Me  intended  settling  at  Cambrai,  and
was  studying  for  the  bar,  when  he  learned  that  the
Spanish  government  Intended  colonizing  the  banks
of  tho  Paraguay,  lie  immediately  went  to  Spain
ami  offered  his  services  to  the  chief  of  the  expedi-
tion, Pedro  <le  Memloza,  who  engaged  him  as  pilot
to  guide  his  Bed  up  the  La  Plata.  The  e\|M-.li-
tion,  which  left  Seville  24  Aug..  1684,  comprised
14  ships,  carrying  8800  Spaniards  of  lioth  sexes
and  of  all  ages,  180  Flemish,  and  76  horses.  Pe-
dro <|e  Meiido/a  landed  7  Nov.  at  the  mouth  of
the  Rio  de  la  Plata,  and  set  to  work  forthwith  to
build  the  city  of  Santa  Maria  de  Buenos  Ay  res.
Foucher,  who  had  acquitted  himself  with  zeal  of
his  duties  as  pilot,  received  as  a  reward  the  mission
of  exploring  the  interior  of  the  country.  Re  tsi
out,  14  June,  1588,  across  the  country  of  the  Cma-
ranis,  where  he  built  a  fort.  He  afterward  crossed
the  countries  of  the  Samococes  and  the  Sibocoeea
— warlike  Indians,  who  disputed  his  passage  step
by  st,.p — and  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Cordilleras
of  Peru.  He  surprised  and  defeated  the  Payaguas
Indians  in  November,  1888,  destroyed  their  vil-
lages, gathered  the  bones  of  Ayolas  and  his  com-
panions who  had  been  massacred  there  nine
months  previously,  and  gave  them  decent  burial.
Foucher  returned  to  La  Plata  in  the  spring  of
1539,  and  was  chosen  aide-de-camp  by  the  gov-
ernor, Alvaro  Nunez  Cabcza  de  Vaca,  in  1848.
Foucher,  who  had  all  the  qualities  for  a  success-
ful colonizer,  and  thoroughly  understood  the  In-
dian nature,  decided  that  they  would  be  easilv
won  over  by  kindness,  ami  would  make  useful
auxiliaries.  He  succeeded  in  imparting  his  views
to  the  governor,  who  thenceforward  treated  them
with  great  humanity,  and  defended  them  from
the  exactions  of  the  other  Spanish  captains.  This
caused  discontent  among  the  latter.  A  conspir-
acy was  formed,  ami  Alvaro  and  Foucher  were
arrested  by  their  own  officers,  judged,  dopoaod.
and  sent  back  to  Spain  in  1544.  The  council  of
the  Indies  took  cognizance  of  the  affair,  and  San-
doval, the  president,  after  hearing  Foucher,  ac-
quitted him.  gave  him  an  Indemnity,  and  empow-
ered him  to  return  to  Paraguay,  wliich  he  did  in
1545.  The  governor,  Don  Domingo  Martinez  de
Irala,  received  him  favorably,  ami  employed  him
in  explorations.  Foucher  reduced  several  Indian
tribes  to  subjection,  and  established  them  in  the
territory  of  Ventre  Kios,  of  which  he  had  been
made  governor  in  154<>.  The  popular  atTection  for
him  is  evident  from  the  Indian  songs  that  have
Ih-cii  collected  ami  preserved  since  his  death.

FOIRMKK,  Telesphore,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  St.  Francois.  Riviere  <lu  Sud,  Montmagnc.  (^u.
bee,  in  18881 Re  MM  educated  at  Nicolet  eoll
and  calliil  00  the  hir  of Lower  Canada in 1816,
He  was  ap|H>intcd  queen's  counsel  in  1888, hai  bwi
"batonnier"  of  the  Quebec  bar.  and  president  of
the  general  council  of  the  lwr  of  the  province  of
QOObaOi He was  eleoted  tO the  Canadian parlia-
ment for  the  county  of  Ilellechasse  in  August,  It
and  represented  this  constituency  till  bis  elevation


516


P0UV1LLE


FnWLEK


to  tin'  ImimIi.  lie  Ix-came  minister  (if  inland  reve-
nue in  November,  1H?3,  mid  retained  this  ]M>rt folio
till  July,  1*74,  when  he  was  appointed  minister  of
justice."  which  place  he  held  until  transferred  to
the  post-olliee  depart ment  in  May,  1875.  While  he
VM  minister  of  justice  he  introduced  and  carried
through  parliament  t he  supreme  court  act  and  the
insolvency  act  in  1875.  He  also  held  a  seat  in  the
Quebec  assembly,  and  represented  Montmngne  in
it  from  general  election  in  1871  until  November,
1873,  when  he  resigned.  In  October,  1875,  he  was
appointed  puisne  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Canada,  an  office  that  he  now  (1887)  holds.

FOl'VILLK,  Jean  Hnptiste.  French  natural-
ist, b.  in  Hambye.  Manchc.  15  Feb.,  1794;  d.  in
Brazil  in  1887.  He  inherited  a  fortune,  ami  in
1820  set  out  on  extensive  travels,  visiting  Europe,
Brazil.  Paraguay,  Chili.  Persia,  and  India.  On  nis
return  to  Paris  he  published  "  Voyages  autour  du
monde"  (1825);  "A  travers  l'Amerique  du  Sud"
(1825);  and  "  Du  Bresil  a  Santiago,  avec  cartes"
(2  vols.,  1826) ;  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Geographical  society.  He  sailed  in  Mav,  1826,  on
board  the  -  Jules  "  for  Buenos  Ayres.  The  ship  ar-
rived on  29  Oct.  at  La  Plata,  then  blockaded  by  the
Brazilians,  and  in  trying  to  run  the  blockade  was
captured.  Fouvillc  on  his  former  visit  had  been
the  guest  of  the  Brazilian  admiral,  and  the  rigors
of  war  were  now  relaxed  in  his  behalf.  After  a
short  stay  at  Montevideo  as  a  prisoner  he  was  lib-
erated, and  set  out  for  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  ar-
rived 25  Dec,  1826.  He  was  successful  in  several
commercial  operations,  and  left  for  Rio  Janeiro,  12
Aug.,  1827,  immediately  after  his  marriage  with
Mi>s  Alice  Laboissiere.  After  making  a  large  col-
lection of  Brazilian  plants,  he  sailed,  15  Oct.,  for
France,  where  he  presented  it  to  the  Paris  museum
of  national  history,  and  published  "Explications
de  l'herbier  des  plantes  Bresiliennes  de  J.  B.  Fou-
ville  "  (Paris,  1829).  The  Geographical  society  in-
vited him  to  take  charge  of  an  expedition  to  the
Congo,  and  he  passed  two  years  exploring  the  in-
terior of  Africa,  his  wife  dying  during  his  stay.  On
his  return  to  Paris  in  May,  1831,  he  published  the
result  of  his  explorations,  "  Vovages  au  Congo  et
dans  l'Afrique  equinoxial "  (4  vols.,  1831).  Fouville
sailed  again  for  Brazil  in  March,  1833,  penetrated
into  the  interior,  and  spent  four  years  exploring
the  lands  watered  by  the  Amazon.  He  was  killed
by  negroes  whose  cupidity  was  aroused  by  his  bag-

Jage,  and  his  body  thrown  into  the  Amazon  in
une,  1887.  His  last  manuscripts,  after  many  vi-
cissitudes, fell  into  the  hands  of  the  traveller  S.
Rany,  who  sent  them  to  Ferdinand Denis,  who

Sublished  them:  "  Histoire  des  nations  Indiennes
e  l'Amazone"(1862);  "Flore  du  Bresil"  (1862) ;
"  Voyages  au  Bresil "  (1863) ;  and  "  Moeurs  et  cou-
tumes  des  Indiens  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (1863).

FOWLE,  Daniel,  printer,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  about  1715;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in
June,  1787.  He  was  an  apprentice  with  Samuel
Kneeland,  and  began  business  for  himself  in  Bos-
ton in  1740.  From  1742  to  1750  he  was  a  partner
with  Gamaliel  Rogers,  and  in  1748-'50  joint  pub-
lisher with  him  of  the  "  Independent  Advertiser."
In  1743-'6  they  published  the  "American  Maga-
zine." They  were  the  first  in  America  to  print  the
New  Testament.  In  1755  he  was  arrested,  by  order
of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives,  on
suspicion  of  having  printed  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  The  Monster  of  Monsters,"  severely  animadvert-
ing on  some  members  of  the  house.  He  was  re-
leased in  a  few  days,  but  left  Boston  in  dJagnet,
went  to  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  and  on  7  Oct.,  1768,
began  the  publication  of  the  "  New  Hampshire  (ia-


zette." — His  nephew.  Hubert,  editor,  was  a  part-
ner with  his  uncle  m  the  publication  of  the  "  New
Hampshire  Gazette,"  which  was  the  only  news-
paper in  New  Hampshire  at  the  lieginning  of  the
Revolution.  As  Daniel  was  a  Whig  and  his  nephew
a  loyalist,  the  partnership  was  terminated,  and
Robert  established  himself  as  a  printer  at  I
The  paper  currency  of  the  period  was  printed  in
his  office,  and,  as  it  was  counterfeited  soon  after-
ward, suspicion  rested  on  him  as  a  participant  in
the  crime,  and  he  fled  to  the  British  lines  in  New
Vork,  and  thence  to  England.

FOWLE,  William  Bentley,  educator,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  17  Oct.,  1795;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,
6  Feb.,  1865.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  bookseller,
and  after  the  latter's  death  carried  on  the  business
till  1823,  when  he  engaged  in  teaching,  having  for
many  years  made  a  study  of  the  theories  and  meth-
ods of  education  and  mental  culture.  In  1848  lie
began  the  publication  of  the  "Common  School
Journal,"  which  was  edited  by  Horace  Mann  till
1848,  and  then  by  himself  for  the  succeeding  four
years.  He  wrote  and  lectured  in  furtherance  of
the  principles  advocated  by  Horace  Mann,  and
rendered  important  assistance  to  that  reformer.
When  teachers'  institutes  were  established,  he  de-
livered many  lectures  at  their  meetings.  Through
his  efforts  the  monitorial  system  of  instruction  was
introduced  into  the  public  and  private  schools  of
Boston.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature  in  1843.  About  1851  he  opened  a  moni-
torial school  in  Boston,  which  he  conducted  suc-
cessfully till  1860,  when  he  retired  to  Medford  and
devoted  himself  to  literary  labor.  He  published,
besides  his  lectures,  as  many  as  forty-eight  books
of  instruction. His  first  publication  was  an  im-

g roved  edition  of  Boyer's  "  French  and  English
•ictionary  " ;  his  latest,  a  series  of  outline  maps.
He  was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  prepar-
ing a  "  Book  of  Dialogues."

FOWLER,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Guilford,
Conn.,  about  1765;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1851.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783.  Having  stud-
ied for  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry,  he  was
ordained  deacon,  21  June,  1789,  and  priest,  11  June,
1790,  by  Bishop  Provoost,  of  New  \ork.  While  in
college  he  performed  the  duties  of  a  lay  reader  in
New  Haven  and  West  Haven.  After  taking  orders,
he  was  rector  of  the  united  churches  at  Peekskill
and  Highlands,  and  subsequently  of  the  church  at
Bedford,  N.  Y.  After  residing  on  Long  Island  and
in  Philadelphia,  he  became  rector  of  churches  in
Spotswood,  Shrewsbury,  and  Middletown,  N.  J.
For  a  brief  period  he  was  in  charge  of  the  church
in  Bloomingdale,  N.  Y.,  but  in  February,  inn?,  he
was  elected  rector  of  St.  Bartholomew's  parish,  S.  C.
In  1812  he  accepted  missionary  work  in  connec-
tion with  the  Protestant  Episcopal  society  for  the
advancement  of  Christianity  in  South  Carolina,
and  was  usefully  occupied  during  his  last  years  at
different  points  in  the  state,  including  Camden,
Columbia,  and  Chatham.

FOWLER,  Charles  Henry,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Burford.  Canada,  11  Aug.,  1837.  In  1841  he  was
taken  with  his  father's  family  to  Illinois,  where  he
spent  his  early  years  on  a  farm.  After  studying  at
Rock  River  seminary  in  Mount  Morris,  he  entered
Genesee  college,  Lima,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1859.  He  soon  afterward  began  the  study
of  law  at  Chicago,  but  soon  after  this  he  was  con-
verted and  at  once  changed  his  purpose,  began  a
course  of  preparation  for  the  ministry,  and  in  1861
was  graduated  at  Garrett  Biblical  institute.  Kv.ms-
ton,  111.  The  same  year  he  was  admitted  on  trial
into  the  Bock  River  conference  of  the  Methodist


\  r.Kit


FOWLER


.M7


z? y/ r^  0 18H0.lHK4.iin.llMH

>^5 Jr7 A, rfl Sine- his cl.vatii

/QO.  N.  tSerx^ru^ he ,IIU, travi,lh


Episcopal  church,  and  was  H|>|M>inted  successively
lo  churches  In  Chicago,  till  In  1*7'.'  be  wu  elected
president of Northwestern university. He  held

M  elected by  tin-
general  conference  to  the  editorship  of  tl
York  "Christian  Advocate." Four  years  later  he

was  elected  one  of
the  corresponding
secretaries  af  the
missionary  society  of
the  Hethodisl  Bpia

copal  church, ami  in
1884  be  was  <•!•
and  ordained  bishop.
He  received  tin-  de-
gree of  I).  I),  from
the  North  west  ern
uiiiversitv.  hikI  after-
ward that  of  LL.  I),
from  Syracuse  uni-
^X^~ ^  versity.'N. V. Hi

-• -~-*-l  was  a delegate to

the general confer-
ences of  1878.  1H7»;.
1880, 1HH4.  and  1888.
tion

•lied

through  the  country
in  the  ]>erformance  of  his  official  duties,  and  has
also  visited  South  America.  His  resilience  is  at
Ban  Francisco,  ami  ha  lias  devoted  a  large  share  of
his  labors  to  the  interests  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church  in  the  Pacific  states.

POWLER,  Henry,  clergyman,  1>.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  in  1K24  :  d.  in  Vineyard  Haven,  Mass.,
4  Aug.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  with  honors  at
Williams  in  1K47,  went  to  New  York,  and  entered
ujxtn  a  literary  career.  He  was  editor  of  "  Holden's
i/.ine."and  a  contributor  toother  journals  and
periodicals.  About  1852  he  removed  to  Chicago,
ami  was  editor  and  part  proprietor  of  the  "Trib-
une  "  f<«r  a  year  or  more.  From  this  place  he  was
called  to  the  professorship  of  political  economy  in
the  University  of  Rochester,  N".  Y.,  which  be  filled
for  nearly  five  years,  studying  meanwhile  in  Roches-
ter theological  seminary.  In  1K58  he  was  licensed
and  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  2d  Presbyterian
church  in  Auburn.  N.  Y.  He  married,  in  1858,  a
daughter  of  Prof.  Chester  Dewey.  His  pastorate  In
Auburn  continued  till  1871,  when  he  resigned  in
sequence  of  failing  health.  He  was  the  author
of  "The  American  Pulpit,"  a  volume  of  biographi-
cal and  descriptive  sketches  of  living  pulpit  celebri-
ties, with  portraits  (New  York,  lH5ti).

FOWLER,  Joseph  Smith,  senator,  b.  in  Steu-
benville,  Ohio,  81  Aug.,  \*Kl'l.  He  was  graduated
at  Franklin  college,  Ohio,  in  1848,  and  for  four
years  filled  the  chair  of  mathematics  in  that  insti-
tution. He  then  studied  law  in  Kentucky,  but  be-
En  practice  in  Tennessee.  When  the  civil  war
gan,  he  ardently  espoused  the  National  cause,
and  in  September,  1861,  in  consequence  of  a  procla-
mation of  Jefferson  Davis  for  the  expulsion  of
loyal  people,  he  removed  to  Springfield,  111.  In
April.  1H«»V!,  he  returned  to  Tennessee,  was  made
comptroller  of  the  state  under  Gov.  Andrew  .John-
son, and  took  a  leading  part  in  reorganizing  the
state  government  in  the  interests  of  the  I'nion.
lie  was  elected  to  the  V.  S.  senate  in  1865,  but
was  not  admitted  to  his  seat  until  July.  1866.

POWLER,  Littleton,  clergyman,  l>.  in  Smith
Teun..  12  Sept.,  1H02;  d.'in  Texas.  19  .Ian..
He  became  a  im-mltcr  of  the  Methodist
church  in  1SM»,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  Ken-
tucky on  30  Sept,  1826,  was  ordained  as  deacon  in


•cr.  182*.  stationed  at  Louisville  the  following
year,  and  ordained  an  elder  in  n. <t..U  r.  ]*.'«•.  It.
1882  he  went  to  Tennaaaaa,  and  in  August,  1888. as
a  missionary  to  Texas. In  1H8H  he  waa  appointed

Mississippi conference sti|>erintenaent of

the  Texas  mission.  After  the  organization  of  the
Texas  conference  he  was  presiding  elder  of  various
districts.  He  attended,  in  1844,  the  last  conferenoa
baton  the  division  of  the  church,  and  in  1848  the
LooJerille  convention,  at  which  the  Methodist
Kpiscojud  church  south  was  organized.

KOhLKR,  Orin.  clergyman,  b.  in  Lebanon.
Conn..  2»  July.  17!M  :  &  in  Washington,  !>.<'..  :{
Spt.,  1861.  'He  was  graduated  at  Yak  in  1H15.
studied  theology  under  President  Dwight,  taught
in  the  academy  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  for  a  year,  was
licensed  to  preach  on  14  Oct..  1H17.  made  a  mission-
ary tour  in  the  Mississippi  valley  in  1H1H.  and  in
1H1"  was  settled  over  a  Congregational  church  in
I'lainlield.  Conn.  He  was  dismissed  by  this  society
in  1831,  but  was  immediately  called  to  a  church  in
Fall  River,  of  which  he  remained  ]*astor  until  he
entered  congress.  In  1H41  he  deli vered  three  dis-
courses containing  a  history  of  Fall  Hiver  since
1620,  and  an  account  of  the  boundary  dispute  be-
tween Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island.  He  was
appointed  by  a  commfttee  of  citizens  to  defend  the
interests  of  the  town  I h* fore  the  boundary  commis-
sioners, published  a  series  of  articles  on  the  sub-
ject in  the  Boston  ••  Atlas,"  and  was  elected  in  1H47
to  the  state  senate,  where  he  seemed  the  rejection
of  the  decision  of  the  boundary  ontnmlaaion  by  a
unanimous  vote.  His  constituents  were  so  pleased
with  his  ability  as  a  legislator  that  they  elected
him  in  1848  as  a  Free-soil  Whig  to  the  National
house  of  representatives,  and  re-elected  him  for  the
following  term.  He  was  an  advocate  of  tamper-
ance  laws,  and  a  strong  opponent  of  slavery.  In
March,  1850,  he  replied  to  Daniel  Webster's  speech
in  justification  of  the  fugitive-slave  law.  He  was
the  author  of  a  "  Disquisition  on  the  Evils  attend-
ing the  Use  of  Tobaoco"  (1838),  and  "  Lectures  on
the  Mode  and  Subjects  of  Baptism  "  (1H35).  His
••  History  of  Fall  River,  with  notices  of  PreebOffl
and  Tiverton."  was  republished  in  1868 (Fall  River).

FOWLER,  Orson  Squire,  phrenologist,  b.  in
Cohocton.  Steuben  no,  N.  Y..  11  Oct,  1809;  d.
near  Sharon  Station,  Conn.,  18  Aug..  1887.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1834.  In  1835  he  and
his  brother  Lorenzo  opened  an  office  in  New  York.
In  1836  they  wrote  and  published  "Phrenology
Proved,  Illustrated,  and  Applied."  In  October.
1838.  he  leaned  in  Philadelphia  the  first  numlierof
the  "American  Phrenological  .Journal."  which  was
published  in  that  city  till  1848,  when  it  was  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  continued  by  the  firm  of
I ».  S.  and  L  N.  Fowler,  which  became  Fowlers  &
Wells  in  1844,  and.  by  the  retirement  of  the  Fow-
lers, s.  R.  Wells  in  lsiUt.  Besides  his  labors  as  an
editor  and  a  prolific  author,  Mr.  Fowler  lectured
on  his  specialty  and  allied  subjects  in  the  I'nited
States  and  Canada  for  many  years.  In  1881  he
removed  to  Boston.  Mass.,  and  in  1H7.">  to  Manches-
ter. Mass.  Among  his  many  volumes  on  phrenolo-
gy ami  kindred  subjects  are  ••  Memory  and  Intel-
lectual Improvement  "(Philadelphia,  1H41);  "  Pliw
iologv.  Animal  ami  Mental "  (1842) ;  "Matrimony.
or  Phrenology  applied  to  the  Slection  of  Com-
panions" (1842);  "Self-Culture  and  Perfection  of
Character "(l*i:b:  ••  Hereditary  Descent,  its  Laws
and  Facts  applied  to  Human  Improvement  "(184
••  Lore  and  Parentage"  ilNCl);  "The  Self-Instruc-
tor in Phrenology and Physiology." with his

brother  (1848);  "Banal  Science"  (Philadelphia,
ls;n,: ■  Amativeness";  "Human  Science";  and


518


FOWLF.R


FoWLKS


"Creative  Science,  or  Manhood,  Womanhood,  and
their  Intcr-Kelations."— His  brother,  Lorenzo
Ml«'s,  i».  in  Cohocton, St  .liinc.  inn.  Ha  Moom-
panied  Orson  <>n  lecturing  lours,  and  lectured
■lone  throughout  the  United  States  and  the  Brit-
ish-American provinces.  In  1863  he  settled  in
London,  and  lectured  in  all  parts  of  Great  Britain.
Several  of  hie  lectures  were  published  in  London.
In  addition  to  the  works  written  in  conjunction
with  his  brother,  he  is  the  author  of  the  "  Synopsis
of  Phrenology  and  Physiology "(1844);  "Marriage,
its  History  and  Philosophy,  with  Directions  for
Happy  Marriages  "  (1846) ;  and  "  Lectures  on  Man."
As  a  meml>er  of  the  firm  of  Fowlers  &  Wells  he
was  engaged  in  publishing  "Life  Illustrated,"
a  weekly  journal,  and  the  monthly  periodicals
the  "American  Phrenological  Journal  '  and  the
••Water-cure  Journal."  which  was  superseded  by
the  "  Science  of  Health."— Lydia  Folger,  wife  of
Lorenzo  N.,  b.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  in  1823;  d.  in
London.  England,  26  Jan.,  1879,  was  a  graduate  of
Syracuse  medical  college,  and  practised  medicine.
She  lectured  on  physiology  and  on  diseases  of
women  and  children,  and  published  "  Familiar
Lessons  on  Phrenology  and  Physiology"  (1847),
and  "  Familiar  Lessons* on  Astronomy"  (1848).

FOWLER,  Philemon  Halstead,  clergyman,  b.
in  Albany.  X.  V.,  9  Feb.,  1814;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
19  I  )t ■(•..  1S7U.  He  was  graduated  at  Hobart  college
in  1882,  was  a  tutor  there  for  one  year,  and  stud-
ied theology  at  Princeton  seminary,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1830.  He  held  pastorates  in  Washing-
ton. I).  C,  and  Elmira,  N.  \.;  and  from  1851  till
IS 74.  when  he  was  compelled  to  resign  on  account
of  failing  health,  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Utica,
X.  Y.  lie  was  a  member  of  the  joint  committee  on
reunion  in  18G6,  and  was  moderator  of  the  new-
school  Presbyterian  general  assembly  when  the
two  wings  of  the  church  reunited  in  1870.  He  was
the  author  of  a  -'History  of  Presbvterianism  in
Central  New  York,"  and  of  several  other  small  vol-
umes and  published  discourses.

FOWLER.  Samuel,  physician,  b.  near  New-
burg,  X.  Y.,  30  Oct.,  1779  ;  d.  in  Franklin,  N.  J.,
21  Feb.,  1844.  He  studied  medicine  in  Philadel-
phia, and,  after  being  licensed  in  1800,  began  to
practise  in  Hamburg,  X.  J.  A  few  years  later  he
removed  to  Franklin,  where  he  subsequently  re-
sided, enjoying  a  high  reputation  on  account  of
his  scientific  knowledge. He  interested  himself  in

Eolitics,  and  represented  his  county  in  the  upper
ranch  of  the  New  Jersey  legislature,  and  also  his
state  in  congress,  to  which  he  was  twice  elected  as
a  Jackson  Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1833,
till  4  March,  1837.  As  a  mineralogist  he  held  de-
servedly a  high  rank.  The  zinc-mines  in  Franklin
were  once  owned  by  him,  and  his  descriptions  of
the  minerals  found  in  their  vicinity,  particularly
the  franklinite,  said  to  have  been  named  by  him,
led  to  the  development  of  its  metallurgy.  The  rare
mineral,  fowlerite,  was  discovered  by  him.  He
contributed  frequent  descriptions  of  New  Jersey
minerals  to  scientific  and  otner  journals.

FOWLER,  Samuel  Page,  antiquarian,  b.  in
Dan  vers,  Mass.,  22  April,  1800.  He  carried  on  the
business  of  tanning  and  currying  in  his  native  town,
held  various  local  offices,  and  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1837-'9,  and  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1853.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Essex  institute,  and  for  ten  years
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Peabody
institute  of  Danvers.  He  wrote  articles  for  the
u Historical  Collections "  of  the  Essex  institute.
and  a  sketch  of  the  "  Life  and  Character  of  the  Rev.
Samuel  Parris,  of  Salem  Yillage,  and  his  Connec-


tion with  the  Witchcraft  Delusion  of  1692";  and
annotated  Robert  Calefs  "More  Wonders  of  the

Invisible  World"  (Sal. •in.  1861).

FOWLER.  Thomas  Powell,  lawyer,  b.  in  N.w-
burg,  N.  Y.,  26  Oct,  1H">1.  Be  was  graduated  at
Columbia  law-school  in  1874,  and  became  a  prac-
tising lawyer  in  New  York  city.  He  has  been  I
director  of  various  railway  companies,  beoUM  re-
ceiver of  the  Shenango  and  Allegheny  road  in
1884,  and  since  1886  has  been  president  of  the
New  York.  Ontario,  and  Western  railway.

FOWLER,  William  Chauncey,  educator  and
author,  b.  in  Killingworth  (now  Clinton),  Conn.,  1
Sept.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Durham,  Conn.,  15  Jan.,  1881.
His  parents  settled  at  Durham  when  he  was  four
years  old.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1816,  and
studied  theology  there,  at  the  same  time  perform-
ing the  duties  of  rector  of  the  Hopkins  grammar-
school.  He  was  graduated  at  the  theological
school  in  1818.  was  a  tutor  at  Yale  from  1819  till
1823,  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Green-
field, Mass.,  in  1825-'7,  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  philosophy  in  Middlebury  college.  Vt.,
from  1827  till  1838,  and  then  of  rhetoric  and  ora-
tory in  Amherst  college  till  1843.  He  subsequently
engaged  in  literary  labors,  residing  at  Amherst  till
1858,  and  afterward  in  Durham.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  assembly  in  1851,  and  of
the  Connecticut  senate  in  1864.  For  his  father-in-
law,  Noah  Webster,  he  edited  the  university  edi-
tion of  Webster's  "  Dictionary  "  (New  York,  1845).
He  published  an  "  English  Grammar  " ;  a  treatise
on  "  The  English  Language  in  its  Elements  and
Forms  "  (1850) ;  "  Memorials  of  the  Chaunceys  "
(1856);  "The  Sectional  Controversy,  or  Passages
in  the  Political  History  of  the  United  States"
(1862);  genealogical  works  on  "William  Fowler,
the  Magistrate,  and  his  Descendants,"  "  Wives  of
the  Fowlers,"  and  "  Wives  of  the  Chaunceys " ;
"History  of  Durham"  (Hartford,  1866):  and
"  Local  Law  in  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut "
(Albany,  1872).— His  son,  William  Worthing-
ton,  author,  b.  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  24  June,  1833;
d.  in  Durham,  Conn.,  18  Sept.,  1881,  was  educated
at  Phillips  Andover  academy  and  at  Amherst,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1854.  He  studied  law
at  Amherst  and  in  New  York  city,  where  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1857. He  practised  his

Erofession  in  New  York  till  1864,  then  became  a
roker,  and  in  1871  abandoned  that  business  for
literature  and  journalism,  settling  in  Durham.  In
1879  he  was  a  member  of  the  Connecticut  senate.
He  was  for  twelve  years  the  New  York  financial  cor-
respondent of  the  Boston  "  Commercial  Bulletin,"
ana  was  the  author  of  "Ten  Years  in  Wall  Street"
(Hartford,  1870) ;  "  Life  and  Adventures  of  Benja-
min F.  Moneypenny";  "Fighting  Fire"  (1873):
"  Woman  on  the  American  Frontier "  (1877) ;
"Twenty  Years  of  Inside  Life  in  Wall  Street"
(Xew  York,  1880);  and  a  pamphlet  on  "The  Fowl-
ers of  Buckinghamshire,  England."

FOWLES,  James  H.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xassau,
New  Providence,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  1854.  He  was  the
son  of  a  lieutenant  in  the  British  army,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1831,  licensed  to  preach  by  the
presbytery  of  New  York  in  1833,  and  afterward
ordained  "in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  by
Bishop  Bowen,  of  South  Carolina.  He  preached
in  that  state  till  1845,  when  he  succeeded  Stephen
H.  Tyng  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  the  author  of
•■  Protestant  Episcopal  Views  of  Baptism  Explained
and  Defended*'  (Philadelphia,  1846).  A  collect  ion
of  thirty  "Sermons  Preached  in  the  Church  of  the
Epiphany,  Philadelphia,"  accompanied  by  a  me-
moir, was  published  after  his  death  (1855).


!-o\


Mil


lu\.  (  baric*  James,  lawyer,  b,  in  Antrim,

N.  II..  II".  '..  1811  ;  «1.  in  v.

II. waa  graduated  at Dartmouth  h
studied  law.  and  in  \xu  formed  a  partnership  with
P  AbU>t, of Nashua,  N.  II..  which was  con-

tinual through  his  life. He  was  count)  solicitor
1 1,  it  member  of  the  commission  to  re\  ise

i  1 1  n  mnsfalnt  Itstlttf  f"  1841  "'-'.  travelled  iii
Kgypt  in  1846,  and  in  the  Weal  Indies  the  follow-
ing year. Willi the  Rev.  Samuel  Osgood  In m-

pUeu  "  The  N« »a  Hampshire  Book.  Speciinena  of  it*

1  11.'  was  the  author  of

iv  ..f Dunstable"  [\H4(\),  and  the  "Town

onoord,  1H4:{>.

POX,  Ebeneser,  patriot,  b.  in  East Roxbury,

Haas.,  in  l?M;  <i.  there  in  1848. He  served tot

ears  as  a  seaman,  resided  in  his  native  town


f r« «m  l>l  till  18117,  and  was  i>ost master  of  Boston
'(». lie  wrot.-  the  ••  Revolutionary  Ad\»-n-


was  im»si

e "  RcVi
tam  of  Klwile/.er  Fox" (Boston, 1848).

I  OX,  George,  founder  of  the  society  of  Friends,

1 1.  at  Drayton-in-the-elay.  now  called  Fenny  Dray-
tou,  Leicestershire.  England,  in  .Inly.  1084;  d.  in
London,  18  Jan.,  1091.  Bis  father,  Christopher  Fox,

was  a  weaver.  At  an  early  age  the  DO}  was  placed
nli  a  shoemaker  who  also  dealt  in  wool,  and  Fox

was  employed  by  him  for  some  time  as  a  shepherd.

He  kept  aloof  from
the  other  work-
men, and  medi-
tated much  on
Scripture  topics,
gradually  form-
ing the  doctrines
which  he  after-
ward preached.
Winn  alxnit  nine-
teen  he  gave up

his  occupation,  fol"

some  years  lived  a
wandering  life  in
woods  and  solitary
places, practising
extreme self -de-
nial, and  at  the  age
of  twentj  thraoan
I  m  a  red  as  a  preacn-
er at Manches-
ter. The  populace
•rowded  to  hear  him.  and  he  was  arrested  ami  im-
irisoned  as  a  disturlnr  of  the  peace. When  re-
tted, he  proceeded  to  travel  through Filmland,
preaching  his  doctrines  and  making  many  converts.
Ie  was  many  times  imprisoned,  usually  for  rates*
ig  to  make  oath  or  to  pay  tithes,  and  in  l668-,6  was
•untied  in  different  prisons  about  three  vears. The
erm  (Quakers  is  said  to  have  been  applied  to  his  fol-
ajen  for  the  first  time  at  Derby  in  1(>T>0, in  conse-
'f  his  telling  .Justice  Bennet  to  "quake  at
word  of  the  Lord." In 1069  he  married  the
ridow  of  a  Welsh  judge  who  had  often  befriended
lim.and  whose  wife  and  daughters  had  beoOfM  be*
i-veis  in  his  teachings, In  1 «» 7 1  be  sailed for  the
trl»adoes,  where  many  joined  his  society. While
this  place  he  drew  up  a  pa|>er  setting  forth  the
lief  of  the Fri.ii. Is  ;1s  to  the  fundamental  doo
les  of  Christianity. He  then  visited  the  colonics
Maryland,  New  Jersey,  and  New  Kngland.  ad-
vancing his  views  wherever  he  went. A  large  oak
Flushing,  Long  Island,  under  which  he  preached
ire,  and  which  was  preserved  as  an
il  monument,  wits  destroyed  by  lire  in  Oct o-
ifter  preaching  again  in  England,  lb>!-
i'l.  and  Germany,  he  Anally, s  few  vears  before  his
established  himself  m London. His  pul>-


d  works,  containing  his  journal,  correspond-
.iixl  all  hisdoctrina]  writing,  an-  numerous
and  curious.  They  were  partially  collected  in  three
volumes  folio  (London.  1604  17061  An  edition  in
eight  <Hta\o  volumes  was  published  in  Philadelphia
iii  IS  i  full  account  of  his  various  wrn

and  publications, sec  Joseph  Smith's"  ( "atalogue  of
Friends'  Books."  vol.  1..  pp.  till  C,',)~.

I  OX,  Qeorge  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Hallston

Sj.a.  V  V..  BOet,  1648.  lb-  was  graduated  at  the
I  diversity  of  Rochester  in  1W7.  and  two  years
afterward received  the  degree  of  M.  I), from  the

I'niversity  of  Pennsylvania, During  1870-1  he

was  a  student  of  medicine  in  the  universities  of
Berlin,  Vienna,  Paris,  and  London,  and  in  1N?4  ha
liegan  practice  in  New  York  city,  and  a  year  later
U'cainc  surgeon  t<»  the  New  York  diepenesry.  Ib-
was  appointed  clinical  professor  of  diseases  of  the
skin  in  the  Woman's  medical  college  of  the
York  infirmary  in  1*77.  and  clinical  professor  of
dermatology  at  Starling  medical  college  of  <olum-
1'iis.  Ohio,  in  187!).  In  1880  he  was  appointed
clinical  professor  of  diseases  of  the  skin  in  the
New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  ami
in  ins.-)  professor  of  skin  diseases  in  the  l\.st -grad-
uate medical  school  in  the  same  city.  I>r.  Fox  has
Im-.mi  unusually  successful  in  the  adaptation  of  new
photographic  processes  to  the  illustration  of  medi-
cal works,  and  has  published  "  Photographic  Illus-
trations of  Skin  Diseases  "(New  York,  lsxo  :  -Jd  d..
1886);  "Photographic  Illustrations  of  Cutaneous
Syphilis"  (1KN1):  "Illustrated  Medicine  and  Sur-
gcrv"(lKs2-'3);  and"  Flectp.lysis  in  the  Removal
of  Buperfiooni  Hair,  etc."  (Detroit  1887).

FOX,  (icorge  L«.  actor,  b.  in  Boston,  .Mas-..  :»
July,  1825;  d.  in  Cambridge.  24  Oct.,  1877.  lb-
made  his  first  appearance  in  1K(0.  in  the  Tremont
theatre.  Boston,  as  one  of  the  children  in  the
"Hunter  of  the  Alps."  for  the  benefit  of  Charles
Keen, At  the  age  of  twenty-five  he  played  in  the

"Demon  of  the  Desert  "  at  the  National  theatre  in
New  York.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
went  M  lieutenant  of  the  8th  New  York  infantry,
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  On  M
July,  18(11,  he  left  military  life,  and  appeared  01
the  following  evening  at  the  new  Bowerv  theatre.
lie  afterward  became  manager  of  the  old  Bowery,
and  later  was  associated  with  Lingard  at  the  new
Bowery.  In  18t!7-'8  he  was  stage  manager  of  the
Olympic,  and  made  an  immediate  success  in  the
part  of  the  clown  in  the  pantomime  "Iluinpty-
Dumptv."  During  the  season  of  1x70  he  was  play-
ing at  Booth's  theatre  in  New  York  city,  when  he
was  stricken  with  paralysis.  Softening  of  the  brain
followed,  and  he  emlcd'his  days  in  an  asylum. — His
brother.  Charles  Kenible,  actor,  b.  in  Boston,
...  IS  Aug..  1888;  d.  17.bin..  1878, went  on  the
stage  at  the  age  of  six  vears.  and  played  the  child
in  tin-  M Carpenter  Of  Rouen"  at  the  old  Kagle
theatre  in  Boston.  His  first  appearance  in  NYw
York  was  made  at  the  old  National  theatre,  18
.lulv,  1858,  afl  Cute  in  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  In
1868  be  was  a  member  Of  the  company  at  the  old
Bowery,  and  in  1859  was  engaged  at  the  new
Bowery.  He  afterward  appeared  at  the  Olympic
in  pantomimes,  and  at  the  Eriobe  theatre  in  Boston,
l«i  .May.  1874.  in  "  Ilumpty-Dumpty  at  Home,"
that  bones  being  then  under  the  management  of
his  brother.  Charles  Kemble  Fox  was  the  author
of  the  pantomime  in  which  botfcl  brothers  won  DOpS-
laritv  and  fortune.

Fox.  BnsteTM  Vtoaa,  uvni  officer,  b,  in  Sau-

gus,  Mass.,  II  Jane,  1881  :  d.  in  New  York  cit
ii.t..  1888. He  waa  appointed  midshipman  in  the
U.S.  navy.  12  Jan.,  1868,  and  terred  on  various


320


i  ••«  >x


FOX


stations,  mi  tin-  coast  survey,  in  command  of  mail
station*,  ami  in  the  war  with  Mexico  until  10  July,
1856,  wlnn.  after  a  service  of  nineteen  years,  he  re-
signed with  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  his  commission
being  dated  the  day  previous  to  his  resignation.
After  tearing  the  navy  he  accepted  the  position  of
ajjeiit  of  the  Hay  state  woollen  mills  at  Lawrence,
Ma>s.  In  February,  lNdl.  he  was  sent  for  by  Gen.
Scotland  consulted  in  reference  to  sending  sup-
plies and  troops
to  Fort  Sumter,
but  the  expedition
was  forbidden  by
President  Buchan-
an, When  Mr.  Lin-
coln became  presi-
dent. Fox  was  sent
to  Fort  Sumter  to
communicate  with
Maj.  Anderson, and
on  his  return  was
directed  to  car-
ry out  the  plan
previously  formed.
The  plan  was  vir-
tually thwarted  by
the  withdrawal  of
one  of  the  ships
(the  "  Powhatan  \
which  was  to  have
taken  part.  The
expedition  had
not  reached  Charleston  when  the  Confederates,
notified  of  its  coming,  opened  fire  on  Fort  Sumter,
and  the  only  thing  accomplished  was  the  bring-
ing away  of  Maj.  Anderson  and  his  command  after
the  surrender.  After  communications  with  Wash-
ington had  been  cut  off,  Fox  applied  to  William
II.  Aspinwall  and  William  B.  Astor,  who  fitted
out.  the  steamer  "  Yankee,"  of  which  he  was  ap-

gointed  acting  captain,  and  in  which  he  sailed  for
hesapeake  bav.  He  was  at  this  time  appointed
by  President  Lincoln  to  the  post  of  assistant  secre-
tary of  the  navy,  which  he  held  until  the  end  of  the
war.  His  services  in  this  position  were  extremely
valuable,  and  a  member  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  cabinet
once  spoke  of  him  as  follows :  "  Fox  was  the  really
able  man  of  the  administration.  He  planned  the
capture  of  New  Orleans,  the  opening  of  the  Missis-
sippi, and  in  general  the  operations  of  the  navy,
lie  had  all  the  responsibility  of  removing  the  super-
annuated and  inefficient  men  he  found  in  charge,
had  the  honor  of  selecting  Farragut,  and  was  often
consulted  by  Gen.  Grant.  He  performed  all  his
duties  with  an  eye  only  to  the  requirements  of  the
hour,  and  with  no  view  to  the  advancement  of  any
interest  of  his  own."  He  was  an  able  assistant  to
Sec.  Welles,  whose  administration  of  the  navy  de-
partment owed  to  him  much  of  its  success.  Soon
after  the  close  of  the  war  Capt.  Fox  was  sent  on  a
special  mission  to  Russia  to  convey  to  the  czar,
Alexander  II.,  the  congratulations  of  the  U.  S.
congress  on  his  escape  from  assassination.  The
voyage  was  made  on  the  "  Miantonomoh,"  the  first
monitor  to  cross  the  Atlantic.  It  is  said  that  Capt.
Fox  might  have  obtained  from  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment an  admiral's  commission  had  he  not  refused
to  ask  for  it.  One  result  of  his  visit  to  Russia  was
the  purchase  of  Alaska  by  the  U.  S.  government.
In  the  negotiations  concerning  this  purchase  Capt.
Fox  took  an  active  interest.  He  afterward  became
manager  of  the  Middlesex  mills,  and  a  partner  wit  h
E.  R.  Mudge,  Sawyer  &  Co.,  where  he  remained  sev-
eral years.  See  Joseph  F.  Loubat's  "  Narrative  of
Fox's  Mission  to  Russia  in  1866  "  (New  York,  1873).


FOX,  Henry  Stephen.  British  diplomatist,  d.
in  Washington.  I).  ('..  13  Oct.,  1846.  He  was  the
son  of  Gen.  Henry  Fox,  and  nephew  to  Charles
.lames  Pox,  the  British  itetftimun  He  wai  the  lint
iiiini-ter  plenipotentiary  of  Great  Britain  to  BuenOf
Ayres,  was  afterward  transferred  to  Rio  de  .Janeiro,
and  thence  to  the  United  States  in  1886.  I  ]
ducted  the  difficult  negotiation  growing  out  of
the  burning  of  the  steamer  "Caroline,"  the  case  of
McLeod,  and  other  disputes  that  were  caused  by
the  Canadian  rebellion  of  1837,  which  he  brought
to  a  happy  conclusion,  preserving  the  friendly  re-
lations of  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.

FOX,  Luke,  English  navigator,  b.  about  1585;
d.  after  1635.  He  was  a  seaman  from  his  youth,
and  his  thoughts  were  early  turned  toward  the  dis-
covery of  a  northwest  passage,  which  he  continued
to  believe  practicable  to  the  end  of  his  life,  not-
withstanding his  ill  success.  Having  procured  a
vessel  from  Charles  I.,  furnished  with  whatever
was  necessary  for  the  enterprise,  he  left  Deptford,
5  May,  1631,  arriving  at  Hudson's  bay  on  2'2  June
following.  During  the  exploration  of  this  bay  he
discovered,  on  27  July,  an  island,  which  he  named
"Sir  Thomas  Rowe's  Welcome,"  and  named  the
cape  which  bounded  its  northern  extremity  "  Wos-
tenholme's  Ultima  Vale."  Proceeding  northward,
he  discovered  and  named  various  points  situated
in  the  large  island  since  known  as  Cumberland
island,  but,  despairing  of  penetrating  the  polar  sea
by  Hudson's  bay,  he  determined  to  return,  and  ar-
rived in  the  Downs  on  21  Oct.  He  published  an
account  of  his  voyage  (London,  1635).

FOX,  Margaret,  spiritualist,  b.  in  1836.  She
and  her  sister  Katharine  (b.  1839)  were  the  young-
est children  of  John  D.  Fox,  of  Hydeville,  Wayne
co.,  N.  Y.  When  Margaret  was  about  twelve  years
old  the  family  were  startled  by  mysterious  rap-
pings  heard  nightly  on  the  floor  of  one  of  the  bed-
rooms. All  endeavors  to  trace  them  to  any  physi-
cal source  proved  unavailing.  On  the  night  of  31
March,  when  the  raps  occurred,  Kate  Fox  imitated
them  by  snapping  her  fingers,  and  the  raps  re-
sponded by  the  same  number  of  sounds.  The  ages
of  different  members  of  the  family  were  asked,  and
the  answer  in  every  instance  given  correctly — a
knock  for  each  year.  Various  experiments  were
made,  but  the  occult  power  refused  to  act  save  in
the  presence  of  the  two  sisters.  The  family  re-
moved to  Rochester,  and  the  raps  followed,  while
heavy  bodies  were  also  moved,  without  appreciable
agency.  In  November,  1849,  the  sisters  appeared
in  a  public  hall,  when  the  same  phenomena  were
freely  manifested,  and  subjected  to  tests.  Com-
mittees reported  that  they  were  unable  to  trace
the  sounds  to  any  mundane  agency.  In  May,  1850,
the  two  girls  went  to  New  York  city,  the  manifes-
tations became  the  subject  of  public  discussion,
and  "mediums"  sprang  up  all  over  the  country.
Men  of  learning  followed  in  the  train  with  the
ignorant.  The  elder  of  the  sisters  was  dissuaded
from  following  the  "spirit  mediumship"  by  Dr.
Kane,  the  Arctic  explorer,  previous  to  his  expedi-
tion to  the  north  in  1853.  During  his  absence  her
education  was  provided  for  by  his  arrangement  and
at  his  expense.  On  his  return  in  1865  she  asserted
that  a  marriage  had  taken  place, and, although  this
was  denied  by  his  relatives,  she  continued  to  bear
his  name  after  his  death.  "  The  Love  Life  of  Dr.
Kane"  (New  York,  1865),  containing  letters  and  fac-
similes, waspublished  in  proof  of  her  claim.  Katha-
rine married  an  English  barrister  named  Jem-kin.
In  1888,  Margaret  appeared  in  New  York  city,  in  a
public  exposure  of  her  pretended  "manifestations,*
in  which  she  showed  how  they  were  produced.


fraHCI


521


|t>\ M.u» II.  "iirn,  actress,  h.  in Hartford,

Cotlll., Ill 184ft. II<T IllJliflfll llllllli' Was II

tlr  her  first  appearance  OB  tin-  llagl  ul the

. -t - 1 1 1 1 1  in  Troy,  N.  V..  and  afterward  ai>-
peared  Ht  [jaura  arictiea  in  Nea

tarried  Charles K. Fox, the  conn dian.  hut
w|Mimt.cl from him,  and  aUtTWUd man

Burnham,  >.f  New  York  city,  and  retired  fr>>m  tin-
stage.  She  ha*  written  many  poem  <>f  merit,  and
dramatizes  I several  works, which  have  been  suc-


cessfully produced  <>n  the  stage

I  o\.  Thomas  Bailer,  clergyman,  l>.  in  Boston,
Mass..  in 1808; d.  in Dorchester,  Mass.,  in lnTii.


t  as  graduated  at Harvard  in I8M»  and  at the
•ridgo divinity-school in 1N31,  and became

K  tor  of  the  first  raligknis  tuoiatj of  Hewbarypoft,
ss.,  where  he  remained  until  l'H4.r>.  He  then  re-
I  t..  Boston,  where  lie  gathered  a  congrega-
aml  established  a  church  in  Indiana  Place,
which  was  soon  afterward  merged  into  the  Church
«if  the  Disciples,  to  which  it  transferred  its  house  of
worship.  He  liegan  to  write  for  the  press  while
yet  an  undergraduate,  and  was  for  several  years  a
regular  eorres|>ondent  of  the  "  <  'hristian  Inquirer,"
<>f  N.w  York.  He  was  for  three  years  the  editor
of  tin-  -  Christian  Register"  in  Boston,  and  for  a
much  longer  period  an  assistant  editor  and  con-
tributor to  the  "Christian  Examiner,"  of  which  he
was  for  six  years  proprietor,  and  much  of  the  time
actually,  though  not  nominally,  the  editor.  He
was  for  many  years  editor  of  the  "Boston  Tran-
script," and  furnished  not  only  articles  on  topics
of  the  day.  but  many  on  subjects  of  enduring  in-
terest, together  with  numerous  book-notices  and
biographical  sketches.  His  first  book  was  a
"Sketch  of  the  Reformation,"  which  was  repub-
lished in  England  with  some  worthless  alterations.
His  other  publications  were  "The  Ministry  of
Jesus  "(Boston,  1^>7):  "The  Sunday-School  Prayer-
Book  "  i  1838);  "  Hints  for  Sunday-School  Teachers"
(1840);  "  Allegories  and  Christian  I-iessons  for  Chil-
dren "  (1S45);  "The  Acts  of  the  Apostles"  (184<i):
and  "The  School  Hvmn-Book,  for  Normal,  High,
and  Grammar  Schools"  (1850).

FOXCROFT.  George  Augustus,  humorist.  I>.
in  Boston  in  1815;  d.  13  March.  1878.  He  received
an  academic  education,  was  clerk  in  a  Boston  store
in  lX31-'t».  and  in  1*37  purchased  a  farm  in  Ded-
hain.  and  lived  on  it  till  1846.  Subsequently,  for
some  years,  he  was  a  broker  in  Boston,  out  finally
devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  journalism.
He  wrote  many  articles  for  the  daily  press  on
monetary  topics,  and  amusing  sketches  of  domestic
life  and  character,  under  the  pen-name  of  "Job
Sass."  He  may  Ix?  regarded  as  the  originator  of
what  has  been  called  "  phonetic  humor."

FOXCROFT,  Thomas,  clergyman,  l>.  In  Cam-
bridge, Mass..  •,'•»  Feb.,  1<;<»7:  d.  in  Boston.  18  June,
1  ?•">"'.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1714,  and
on  20  Nov.,  1717,  liecame  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional  church  in  Boston,  where  he  remained  till  his
death,  lie  was  learned,  devout,  and  a  good  logician,
and  was  admired  lioth  for  his  talents  and  for  the
nice  of  his  manners.  He  published  thirtv-two
•  lis.  Including  "Observations,  Historical  and
Practical,  on  the  Bis,,  and  Primitive  State  of  New
land,  a  Century  Sermon''  (1780).— His  s,,n.
u.l.  d.  J  March,  1807.  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1754,  and  was  for  twenty-eight  years  min-
■f  New  Gloucester,  Me.

I<»\l. I. imcs Clark,  educator, l>. in Great

V  II.,  l  Manh,  1841. He  was  graduated  at

Williams  in  1863,  and  in  1863 -'5  was  professor  of

in  Wesleyan  female  college,  Cin-

two  years  he  was  president  of  the


Joncsborough female college,  ami in 1867 was
chair  of  chemistry  in  l^awrenoe  uni-
versity, Uvoining in 1*7!» vice-president <>f  that
institution. Hi-  baa  published  " Tables  foi
initiation,  Description,  and  Classification  of  Miner-
als" (Chicago,  IH75);  "Chemical  Problems'
York.  is7'.ii;  and  "Handbook  of  Mineralogy*1
I  i:\ll  I  V.James  Madison, naval  ofli
in  Man  land.  «5  Mav.  1*<K»;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,

»'<>  N-pt..  is7  7. lb-  entered  the  C  s.  n,v.
midshipman,  1  May.  In-jn.  became  peered  mldahip-

maii  in  1888,  lieutenant  in  ISM,  commauder  in
1881,  captain in IMS,  Msf  ■  WlWalnni in ISTSl

Il< served ill  the  naval battery  before  Vera  |
ami  com  mam  led  the  steamer  "  Quaki  r  City."  of  the
South Atlantic blockading  squadron,  in 1881
This  v.  ruck  by  a  shell  and  partially  dis-

abled in  an  attack  by  Confederate  rams  off  t  harles-
ton,  31  Jan..  1H»>3.  He  commanded  the  "  Tusca-
rora"  in  l>oth  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  the
steam  sli>op  "  Saranac,"  of  the  North  Pacific  squad-
ron, in  1M(J7-'H.  He  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  League  Island  naval  station  on  30  April,  1*7<>,
and  was  retired  from  the  service,  (i  Mav,  1871.

FRALKY,  Frederick,  merchant,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa..  18  May.  1*04.  After  studying  law
for  his  own  gratification,  he  engaged  in  business.
In  ISM  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Franklin
institute,  and  was  for  many  years  its  treasurer.
He  was  elected  to  the  city  council  in  1*34.  and.  as
chairman  of  its  finance  committee  in  is:!7,  when
the  susjH'iisioii  of  neofa  payments  had  brought  the
city  to  the  verge  of  insolvency,  he  promised,  as  a
measure  of  relief,  the  issue  of  certificates  of  debt
in  small  denominations,  which  was  successfully
adopted.  In  the  same  year  he  was  elected  by  the
Whigs  to  the  state  senate.  During  his  term  of
Ml  MM  in  (iov.  Joseph  Ritner's  administration  the
trouble  known  as  the  "  Buck-shot  war"  arose,  and.
at  the  request  of  his  colleagues,  Mr.  Fraley  pre-
pared an  address  to  the  people  giving  an  account
of  it.  and  afterward  served  as  chairman  of  the
committee  of  investigation. In  1847,  on  the  oonv-

K let  inn  of  Girard  college,  he  was  elected  one  of  the
Mid  of  directors  of  the  institution,  prepared  the
plan  that  was  adopted  for  its  organization  and
management,  and  for  several  years  remained  at
the  head  of  its  direction.  During  a  vacancy  in
the  presidency  he  took  that  place  in  the  college
for  six  months.  He  was  active  in  the  movement
that  culminated  in  1854  in  the  consolidation  of  the
city  with  all  the  districts  within  the  bounds  of  the
county.  Mr.  Fraley  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Union  club,  ami  its  successor,  the  Union  League
of  Philadelphia  He  was  chosen  a  delegare  in  USB
to  the  commercial  convention  held  in  Boston  for  the
establishment  of  a  National  boatd  <»f  trade,  and  was
chosen  first  president  of  that  boatd.  and  by  unani-
mous re-election  has  continued  in  that  office  until
the  present  time  (1887).  He  was  one  of  the  most
active  promoters  and  organizers  of  the  Centen-
nial exhibition  of  l*7t»,  and  in  ISM  was  elected
treasurer  of  the  Centennial  board  of  finance.  He
has  been  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania since  ISM,  which  in  l^WO  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  I).,  and  since  1n7«.»  he  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  American  philosophical  societv.

FRANCF.  Joseph.  French  soldier,  h.  in  Fort
de  France.  Martinique,  in  17H7;  d.  then-  in  De-
cemlier.  1808.  In  018  M  entered  the  colonial
gendarmerie  of  the  island,  and  in  1834  had  at-
tained the  rank  of  colonel.  He  commanded  for
ten  years  all  the  armed  police  lore*  of  the  island.
In  JH44  he  published  "La  verite  sur  les  fails,  on
I'esc lavage  a  nu,"  which  created  a  sensation,  for  it


:&>


lKANcilEKK


FRANCIS


described  the  horrors  of  slavery  in  the  French  colo-
nics. IK- als<»  published  a  copy  of  the  reports  he
had  made  in  his  official  capacity,  in  which  In-  \  iir-
OTOUsly  Jonnunwid  slavery.  France  was  the  object
ol  daily  ovations  I > v  the  negroes,  who  hail  begun
to  -ln>w  rigM  of  discontent.  The  governor  of  the
ootonj.  becoming  alarmed,  arrest  ii  1  the  colonel  and
sent  him  to  France,  where  he  was  tried  and  sus-
pended from  his  duties.  On  his  return  to  Mar-
tinique he  found  himself  in  straitened  circum-
stances, and  a  subscription  was  raised  among  the
colored  class  to  aid  him.  When  the  revolution  of
1848  emancipated  the  slaves,  he  was  chosen  their
delegate  to  the  legislative  assembly.  He  returned
to  Martinique  in  18">2,  and  until  his  death  was  a
member  of  the  general  council  of  the  colony.  From
I860  till  1862  he  was  chief  clerk  of  the  administra-
tion, and  from  lM'.'itill  1S(>8  private  counsellor  to
the  governor.  France  is  the  author  of  "  Histoire
de  la  Guadeloupe  "  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1855);  "  Les  cor-
saires  francaisdans  les  Antilles"  (1857);  "  Histoire
de  la  flibuste"  (1860);  "  Questions  coloniales "
(1860);  and  "  Statistique  physique  et  politique  de
la  Martinique."  (1861).

FRANCIIERK,  Gabriel,  explorer,  b.  in  Mon-
treal, 3  Nov.,  1786;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  in  1856.
He  was  educated  in  Montreal,  and  trained  to  com-
mercial pursuits  by  his  father.  In  1810  he  bound
himself  lor  five  years  to  the  Pacific  fur  company,
formed  by  John  Jacob  Astor,  and  was  a  member
of  the  expedition  sent  to  develop  the  fur-trade
beyond  the  Rocky  mountains.  He  returned  to
New  York  with  several  of  his  companions  in  less
than  two  months,  and  in  September,  1810,  sailed
on  the  "Tonquin"  for  the  Columbia  river,  where
the  expedition  arrived  in  March,  1811,  after  suffer-
ing many  hardships.  Franchere  was  one  of  the
witnesses  to  t  he  transfer  of  Astoria  to  the  Northwest
company,  after  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities  be-
tween the  United  States  and  England,  and  re-
mained for  some  time  in  the  service  of  that  com-
pany, but  finally  resolved  to  return  to  Canada.  In
order  to  reach  Montreal  he  travelled  a  distance  of
5,000  miles  by  the  overland  route  in  canoes  or  on
foot.  Franchere  removed  to  Sault  Ste.  Marie  in.
1834,  and  engaged  in  the  fur-trade.  He  afterward
established  the  commercial  house  of  Franchere  and
Company  in  New  York  city.  A  large  number  of
French  Canadians  having  emigrated  to  the  United
States  after  the  rebellion  of  1837,  he  established
the  Societe  St.  Jean-Baptiste  with  the  object  of
preserving  the  religion,  language,  and  nationality
of  his  compatriots.  He  was  the  last  survivor  of
the  Astor  expedition.  He  published  "  Relation
d'un  voyage  a  la  Cote  du  Nord-Ouestde  l'Amerique
septentrionale  dans  les  annees  1810-'14  "  (1820 ;
English  translation,  edited  by  J.  V.  Huntington,
New  York,  1854).  This  was  the  first  history  of  the
Astor  expeditions,  and  the  first  work  containing
detailed  accounts  of  the  interior  of  Oregon.  It
forms  the  basis  of  Washington  Irving's  "  Astoria,"
and  supplied  Thomas  II.  Benton  with  materials
for  his  great  speech  on  the  Oregon  question.

FRANCIA,  Jos§  Caspar  Rodriguez  (fran-
the-a),  dictator  of  Paraguay,  b.  in  Asuncion  in
1737  or  1758 ;  d.  there,  20  Sept.,  1840.  He  boasted
thai  he  was  of  French  extraction,  but  his  father
is  supposed  to  have  been  born  in  Brazil,  and  to
have  emigrated  to  Paraguay.  His  mother  was  a
Spanish  creole.  He  studied  for  the  priesthood  at
the  seminary  of  his  native  city,  and  afterward  in
the  University  of  Cordova,  where  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  I).,  and  was  for  a  short  time  professor
of  theology.  He  then  practised  law,  and  was  ap-
pointed to  several  public  offices. When  the  inde-


pendence of  Paraguav  wm  declared  Francia  was
elected  secretary  of  the  revolutionary  junta,  who
wan  scarcely  able  to  read  and  write.  In  October,
1813,  the  junta  was  abolished,  and  Yegro-  and
Francia  appointed  joint  consuls  for  a  year:  but
l-'iainia  was  the  moving  spirit  of  the  government,
and  in  1814  he  was  made  dictator  for  three  years,
at  the  end  of  which  time  he  contrived  to  secure  a
re-election  for  life.  He  ruled  the  state  with  a  des-
pot ic  sway,  but  husbanded  the  national  resources
with  great  sagacity.  No  export  or  import  trade
was  allowed  without  the  dictator's  license,  and  an
exorbitant  duty  and  death  awaited  those  who  were
detected  leaving  the  country  without  his  permis-
sion. The  opponents  of  his  rule  were  either  shot
or  imprisoned.  Some  of  Francia's  prisoners  were
subjected  to  the  most  cruel  tortures,  and  his  ap-
parent delight  in  torture  gave  rise  to  the  belief
that,  like  some  of  his  brothers,  he  was  occasionally
deranged.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  generally
humane  toward  the  poor.  He  had  once  been  fond
of  gambling  and  social  and  sensual  enjoyments,
but  now  he  resided  in  the  palace  of  the"  former
Spanish  governors  in  complete  seclusion,  attended
ordy  by  four  servants.  His  barber,  a  mulatto,  was
the  principal  channel  of  his  communication  with
the  outer  world.  He  had  great  mental  powers,
which  he  cultivated  by  study  and  reading.  Be  was
especially  fond  of  the  French  literature  of  the  18th
century,  and  an  admirer  both  of  Rol>espierre  and
Napoleon.  The  anecdotes  of  his  eccentricities  were
almost  as  numerous  as  the  reports  of  his  cruelties.
Two  Swiss  surgeons,  Renger  and  Longcharap,
whom  he  detained  from  1819  to  1825,  published  an
"  Essai  Historique  sur  la  Revolution  de  Paraguay  et
le  Gouverneraent  Dictatorial  du  Docteur  Francia  "
(Paris,  1827).  Two  young  Scotchmen,  J.  P.  and
W.  P.  Robertson,  who  went  to  Paraguay  on  a
commercial  venture  and  were  expelled  by  the  dic-
tator, gave  appalling  accounts  of  his  administra-
tion in  "Letters  on  Paraguav"  (2  vols.,  London,
1838);  "Francia's  Reign  of  Terror"  (1839);  and
"  Letters  on  South  America  "  (3  vols.,  1843).

FRANCIS,  Convers,  clergyman,  b.  in  West
Cambridge,  Mass.,  9  Nov.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  7
April,  1863.  He  studied  at  Medford  academy,  and
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815.  Afterward  he
studied  theology  in  the  Cambridge  divinity-schooL
and  on  23  June,  1819,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Unitarian  church  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  where  he
remained  twenty-three  years.  In  1842  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  pulpit  eloquence  and  the  pas-
toral care  in  Harvard,  which  chair  he  continued  to
hold  to  the  end  of  his  life.  He  was  a  brother  of
Lydia  Maria  Child,  the  philanthropist  and  au-
thor. Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1837.  He  contributed  to  religious  periodicals,  and
published  "  Errors  of  Education,"  a  discourse  at
the  anniversary  of  the  Derby  academv  in  Hing-
ham  (1828):  "'Historical  Sketch  of  Watertown"
(1830);  "  Dudlean  Lecture  at  Cambridge"  (1833);
"  Life  of  Rev.  John  Eliot,  the  Apostle  to  the  In-
dians," in  the  fifth  volume  of  Sparks's  "  American
Biography"  (1836);  memoirs  of  Rev.  John  Allvn,
D.  D.,  of  Duxbury  (1836),  Dr.  Gamaliel  Bradford
(1846),  and  Judge  Davis  (1849):  and  "Life  of  Se-
bastian Rale"  (Boston,  1848).  See  William  New-
ell's  "  Memoirs  of  Convers  Francis"  ("Massachu-
setts Historical  Society's  Proceedings,  1864-'5"),
and  John  Weiss's  "  Discourse  on  the  Death  of  Con-
vers Francis"  (Boston,  1863).

FRANCIS,  James  Bicheno,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Southleigh, Oxfordshire.  England,  18  May,  im.">.
He  was  educated  at  Radley  Hall  and  Wantage
academies,  Berkshire,  and,  after  gaining  a  practical


i-i;  v


n;  \'


cJL^+4 & *$tm*~y.


rate  to  the  United
SUU*  in  April.  1888. On  hta  arrival  In-  secured

nifiit mi  the  New  York.  Providence,  and

:  railway,  in  IH-'M  w.-nt  to  Lowell  as  assistant

r  on  thi'  hydraulic  ami  Other  w<>rks  ami  in

197  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  tan  ami

lUon  Merrimack

riMT.  Ill 1H4.*| In-

was  appointed  |
of  tin-  canal  roin-
|  mi  1 1  \ .  ami  continued
in  tliat  capacity  ami
Mohief  engineer  ar>
til  be  was  retired
from  active  dutv  in
1884  At  prsjnni
(ISM?)  be  is  tli.'i-oii-
salting  engineer  in
all  Important  work
connected  with  the
hydraulic  Improve-
menti <>f Lowell.

Mr.  Francis  may  bo
regarded  as  the
founder  of  a  new  8ohiM>l  of  hydraulic  engineers.
In  gauging  the  flow  of  water,  bv  weirs  and  Bunting
Hbes,  the  volumes,  treated  by  him  have  been  un-
paralleled, ami  he  has  reduced  the  possible  error
from  the  ten  per  cent,  often  allowed  in  previous
experiments,  to  two  per  cent,  lie  was  president  of
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers  from  No-
vemlMT.  1880,  till  .January.  1888,  and.  besides,  bit
contributions  to  periodical  technical  literature.
■M  published  "Lowell  Hydraulic  Experiment!
(New  York.  1855;  enlarged  -d..  1868),  and  "The
Strength  of  Cast-iron  Pillars"  (1865).

FRANCIS,  John  Morgan,  journalist,  b.  in
Prattshurg.  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y..  6  March,  1888.
His  father.  Richard,  a  native  of  Wales,  was  a  mid-
shipman in  the  British  navy,  served  in  Admiral
Bod  man's  flag-ship,  and,  resigning  about  the  close
of  the  Revolutionary  war.  emigrated  to  the  United

and  settled  near  I'tica.  N.  Y.  The  son  was
educated  in  the  common  schools  and  in  Pratts-
burg  academy,  and  when  fourteen  years  old  was
apprenticed  to  a  printer.  In  1843  he  became  edi-
tor of  the  "Wayne  Sentinel"  at  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,
in  1845  an  editorial  writer  on  the  "  Rochester  Ad-
vertiser." and  in  1846  on  the  Troy  "Budget."  of
which  he  was  subsequently  editor  and  associate
proprietor.  After  serving  editorially  on  the  Troy
and  the  Troy  "Whig,"  he  established  the
Troy  "  Times"  in  1851.  and  has  been  its  controlling
proprietor  and  editor-in-chief  ever  since.  He  was
city  clerk  of  Troy  in  1851-'5,  and  was  a  member  of
v  York  state  constitutional  convention  of
1ST.?  's.  In  1S71  |u.  was  ap|M>inted  by  President
Grant  V.  S.  minister  to  (J  recce,  which  office  he  re-
sjgned  in  November,  is?:{.  He  was  minister  to
Portugal in 1888-^4  and  to Aii>tria-Hungarv  in

• He  mad.- the  tour  of  the  world  in  l8
I  I:  \n<  IS.  John  Wakefield,  physician,  b.  in
.rk  citv.  17  Nov..  17*!»:  died  there,  8  Feb.,

His  father  was  a  German,  who  emigrated  to
mtrv  soon  after  the  close  of  the  Revolution-
ary war. The  son  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,

l»equcntlv  entered  Columbia  in  advance  in

ml  was  graduated  in  lMOi».  He  soon  after-
Mid  began  the  study  of  mednine  in  the  office  of
I>r.  Boaeck,  whose  partner  he  was  till  1*2<>.  He
Was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1811,  at  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons.  In  1810  he  l>ecaine
associated  with  Dr.  Hosack  in  editing  the"  Ameri-
dical  and  Philoeophical  Register."  a  quar-
terly which  was  continued  for  four  years. In  1818


he  wasap|H.iiited  lecturer  in  the  institutes  of  medi-
cine ami  materia  medics  at  the  College  oi  ph\-i-
8MH  ami  surgeon*,  and  MM  afterward,  when  the
medical  faculty  of  Columbia  was  consolidated  with
that  institution,  he  was  ap|M tinted  professor  of  ma-
teria incdica  in  the  united  IkmIv.  After  delivering
one  eovfM  of  leotnres  he  sailed  for  Europe  in  l
ami  while  there  studied  under  Abeniethy.  ami
Bumed  the  acquaintance  of  the  BOOf  eminent
physicians  and  literary  men  of  the  time.  (>n  his
return  be  re-entered  on  his  duties  as  professor,  lir-t
of  the  institutes  of  medicine,  afterward  of  medical
jurisprudence,  in  1817, and  then  of  obstetric  from
1818  to  1H2(I.  In  the  latter  year  the  whole  faculty
resigned,  and  the  majority  of  them  farmed  the
Rutgers  medical  school,  with  Dr.  Francis  as  pro*
fessor  of  obstetrics  ami  forensic  medicine  for  four
-.  when  the  school  was  closed  by  the  legisla-
ture He  afterward  devoted  himself  to  the  practice
of  his  profession  ami  to  literature.  He  actively
promoted  the  interests  of  the  New  York  historical
s.m  iety,  the  New  York  Ivceum  of  natural  history,
the  woman's  hospital,  the  State  inebriate  asylum,

and  the  TvpomraphieaJ  moiety,  <>f  which  ha  was  a

memliertill  his  death.  His  taste  in  art  was  fine
and  his  judgment  correct,  and  young  painters  and
sculptors  always  found  in  him  a  friend.  He  was
the  first  presi-
dent of  the  New
York  academy
of  medicine  aft-
er its  organiza-
tion in  1H47.  and
was  elected  an
associate  of  nu-
merous medical
and  scientific  as-
sociations abroad
as  well  as  in  the
United  States.
He  was  a  fine
conversationalist
ami  was  a  so-
cial favorite.  In
t  he  was
one  of  the  edi-
tors of  the  "Med-
ical and  Phvsical

Journal."  Trinity  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  I).  in  1850.  Dr.  Francis  was  intimately  ac-
quainted with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  New
York,  and  was  looked  upon  as  an  oracle  in  matters
relating  to  his  native  city.  He  was  the  author  of
biographical  sketches  of  many  of  the  distinguished
men  of  his  time,  and  of  articles  in  medical  |>oriodi-
cals.  His  published  works  are  "  I'se  of  Mercury  "
(New  York,  1811);  "Cases  of  Morbid  Anatomy"
(1814);  "Febrile  Contagion"  (1816);  "  Notice  of
Thomas  F«ldy"(lM2:b;  "  Denman's  Practice  of  Mid-
wiferv,"  with  notes  (1825);  "Letter  on  Cholera  As-
phvxiaof  1832  "t lxi2>;  "Observations  on  the  Min-
eral Waters  of  Avon"  (1834);  "The  Anatomy  of
Drunkenness";  "Old  New  York,  or  Reminiscences
of  the  past  Sixty  Yean  "(1857;  enlarged  ed..  L888;
reprint,  with  a  memoir  by  11.  T.  Tuekerman.  1886);
and  numerous  addresses.  —  His  son.  Valentine
Mott,  physician,  b.  in  New  York  city.  25  April.  lHJi-l,
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  I'niversit  v  of  New
York  in  1888.  After  practising  jn  >,YW  York  for
several  years  he  removed  to  Newport.  R.  I.  He  was
corresixdideiit  of  an  American  newspa|H-r  while
travelling  on  the  continent  of  Furo|>e  in  1881
and  is  the  author  of  "Hospital  Hygiene"  (New-
York.  1888),  and  "Fight  for  the  l'nion."a  poem
3). — Another  son,  Samuel  Ward,  phyammn,


C&&JTZ*


.V24


FRANCIS


FRANCIS


b.  iti  New  York  city,  26  Dec.,  1885;  d.  in  Newport,
IJ.  I..  89  March.  1896,  WM  irraduated  at  Columbia
in  1887,  and  ut  the  medical  department  of  the  I 'ni-

verMty  .  >f  NVw  Y'>rk  in  lsiH).  Me  began  practice
in  New  Y<»rk  city,  but  subsequently  removed  to
Newport,  EL  I.  Ho  was  physician  in  the  New  fork
<lis|K>nsjiry  in  1860-2.  and  at  other  times  Dr.
Francis  patented  twelve  surgical  inventions,  and
published  "Mott's  Clinics"  (New  York,  1860);  a
medical  essay  on  "Water"  (1861);  "Inside  and
Out"  (1863);  "Biographical  Sketches  of  Liv-
ing New  York  Surgeons"  (1866);  "Biographical
Sketches  of  Living  New  York  Physicians"  (1*1!?);
"Life  and  Death"  (1870);  and  "Curious  Facts
Concerning  Man  and  Nature"  (1874-'5).

FRANCIS,  Joseph,  inventor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  March,  1801.  At  eleven  years  of  age  he
exhibited  a  fancy  boat  at  a  fair,  and  at  the  age  of
eighteen  received  from  the  Massachusetts  me-
chanics' institute  the  first  prize  for  a  fast  row-
boat.  He  afterward  established  a  boat-yard  in
New  York,  and  was  requested  bv  the  secretary  of
the  navy  to  go  to  Portsmouth  navy-yard  and
build  wooden  life-boats  for  the  frigate  "Santee"
and  the  line-of-battle  ship  "Alabama."  Soon
after  this  he  invented  a  portable  boat  that  could
be  taken  apart,  and  a  method  of  building  boats
over  a  frame  or  mould  with  inch-square  strips
of  cedar  nailed  edge  to  edge,  the  joining  show-
ing neither  nail-heads  or  seams,  and  requiring
no  calking.  Those  boats,  all  of  which  were  life-
boats, came  into  general  use.  His  greatest  achieve-
ments were  in  the  construction  of  life-saving  ap-
pliances. These  consisted  of  life-boats,  life-cars,

and  surf  life-boats.
Of  the  life-boats  the
first  that  he  made
was  of  wood,  and
was  called  the  "  Hy-
drogen "  life-boat.
The  interior  was
fitted  with  copper
air-tubes,  and  the
invention  proved
successful.  As  a
result  of  later  ex-
periments, the  use
of  wood  in  the
construction  of  his
boats  quickly  gave
way  to  iron,  al-
though the  use  of
iron  in  the  manu-
facture of  vessels  of
any  kind  was  prac-
tically unknown  at
that  time.  To  Mr.  Francis  may  be  conceded  the
first  use  of  iron  floating  vessels.  Another  im-
provement was  added  by  having  the  spaces  at  the
bow  and  stern  of  the  boats  made  into  reservoirs
of  air,  as  well  as  the  spaces  at  the  sides,  enabling
the  boat  to  sustain  a  great  load  in  the  heaviest  sea.
In  1838  Mr.  Francis  invented  the  life-car  by  which
to  land  people  safely  from  a  wreck.  He  began  with
experiments  on  wooden  life-boats,  and  finally,  in
1842,  invented  the  corrugated  metallic  life-car,
with  space  for  four  adults.  His  first  perfect  me-
tallic life-car  was  placed  on  the  coast  of  New  Jer-
sey, near  Long  Branch,  in  the  autumn  of  1849,  at
his  own  expense,  the  government  refusing  to  aid
him  in  any  way.  The  boat  was  not  called  into  use
until  January,  1850,  when  the  British  emigrant
vessel  "  Ayrshire "  was  wrecked  on  Squan  Beach
in  a  violent  winter  storm.  There  were  201  persons
on  board,  and  200  were  saved  by  means  of  the


fJ(9oe^eJi^M^9tccj


life-car.  The  one  loss  of  life  that  occurred  was
that  of  a  man  who  insisted  on  attempting  to  ride
through  the  surf  on  the  outside  of  the  car,  when
hie  family  were  Inside.  This  car  was  for  a  Ion k  time
preserved  in  the  museum  in  Central  par.
York,  but  on  10  July,  1885,  it  was  deposited,  a-  a
relic,  in  the  National  museum  in  Washington.
During  the  first  four  years  of  the  use  of  life-boats
(1850-3)  they  were  instrumental  in  saving  2,150
lives,  U-sides  an  immense  amount  of  valuable  cargo.
Mr.  Francis's  metallic  life  surf-boat,  invented  in
1845,  was  designed  for  riding  lightly  on  the  wildest
sea.  In  1848  Mr.  Francos  obtained  patents  in  the
United  States,  England,  France,  Germany,  and
Russia,  for  his  method  of  construct iuir  ret
corrugated  sheet-metal,  and  for  the  machinery  by
which  they  were  produced.  His  inventions'  for
the  machinery  and  for  the  application  of  the
hydraulic  press  were  adjuncts  of  the  greatest  im-
portance. Life-boats  built  on  the  principle  of  the
corrugated  sheet-metal  were  furnished  by  him  for
the  Dead  sea  and  Arctic  expeditions,  to  the  war,
navy,  and  treasury  departments,  and  to  several
European  governments.  Mr.  Francis  has  extended
the  application  of  corrugated  metal  to  the  build-
ing of  steamers,  floating  docks,  harbor-buoys,  and
pontoon-wagons,  and  his  inventions  have  been
adopted  by  every  civilized  country.  Among  his
many  other  inventions  are  a  military  hood  made
of  cloth  for  the  protection  of  sentinels  in  a  storm,
a  circular  yacht,  and  a  double-joint  row-lock.
He  has  received  numerous  medals  and  decora-
tions from  European  sovereigns.  The  order  of
knighthood  of  St.  Stanislaus,  with  its  medal  and
diploma,  was  conferred  upon  him  in  1861,  and  on
4  Feb.,  1856,  he  received  a  gold  snuff-box,  diamond-
studded,  and  valued  at  17.500  francs,  from  Napo-
leon III.  He  has  also  received  a  large  number  of
medals  from  the  American  and  other  institutes,
a  medal  and  diploma  from  the  European  shipwreck
society  for  all  nations,  in  France  in  1842,  and  a
second  in  England,  designated  "  Benefactor,"  by
the  Imperial  Royal  European  society,  on  1  July,
1842.  In  addition  to  these  honors  from  foreign
countries,  congress,  in  March,  1887,  a  few  hours
before  its  adjournment,  passed  a  joint  resolution
thanking  him  for  his  "life-long  services  to  hu-
manity and  to  his  country,"  ana  authorizing  the
president  to  present  him  with  a  gold  medal.  Presi-
dent Cleveland  withheld  his  signature  from  the
bill  until  the  specified  time  after  the  adjournment ;
but  another  resolution  requiring  the  medal  to  be
struck  was  passed  in  September,  1888.  He  has  writ-
ten many  articles  for  periodicals,  and  has  published
"  Life-Saving  Appliances  "  (New  York,  1885).

FRANCIS,  Tench,  lawver,  b.  probablv  in  Ire-
land; d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  Aug.,  175s.  lb-
was  the  son  of  John  Francis,  dean  of  Sirmore  and
rector  of  St.  Mary's  church,  Dublin.  His  brother,
Richard  Francis,  was  an  eminent  lawyer,  and  author
of  ••  Maxims  in  Equity," and  another  brother,  Rev.
Philip  Francis,  was  the  father  of  Sir  Philip  Francis.
the  reputed  author  of  the  "  Junius  Letters."  Tench
was  educated  in  England,  and  prepared  for  the  bar,
after  which  he  emigrated  to  Talbot  county,  McL,
and  became  attorney  for  Lord  Baltimore,  in  Kent
He  was  clerk  of  Talbot  county  from  1726  till  1734.
and  in  1734  represented  hiscounty  in  the  Marvland
legislature.  He  subsequently  settled  in  Philadel-
phia, was  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania  from
1741  till  1755,  and  recorder  of  Philadelphia  from
1750  till  1755.  He  was  an  eminent  lawyer,  and.
according  to  Franklin's  "Gazette,"  24  Aug..  178a
served  in  his  several  offices  "with  the  i
reputation."  —  His  son,  Tench,  merchant,  b.  in


I  i;  \\.  is


fra:


096


support  <>f  tlir  Revolutionary  irnr,
i.  Tnrbutt.  soldier.  I>.  in  1740;  d.  in


v,  Talbot  .....  Mil.,  iti 1T:««» ;  .1.  m Philadcl-

:  M  agent  fur

a  family  in  connection  with  their  proprie-

the  first  cashier  of  the

of  North  America,"  which  office  he  li«'l«l

his  .Until. Hf  is  Miiil  t<>  Iuim-  contributed
'•<  fur  iln"

•hir  eon,  tnrbutt.
1797.  was  named  for  his  mother,  h  Mis*  Tnrbutt.
tin-  war  of  the  Revolution  be  was  a  lieu-
iii  tin-  British  army,  luit  afterward  fought
with  hi-  countrymen  for  indc|>endenee,  rose  to  the
rank  of  colonel,  ami  his  correspondence  with  Sir
Philip  Kraiiri-  shows  that  in  1 770  CoL  Frami-
had  purchased  f..r  his  cousin,  Sir  Philip,  a  tract  of
1,000  acres  in  Maryland,  for  which  110  or  IM
guineas  were  to  be  paid.  Hi-  was  also  anxioii-
that  hi-  relative  should  secure  from  the  Knglish
government  a  grant  of  land,  which  be  thought
might  Ih-  purchased  from  the  Indians  fur  from
2,000  to  :t,ixMi  guineas,  Thie  tract,  which  he  do*
scrilx'd  as  "a  prodigious  fine  country. "  was  north
of  the  <»hio  ami  between  the  Scioto  sad  theWa-
■Mh.  The  colonel  also  a-ki-d  his  oocieanondoni  to
"obtain  for  us  the  carrving-plaee  of  Niagara"  and
"a  grant  of  the  Salt  Lake,  and  the  land  for  one
mile  around  it.  in  the  OnondagO  country."  To
this  Sir  Philip  replied  that, although  he  had  really
very  little  ••  interest  "  (influence)  with  the  authori-
ties, be  would  take  the  matter  into  consideration.
Alx.ut  a  year  afterward,  it  appears.  ( ioL  Francis
had  succeeded  to  some  extent  in  improving  his
own  prospects,  as  Sir  Philip  writes  to  a  relative,
under  date  of  1  May,  1771 :  "  If  you  have  not  made
a  thousand  compliments  to  Tubby  Francis  for  me
upon  his  change  of  condition,  you  deserve  to  be
hanged.  I  have  used  that  honest  fellow  infamous-
ly; out  really,  between  ourselves,  I  cannot  prevail
upon  myself  to  talk  to  a  man  who  makes  so  light
of  getting  large  provinces  into  his  possession."
Subsequently,  when  Sir  Philip  had  become  a  mem-
ber of  the  "  new  council "  of  India,  he  again  wrote
to  CoL  Turbott,  saying:  "At  present  I  am  bound
to  the  Ganges;  but  who  knows  whether  I  may
not  end  my  days  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio?  it
gives  me  great  comfort  to  reflect  that  I  have
relatives  who  are  honest  fellows  in  almost  every
part  of  the  world.  In  America  the  name  of  Fran-
cis flourishes.  I  don't  like  to  think  of  the  quan-
tity of  -alt  water  between  us.  If  it  were  claret.  1
would  drink  my  way  to  America. "—John  Brown,
grandson  of  the  younger  Tench,  senator,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  31  Slav,  1791  ;  d.  in  Spring
Green,  in  Warwick,  R.  I.."  9  Aug.,  1HI>4.  lost  his
father  in  infancy,  and  was  adopted  by  his  maternal
grandfather,  Nicholas  Brown.  Be  was  educated  in
the  schools  of  Providence  and  in  Brown  univer-
sity, where  he  was  graduated  in  1808.  He  spent  a
year  in  the  counting-house  of  his  kinsmen,  Messrs.
Brown  &  Ives,  of  Providence,  and  subsequently
attended  the  law-school  at  Litchfield.  Conn,  iii
1**21  be  went  to  live  at  Spring  Green,  a  family  es-
tate on  the  sin. n-s  of  Harragansett  bay.  In  the
same  year  he  «as  elected  to  the  legislature  from
the  town  of  Warwick. and  was  annually  chosen  till
1820.  when  he  resigned.  In  lKJi  he  was  a  member
•  mite,  and  in  the  spring  of  lv
rnor  by  a  coalition  of  the  flnti  masons

e  Democrata Be  had  bean  I  Federalist  ami
nal  Republican,  but  after  this  he  was  known

■  ntocrat. He  was  re-elected  govern.':
year  till  1888,  when  the  state  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  opposite  party. In  the  free-suffrage  trou-
bles of  1842  he  again  appeared  in  the  state  senate
as  a  memU-r  of  the  "  I^aw  and  Order'*  party,  and


in  l«44  he  was  chosen  by  the  legislature  to  fill  the
i.-v  in  the  1  il  bv  the  reaig.

nation  of  William  Sprague.  lie  held  a  m-nt  in
that  body  during  the  remainder  of  the  BMsion  then
[•ending,  and  the  whole  of  the  -Imrt  MMM!  ••'
-in •••ceding  winter,  hi-  time  expiring  I  Man  li,  II
wils  siili-»i|ueiitl\,  for  eight  ..r  ti in.-  year-,  tenia  in
the  state  senate,  and  continued  to  wield  an  iiiijM.r-
tant  influence  in  the  |M.litic-  of  Rhode  I  -Intnl.  In
1856  he  declined  a  re-election  and  withdrew  from
public  life. From 1888  till 1887 ha  was  a  trustee

of  Brown  unlfaraity,  and  from  ik41  till  ikvi  held

the  office  of  chanceflor  in  that  l>ody.

FRANCIS*  0.  Peter,  soldier,  b.  in  17U1  :  d.  in
Richmond,  Va..  in  lKfcJ.  His  origin  i-  obeoura,  but
it  is  -uji|ioM'd  that  he  was  ki<lnap[M-d  from  Portu-
gal and  taken  to  Inland.  He  re-.lved  to  come  to
America,  and  indent ured  himself  ton  sca-caj>tain.
On  arriving  in  City  Point,  near  Petersburg.  \  a.,  he
was  taken  to  the  poor-houne,  where  he  remained
until  he  was  Itound  to  .ludge  Anthony  Winston,  of
Buckingham  county,  on  whose  estate  he  labored
until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.  He  ob-
tained permission  from  his  ina-ter  t<>  enlist  in  the
Continental  army  in  1777,  and  served  with  La-
favitte  at  the  battles  of  Brandywinc,  Yorktown,
Monmouth,  where  he  was  wounded  by  a  musket-
ball,  Oowpene,  and  Stony  Point,  where  he  was  sec-
ond to  enter  the  fortress,  and  received  a  bayonet -
wound.  After  serving  in  skirmishes  under  CoL
Morgan,  he  volunteered  under  Col.  Mavo,  of  Pow-
hatan, and  was  present  at  (Jen.  Gates's  defeat  at
Camden.  Here  he  saved  the  life  of  Col.  Mavo,
and  that  officer  afterward  presented  him  with  l.OOO
acres  of  land  on  Richland  creek,  Ky.  On  hearing
of  Cornwallis's  march  through  the  south  he  vol-
unteered under  Col.  Watkins,  and  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Guilford,  N.  C.  His  bravery  was  equal
to  his  strength,  which  was  herculean.  He  could
shoulder  a  cannon  weighing  1,000  pounds,  and  the
blade  of  his  sword  was  five  feet  in  length.  Many
anecdotes  are  related  of  his  physical  power.  On
his  return  to  Virginia  in  17*1,  he  stopped  at  a  tav-
ern in  Amelia,  and  was  made  prisoner  by  a  detach-
ment of  Tarleton's  dragoons,  who  were  stationed
there.  While  one  of  the  Tories  was  stooping  to
take  off  his  silver  shoe-buckles,  Francisco  drew  his
sword  and  cleft  the  man  through  the  head.  He
frightened  the  rest  of  the  party  and  made  his  es-
cape, although  Tarleton's  corps  was  in  full  view.
This  exploit  was  illustrated  in  an  engraving  which
was  a  favorite  ornament  of  that  period,  and  was
published  by  James  Wil.-t.r.  of  Pennsylvania
(1814).  On  some  occasions  he  was  more  SDOOaaafs]
in  restoring  public  order  than  the  civil  authorities.
Through  the  influence  of  Charles  Yancey  he  was
appointed  sergeant-at-anns  in  the  Virginia  house
of  delegates,  which  oflicc  he  held  until  his  death.
John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke,  brought  the  attention
of  congress  to  Francisco's  military  career,  and  ap-
plied for  a  pension  for  him.

FRANCO.  Bernardo  de  Sonsa  (frank  -..).  Vis-
count. Brazilian  statesman,  b.  in  Pani.  18  .lune.
1805;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  !»  May,  1S7.*>.  He  studied
at  Para.  In  \*'2'A.  being  involved  in  a  conspiracy.
he  was  sent  with  887  others  to  [iehon,  but  was
set  at  Hborty  in  188*4  returned  to  Brazil,  and
was  graduated  in  law  at  Olinda  academy  in  1835.
He  had  already  distinguished  himself  as  editor  of
the  ••  Voz  do  Beberibe"  and  of  the  "  Diario  de
Pernambuco."  In  1839  he  was  appointed  pre-i-
dent  of  the  province  of  Para,  and  contributed
ly  to  its  improvement.  In  1844  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  province  of  Alagoas,  and  soon  after-
ward was  attacked  by  the  rebel  Vicente  Fcrtvira


.vjt;


FRANCO


FRANKLIN


and  his  troops.  Franco  defended  himself  as  well
as  he  cDiild,  bat]  lacking  tin-  means  necessary  to
continue  tin-  defence,  be  retired  on  board  a  man-
of-war.  He  had  belonged  to  the  Conservative
party,  lint  on  account  01  ii^  corruption  went  over
to  the  other.  He  was  a  mcmltcr  of  all  the  legisla-
tures, and  was  one  of  the  most  eloquent  orator-  (>f
South  America.  From  II  May  till  29  Sept.  he  was
minister  of  foreign  relations.  On  July  5,  1855,  the
emj>eror  appointed  him  senator  for  Para,  and  on  4
May.  1857,  he  became  secretary  of  the  treasury,  and
in  isiij  counsellor  of  state.  In  1866  Franco  was
appointed  president  of  the  province  of  Rio  Janeiro,
which  had  been  impoverished  by  the  war  with
Paraguay,  but  soon  improved.  In  1865  he  re-
signed the  presidency  of  Rio  Janeiro,  as  this  office
WBl  incompatible  with  his  duties  as  counsellor  of
state.  On  28  Sept..  1871,  emancipation,  for  which
Franco  and  other  distinguished  Brazilians  had
labored  so  hard,  was  decreed.  In  1872  he  was
made  Viscount  Franco  by  the  emperor.

FRANCO,  Francisco  de  Mello,  Brazilian  phy-
sician, b.  in  Paracatu,  7  Sept.,  1757;  d.  in  Ubatuba,
22  July,  1X23.  He  studied  medicine  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Coimbra,  Portugal,  where  also  he  culti-
vated poetry  and  published  "Reino  da  Estupidez"
(1778),  which  was  condemned  by  the  Inquisition,
and  the  author  was  imprisoned  m  1779.  In  1785,
after  his  release,  he  was  graduated  as  doctor,  and
settled  in  Lisbon,  where  in  1795,  he  became  court
physician.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Geo-
graphical academy.  In  1817  he  accompanied  to
Brazil  the  Archduchess  Mary  Leopoldine,  affianced
bride  of  the  prince-royal  Dom  Pedro.  When,  in
1820,  the  constitutional  struggle  in  Portugal  be-
gan, Franco  by  his  writings  encouraged  the  Lib-
eral party,  and  he  also  declared  for  the  demo-
cratic ideas  when  the  same  movement  occurred  in
Brazil  in  1821.  The  king  immediately  dismissed
Franco  from  service  at  the  palace,  and  he  was
reduced  to  comparative  poverty.  He  published
"  Flora  portugueza  e"  brazueira  "  (12  vols.) ;  "  Tra-
tado  de  educacao  physica  dos  meninos  para  uso  da
nacao  portugueza  ;  "  Ensaio  sobre  as  febres,  com
observacoes  acerca  da  topographica  e  clima  do  Rio
Janeiro  " ;  "  Elementos  de  Hygiene  " ;  and  a  vol-
ume of  poems  (1777).

FRANCO  1)E  SA,  Joaqnim  (fran'-co-da-sah),
Brazilian  magistrate,  b.  in  Alcantara,  Brazil,  25
Dec.,  1807;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  10  Nov.,  1851.
He  studied  in  Portugal,  but  in  1828  returned  to
Brazil,  and  was  graduated  in  law  at  the  Academy
of  Olinda  in  1832.  In  1833  he  became  public  prose-
cutor at  Maranhao,  next  year  judge  of  the  dis-
trict court  for  Sao  Luiz,  and  afterward  held  many
S laces  of  public  trust.  In  1841  he  was  elected  a
eputy  in  the  national  parliament,  and  in  1844
was  appointed  president  of  the  province  of  Para-
hyba,  where  he  introduced  reforms.  When  his  na-
tive province,  Maranhao,  became  a  prey  to  hostile
parties,  Franco  was  called  to  the  presidency,  27  Oct.,
1846.  He  formed  the  "  Liga-liberal-raaranheuse  "
of  the  best  elements  of  the  opposing  parties,  and
this  society  soon  became  his  firm  supporter  in  the
preservation  of  public  order,  which  in  a  few  months
was  fully  restored.  Franco  gave  a  great  impulse
to  public  instruction,  establishing  many  schools,
and  under  his  administration  the  first  newspaper,
"  O  Progreso,"  was  published  in  the  province.  In
less  than  two  years  he  made  the  province  one  of
the  most  prosperous  and  flourishing  of  the  empire.
He  resigned  the  presidency,  1  Oct.,  1848,  ana  re-
tired to  private  life.

FRANK  LAND,  Sir  Charles  Henry,  bait.,  col-
lector of  the  port  of  Boston,  b.  in  Bengal,  India,


10  May,  1716;  d.  in  Bath,  England.  11  Jan..  17f,s.
He  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Oliver  (n.inwcll,
and  his  father  was  governor  of  the  Hast  India  com-
pany's factory  in  Bengal.  The  intellectual  attain-
ments of  the  son  won  him  such  friend-  aa  Boraoa
Walpole.  Henry  Fielding,  and  Lord  Chesterfield,
whom  he  was  said  to  resemble  both  in  manm
appearance.  On  the  death  of  his  father  in  Bengal
in  1738,  he  inherited  a  large  fortune,  and  w,v  of-
fered the  governorship  of  Massachusetts  and  the
collectorship  of  the  port  of  Boston.  He  accepted
the  latter  office,  and  in  1741  came  to  Boston  with
Sir  William  Shirley,  who  was  given  the  former.
Frankland  identified  himself  with  King's  Chapel
under  Roger  Price,  and  contributed  toward  its
support.  While  visiting  Marblehead,  which  was
authorized  to  erect  a  fortification  for  the  defence
of  its  harbor,  Frankland  became  interested  in  a  girl
of  about  sixteen  who  was  scrubbing  the  tavern
floor.  Although  meanly  clad,  Agnes  Surriage  pos-
sessed great  beauty  and  wit,  and  Frankland  sought
permission  of  her  parents  to  have  her  educated.
On  the  death  of  his  uncle,  Sir  Thomas  Frankland,
in  1746,  he  succeeded  to  the  baronetcy.  In  1751
he  bought  a  large  estate  in  Hopkinton,  Mass..  where
he  built  a  fine  mansion,  and  furnished  it  in  costly
style.  The  grounds  were  embellished  with  walks,
fruit-trees,  rare  shrubbery,  and  hedges  of  box,
which  in  1862  had  attained  a  height  of  ten  feet.
In  1752  he  retired  to  this  estate  with  Agnes  Surri-
age, and  lived  in  great  luxury,  following  the  chase
and  indulging  in  various  sports.  The  will  of  his
uncle  being  contested,  he  returned  to  England  in
1754,  where  he  attempted  to  introduce  Agnes  Sur-
riage to  his  relatives,  one  of  whom  had  married  the
Earl  of  Chichester.  She  was  treated  with  disdain.
and  as  soon  as  his  affairs  were  settled,  Frankland
left  England  for  a  continental  tour.  For  some  time
he  resided  in  Lisbon.  On  the  morning  of  the  great
earthquake,  1  Nov.,  1755,  he  attended  high  mass,
and  was  buried  under  the  ruins  of  the  house  of
Francesco  de  Ribeiro,  which  fell  as  he  rode  past.
He  was  rescued  by  Agnes  Surriage,  whom  he
shortly  afterward  married.  He  then  returned  to
England,  where,  as  Lady  Frankland,  Agnes  was
cordially  received  by  his  relatives.  In  1766  he
returned  to  Boston,  where  Lady  Frankland  was
received  into  the  best  society  of  that  city.  Frank-
land  bought  the  Clarke  mansion  in  Garden  court,
but  in  1757  resigned  his  office  and  obtained  an
appointment  as  consul-general  in  Portugal.  In
1763  he  visited  Boston,  and,  after  spending  some
time  in  his  house  at  Hopkinton,  went  to  Bath,
England,  where  he  resided  till  his  death.  The  story
of  Lady  Frankland  has  been  versified  by  Oliver
W.  Holmes,  and  she  is  the  heroine  of  "Agnes  Sur-
riage," a  novel,  by  Edwin  L.  Bynner  (Boston,  1887).
See  a  "  Memoir"  by  Elias  Nason  (Albany,  1 8

FRANKLIN,  Benjamin,  statesman  and  phi-
losopher, b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1706;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  April,  1790.  (See  representa-
tion of  birthplace  on  page  531.)  His  family  bad
lived  for  at  least  three  centuries  in  the  parish
of  Ecton,  Northamptonshire,  England,  on  a  free-
hold of  about  thirty  acres.  For  several  genera-
tions the  head  of  the  family  seems  to  ha\  i
the  village  blacksmith,  the  eldest  son  being  always
bred  to  that  business.  Benjamin's  grandfather.
Thomas,  born  in  1598,  removed  late  in  life  to  Ban-
bury, in  Oxfordshire,  while  his  eldest  son,  Thomas,
remained  on  the  estate  at  Ecton.  This  Thomas
received  a  good  education,  and  became  a  scrivener.
He  came  to  be  one  of  the  most  prominent  men  in
his  county,  and  formed  a  friendship  with  tl,
of  Halifax. In  mental  characteristics  he


FRANKLIN


i  i;  WKI.IN


■


e  born©  a  strong  likeness  to  hi-*  Immortal
son,  John, was a dyer of
I lived  in Banbury. The  thil
!.  me  tune  ii  silV-dyer  in  Ixmdon,

-ton  at  mi  advanced  |M  ami  left
fltsrnn limit  there.  Ho  took  u  great  int.
politics,  whs  Bond  <>f  writing  vcr-ex,  and  bvssjted
:n  •  if  short-hand.  The  fourth  son,  Joeiah,
born  in  1655,  mired  an  apprenticeship  with  hi-
brother  John,  at  Banbury,  but  removed  I
Borland  in  1688.  Prom  the  beginning  of  the
Bexormation  the  family  had  been  Eealotn  Protos
and  in  Mary's  reign  had  incurred  considera-
tnger  on  that  account.  Their  inclination
seems  to  have  been  toward  l'uritanism,  lint  they
remained  in  the  Church  of  Kngmnd  until  late  in
_n  of  Charles  II..  when  so  many  clergymen
wen-  dispossessed  of  their  holding!  for  DOU-OOn-
fortuity,  ami  proceeded  to  tarry  on  religion*  ser-
in conventicles  forbidden  by  law.  Anions
these  dispossessed  ulergjiueo  in  rTorthan iptonanirn
wen-  friends  of  Benjamin  and  Josiah,  who  beoime
their  warm  adherents  and  attended  their  onventi-
cles.  The  persecution  of  these  DOtVCJOnformista
led  to  a  rami)  Puritan  migration  t->  New  England,
in  which  Josiah  took  part.  He  settled  in  Boston,
where  he  followed  t  he  business  of  soap-!>oilcr  and
tallow-chandler.  He  was  twice  married,  the  second
time  to  the  daughter  of  Peter  Folger,  one  of  the
earliest  settlers  of  New  England,  a  man  ot  MMM
learning,  a  writer  of  political  verses,  and  a  Malonf
Opponent  of  the  persecution  of  the  (Quakers.  By
his  first  wife  Josiah  Franklin  had  seven  children ;
by  his  second,  ten.  of  whom  the  illustrious  Benja-
min was  the  youngest  son.  For  five  generations
his  direct  ancestors  had  been  youngest  sons  of
youngest  sons.  As  a  child  he  showed  such  pre-
cocity that  his  father  at  first  thought  of  sending
him  to  Harvard  and  educating  him  for  the  minis-
try; but  the  wants  of  his  large  familv  were  so  nu-
merous that  presently  he  felt  that  he  could  not
afford  the  expense  of  this.  At  the  age  of  ten,  after
little  more  than  a  year  at  the  grammar-school,
Benjamin  was  set  to  work  in  his  father's  shop,  cut-
ting wicks  and  filling  moulds  for  candles.  This
was  so  irksome  to  him  that  he  began  to  show
svmptoms  of  a  desire  to  run  awav  and  go  to  sea.
To  turn  his  mind  from  t his, his  father  at  length  de-
cided to  make  him  a  printer.  He  was  an  in~.it  ia-
di-r.  and  the  few  shillings  that  found  their
way  into  his  hands  were  all  laid  out  in  books.
His  elder  brother,  James,  had  learned  the  printer's
trade,  and  in  1717  returned  from  England  with  a
MUSS,  and  established  himself  in  business  in  Bos-
ton. In  the  following  year  Benjamin  was  appren-
ticed t>>  his  elder  brother. and, becoming  interested
and  proficient  in  the  work, soon  made  himself  verv
useful.  He  indulged  his  taste  for  reading,  which
often  kept  him  up  late  into  the  night.  Like  n
many  other  youthful  readers,  he  counted  Defoe
and  Bunyan  among  his  favorites,  but  presently  we
find  him  studying  Locke's  " Essay  on  the  Human
understanding,*'  and  the  Port  Koyal  logic.  While
IBiCtking  himself  in  arithmetic  and  the  clement-
of  geometry,  he  was  also  striving to acquire a

Eroee  style  like  that  of  Addison.  Me  wrote  little
Iliads  and  songs  of  the  chap-book  sort,  and
hawk.d  them  about  the  streets,  sometimes  with
pn.tit  to  his  pocket At  the  same  time  an  Inborn

tendency  toward fr thinking  was  strengthened

by  reading  Shaftesbury  and  Collins,  until  some
worthy  people  U*gan  to  look  askance  at  him  and"
call  him  an  infidel.  In  1721  .lames  Franklin  began
printing  and  publishing  the  u New  England  don-
toe  third  newspaper  that  appeared  in  Bos-


ton, and the fourth in Amer  In-  paper

Benjamin  wrote  ajiunjiaom  arti.i,-.  and  oon-
tnved  to  ■nuggJe  then  Into  its  columns  with-
out his  brother'-  knowledge  "f  their  authorship;
sot f  them  attracted  attention,  and  were  attrib-
uted to  various  men  of  eminence  in  the  colony,
The  newspaper  was  quite  Independent  In  its  I

and  for  a  pcwitieai  article  that  gave  offence  tO  the
colonial  legislature  James  Franklin  was  put  into
jail  for  a  month,  while  Benjamin  was  duly  adinon-
idi.it  and  threatened.  Finding  himself  somewhat
uii|m. pular  in  Boston. and  being  harshly  treated  by
hi-  brother,  whose  violent  tcui|M-r  he  confesses  to
have  sometimes  provoked  by  his  -aucine-s,  Benja-
min at  length  made  up  hi-  mind  to  run  away  from
home  and  seek  his  fortune.  He  raised  a  little
money  by  selling  some  of  his  iHM.ks,  and  in  <  I
Iht.  1728,  -  t  -ail  in  a  sloop  for  New  York.  Tri-
able to  find  employment  there  as  a  printer,  beset
out  for  Philadelphia,  crossing  to  AiiiInpv  in  a  small
vessel,  which  was  driven  anon  the  BOOM  of  Long
I-limd  in  a  heavy  gale.  Narrowly  ex-aping  -hij>-
wreck,  he  at  length  reached  Amboj  in  the  cra/v
little  craft,  after  thirty  hours  without  f<x.d  of
drink,  except  a  drop  from  a  flask  of  what  he  called
"filthy  rum."  From  Amboy  he  made  his  way  on
foot  across  New  Jersey  to  Burlington,  whence  he
was  taken  in  a  row-boat  to  Philadelphia,  landing
there  on  a  Sunday  morning,  cold,  lieclraggled,  and
friendless,  with  one  Hutch  dollar  in  his  pocket.
But  he  soon  found  employment  in  a  j.rinting-oilice.
earned  a  little  money,  made  a  few  friends,  and  took
comfortable  lodgings  in  the  bouse  of  a  Mr.  Bead,
with  whose  daughter  Deborah  he  proceed-Nl  to  fall
in  love.  It  was  not  long  lie  fore  his  excellent  train-
ing and  rare  good  sens*'  attracted  the  favorable
notice  of  Sir  William  Keith,  governor  of  Pennsyl-
vania. The  Philadelphia  printers  being  ignorant
and  unskilful.  Keith  wished  to  secure  Franklin's
services,  and  offered  to  help  set  him  up  in  business
for  himself  anil  give  him  the  government  print-
ing, such  as  it  was.  Franklin  had  now  been  seven
months  in  Philadelphia,  and.  his  familv  having  at
length  heard  news  of  him.  it  was  thought  best  that
he  should  return  to  Boston  and  solicit  aid  from  his
father  in  setting  up  a  press  in  Philadelphia.  On
reaching  Boston  he  found  his  brother  sullen  and
resentful,  but  his  father  received  him  kindly,  lie
refused  the  de-ircd  assistance,  <>n  the  ground  that
a  boy  of  eighteen  WM  not  tit  t<>  manage  a  business,
bttt  lie  commended  his  industry  and  iierscvcrance,
and  made  no  objection  to  his  returning  to  Phila-
delphia, warning  him  to  re-train  his  inclination  to
write  lampoons  and  satires,  and  holding  out  hopes
of  aid  in  case  he  should  behave  industriously  and
frugally  until  twenty-one  years  of  age.

On  Franklin's  return  to  Philadelphia,  the  gov-
ernor promised  to  furnish  the  money  needful  for
establishing  him  in  business,  and  encouraged  him
to  go  over  to  London,  in  order  to  buv  a  press  and
type  and  gather  useful  information.  But  Sir  Will-
iam was  one  of  those  social  nuisances  that  are  lav-
ish in  promises  but  scanty  in  performance.  It  was
with  the  a—  urauce  that  the  ship's  mail-liag  carried
letters  Of  introduction  and  the  necessary  letter  of
credit  that  young  Franklin  crossed  the  (Mean.  On
reaching  England,  he  found  that  Keith  had  de-
ceived him.  Having  neither  money  nor  credit
wherewith  to  accomplish  the  purpose  Of  his  jour-
ney or  return  to  America,  he  sought  and  MMM
found  a  place  as  Journeymen  in  a  London  printing-
hou-e.  Before  leaving  home  he  had  been  betrothed
to  Miss  Bead.  He  now  wrote  to  her  that  it  would
Ik-  long  before  he  should  return  to  America,  in-
ability ami  diligence  enabled  him  to  earn  motiev


698


FRANKLIN


FRANKLIN


quickly,  but  for  a  while  he  was  carried  away  by
the  fssrinstions  of  ■  great  city,  and  spent  his

DBOtMJ  :i-  t.i>i  as  lie  earned  it.  In  tin-  course  of
his  eight  ten  months  in  London  he  gained  much
knowledge  of  the  world,  and  became  acquainted
with  some  distinguished  persons,  among  others  Dr.
.Vaudeville  ami  Sir  Mans  Slnane  ;  and  he  spsafcl  of
lii>  "iMiviiir  desire"  to  meet  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  in
which  he  was  not  gratified.  In  the  autumn  of
1728  lie  made  his  way  back  to  Philadelphia,  and
after  some  further  vicissitudes  was  at  length  (in
1798)  established  in  business  M  h  printer.  He  now
became  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Pennsylvania
Gazette,"  and  soon  made  it  so  popular  by  his  ably-
written  articles  that  it  yielded  him  a  comfortable
income.  During  his  absence  in  England,  Miss
Read,  hearing  nothing  from  him  after  his  first
letter,  had  supposed  that  he  had  grown  tired  of
her.  In  her  chagrin  she  married  a  worthless
knave,  who  treated  her  cruelly,  and  soon  ran  away
to  the  West  Indies,  where  he  died.  Franklin  found
her  overwhelmed  with  distress  and  mortification,
for  which  he  felt  himself  to  be  partly  responsible.
Their  old  affection  speedily  revived,  and  on  1  Sept.,
1730,  they  were  married.  They  lived  most  happily
together  until  her  death,  19  Dec,  1774.

As  Franklin  grew  to  maturity  he  became  noted
for  his  public  spirit  and  an  interest  at  once  wide  and
keen  in  human  affairs.  Soon  after  his  return  from
England  he  established  a  debating  society,  called
the  "Junto,"  for  the  discussion  of  questions  in
morals,  politics,  and  natural  philosophy.  Among
the  earliest  members  may  be  observed  the  name  of
the  eminent  mathematician,  Thomas  Godfrey,  who
soon  afterward  invented  a  quadrant  similar  to
Hadley's.  For  many  years  Franklin  was  the  life
of  this  club,  which  in  1748  was  developed  into  the
American  philosophical  society.  In  1732  he  began
publishing  an  almanac  for  the  diffusion  of  useful
information  among  the  people.  Published  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Richard  Saunders,"  this  enter-
taining collection  of  wit  and  wisdom,  couched  in
quaint  and  pithy  language,  had  an  immense  sale,
and  became  famous  throughout  the  world  as  "  Poor
Richard's  Almanac."  In  1731  Franklin  founded
the  Philadelphia  library.  In  1743  he  projected  the
university  that  a  few  years  later  was  developed  into
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  for  a  long
time  considered  one  of  the  foremost  institutions  of
learning  in  this  country.

From  early  youth  Franklin  was  interested  in  sci-
entific studies,  and  his  name  by  and  by  became  as-
sociated with  a  very  useful  domestic  invention,  and
also  with  one  of  the  most  remarkable  scientific  dis-
coveries of  the  18th  century.  In  1742  he  invented
the  "  open  stove,  for  the  better  warming  of  rooms,"
an  invention  that  has  not  yet  entirely  fallen  into
disuse.  Ten  years  later,  by  wonderfully  simple  ex-
periments with  a  kite,  he  showed  that  lightning  is
a  discharge  of  electricity;  and  in  1753  he  received
the  Copley  medal  from  the  Royal  society  for  this
most  brilliant  and  pregnant  discovery.

A  man  so  public-spirited  as  Franklin,  and  editor
of  a  prominent  newspaper  besides,  could  not  long
remain  outside  of  active  political  life.  In  1736  he
was  made  clerk  of  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,
and  in  1737  postmaster  of  Philadelphia.  Under
his  skilful  management  this  town  became  the  cen-
ter of  the  whole  postal  system  of  the  colonies,  and
in  1753  he  was  made  deputy  postmaster-general  for
the  continent.  Besides  vastly  increasing  the  effi-
ciency of  the  postal  service,  he  succeeded  at  the
same  time  in  making  it  profitable.  In  1754  Frank-
lin becomes  a  conspicuous  figure  in  Continental
politics. In  that  year  the  prospect  of  war  with  the


French  led  several  of  the  royal  governors  to  cali
for  a  congress  of  all  the  colonies,  to  be  held  at  Al-
bany. The  primary  purpose  of  the  meeting  WH  to
make  sure  of  the  friendship  of  the  Six  Nation-,  and
to  organize  a  general  scheme  of  operations  against
the  French.  The  secondary  purpose  was  to  prepare
some  plan  of  confederation  which  all  the  colonies
might  be  persuaded  to  adopt.  Only  the  four  New
England  colonics,  with  New  York,  Pennsylvania,
and  Maryland,  sent  commissioners  to  this  congress.
The  people  seem  to  have  felt  very  little  intei
the  movement.  Among  the  newspapers  none  seem
to  have  favored  it  warmly  except  the  "  IVun.-yl-
vania  Gazette,"  which  appeared  with  a  union  de-
vice and  the  motto  "  Unite  or  Die!"  At  the  Al-
bany congress  Franklin  brought  forward  the  first
coherent  scheme  ever  propounded  for  securing  a
permanent  Federal  union  of  the  thirteen  colonies.


The  plan  contemplated  the  union  of  all  the  colo-
nies under  a  single  central  government,  under
which  each  colony  might  preserve  its  local  inde-
pendence. The  legislative  assembly  of  each  colony
was  to  choose,  once  in  three  years,  representatives
to  attend  a  Federal  grand  council,  which  was  to
meet  every  year  at  Philadelphia,  as  the  city  most
convenient  of  access  from  north  and  south  alike.
This  grand  council  was  to  choose  its  own  speaker,
and  could  neither  be  dissolved  nor  prorogued  ex-
cept by  its  own  consent,  or  by  especial  order  of  the
crown.  The  grand  council  was  to  make  treaties
with  the  Indians,  and  regulate  trade  with  them ;
and  it  was  to  have  sole  power  of  legislation  on  all
matters  concerning  the  colonies  as  a  whole.  To
these  ends  it  could  lay  taxes,  enlist  soldiers,  build
forts,  and  nominate  civil  officers.  Its  laws  were  to
be  submitted  to  the  king  for  approval ;  and  the
royal  veto,  in  order  to  be  effective,  must  be  exer-
cised within  three  years.  To  this  grand  council
each  colony  was  to  send  a  number  of  representa-
tives, proportioned  to  its  contributions  to  the  con-
tinental military  service,  the  minimum  number
being  two,  the  maximum  seven.  With  the  excep-
tion of  such  matters  of  general  concern  as  were  to
be  managed  by  the  grand  council,  each  colony  was
to  retain  its  powers  of  legislation  intact.  In  an
emergency  any  colony  might  singly  defend  itself
against  foreign  attack,  and  the  Federal  govern-
ment was  prohibited  from  impressing  soldiers  or
seamen  without  the  consent  of  the  local  legislature.
The  supreme  executive  power  was  to  be  vested  in
a  president  or  governor-general,  appointed  and
paid  by  the  crown.  He  was  to  have  a  veto  on  all
the  acts  of  the  grand  council,  and  was  to  nominate
all  military  officers,  subject  to  its  approva
money  could  be  issued  save  by  joint  order  of  the

f)vernor-general  and  council. "This  plan,
ranklin,  "is  not  altogether  to  my  mind ;  but  it  is
as  I  could  get  it." To  the  credit  of  its  gnat  au-
thor, it  should  be  observed  that  this  scheme— long
afterward  known  as  the  "Albany  plan  " — content
plated  the  formation  of  a  self-sustaining  1


I  i;  WKLtN


FRANKLIN


m


eminent,  and  not  of  a  mere  leagus. It  aimed

at  creating  "a  public  authority  at  obligator]  In  it*

the local government* were in their

•  res";  and  in  tin-  rospsct  it  wits  iiiucli  more

nplete  thnn  the  articles  <>f  oonfederation  under

h  the  thirteen states  oootrived to  live  from

-i  till  i?hi». But  public  «'iiiiii"ii  wh-mioi  vet  ripe
the  adoption  of  such  l*>Id  and  comprehensive
\ft<T  long  dobalo,  the  A I  banv  congress  de-
I  to  ii'li>|>t Franklin's  plan.  an<l  copies  of  it
re  sent  to  all  the  colonics  for  their  considera-
tion; but nowhere  <lid  it  meet with |K>pular  ap-
ral. A  town-meeting  in  Bo-ton  denounced  it
•  f  liberty;  Pennsylvania  rejected  it
without  a  word  of  discussion;  not  one  of  the  as-
voted to  adopt it. When sent over  to
.land,  to  lie  inspected  by  the  ministers  of  the
Mi.  it  only  irritated  and  alarmed  them. In
England  it  was  thought  to  give  too  much  indo-
lence of  action  to  the  colonies;  in  America  it
was  thought  to  give  too  little. The  scheme  was,
moreover,  impracticable,  because the desire  for
union  on  the  part  of  the  several  colonies  was  still
tremely  feeble; but  it  shows  on  the  part  of
Franklin  wonderful  foresightedness. If  the  Revo-
lution had  not  occurred,  we  should  probably  have
sooner  or  later  come  to  live  under  a  constitution
resembling  the  Albany  plan. On  the  other  hand,
if  the  Albany  plan  had  been  put  into  operation,  it
might  perhaps  have  so  adjusted  the  relations  of  the
colonics  to  the 'British  government  that  the  Revo-
lution would  not  have  occurred.

The  only  persons  that  favored  Franklin's  scheme
were  the  royal  governors,  and  this  was  because
they  hoped  it  might  be  of  service  in  raising  money
with  which  to  fight  the  French. In  such  matters
the  local  assemblies  were  extremely  niggardly. At
the  beginning  of  the  war  in  1755,  Franklin  had
been  for  some  years  the  leading  spirit  in  the  assem-
bly of  Pennsylvania,  which  was  engaged  in  a  fierce
dispute  with  the  governor  concerning  the  taxation
of  the proprietary  estates. The  governor  con-
tended that  these  should  be  exempt  from  taxation  ;
the  assembly insisted rightly  that  these  estates
should  l>ear  their  due  share  of  the  public  burdens.
On  another  hotly  disputed  question  the  assembly
was  clearly  in  the  wrong;  it  insisted  upon  issuing
paper  money, and  against  this  pernicious  folly
governor  after  governor  fought  with  obstinate  bra-
ry. In  1755  the  result  of  these  furious  conten-
tions was  that  Rraddock's  army  was  unable  to  get
any  support  except  from  the  steadfast  personal  ex-
ertions of  Franklin,  who  used  his  great  influence
with  the  fanners  to  obtain horses,  wagons,  and
isions.  pledging his  own property  for  their
payment. Until  the  question  of  the  proprietary
estates  should  be  settled,  the  operations  of  the  war
seemed  likely  to  be  paralyzed. In  1757  Franklin
was  sent  over  to  Kngland  to  plead  the  cause  of  t  he
assembly  before  the  privy  council. This  business
!  him  in  England  five  years,  in  the  course  of
which  he  became  acquainted  with the  most  eini-
il  people  in  the  country. 1 1  is  discoveries  and
writings  had  won  him  a  Kuropean  reputation. Be-
lie left Kngland.  in  1702,  he  received  the  de-
"f  LL.  I),  from  the  universities  of  Oxford  and
nburgh. His  arguments  before  the  privy  coun-
-iicces>ful  ;  the  sorely  vexed  question  was
ided  against  the  proprietary  governors ;  and  on
hi-  return  to  Pennsylvania  in  17(52  he  received  the
formal  thanks  of  the  assembly. It  was  not  long
ices  were  again  required  in  England.
Grenville  gave notice  of  his  proposed
stani|>-act f..r  defraying  part  of the  expenses  of
late  war.  and  Franklin  was  sent  to  Kngland  as
vol.  II. — 34


a^'eiit  for  Pennsylvania,  and  instructed  to  make
c\ery  effort  l<>  pnvent  the  passage  of  the  -tami>-act.
He  carried  out  hi-  instructions  ably  and  faithfully;
but  when  the  obnoxious  law  was  pawed  in  1
counselled  Mihuii— ion.  In  thi-ca-c,  howe\er,  the
wltdoa Ol  this  wisest  of  Americans  proved  inferior
to  the  "collective  \\  i-doin  "  of  hi-  fellow-countrv-
meii. Warned by the fierce n  of the

American-,  the  new  mini-try  of  Lord  Buckingham
decided  to  reconsider  the  act.  In  an  examination
Ufore  the  boon  of  common-,  Franklin's  strong
sense  and  varied  knowledge  won  general  admira-
tion, and  contributed  jiowerfully  toward  the  PJPMl
of  the  -tamp-ait.  The  danger  was  warded  off  but
for  a  time,  however.  Next  year  Charles  Towns-
hend  carried  his  measures  for  taxing  American
ini|M)rts  and  applying  the  proceeds  to  the  main-
tenance of  a  civil  list  in  each  of  the  colonic-,  to
be  responsible  only  to  the  British  government.
The  need  for  Franklin's  services  as  mediator  was
now  so  great  that  he  was  kept  in  Kngland,  and
presently  the  colonies  of  Massachusetts,  New  Jer-
sey, and  Georgia  chose  him  as  their  agent.  Dur-
ing these  years  he  made  many  warm  friendships
with  eminent  men  in  Kngland,  M  with  Burke,
Lord  Shelburne,  Lord  Howe,  David  Hartley,  and
Dr.  Priestley.  His  great  powers  were  earnestly  de-
voted to  preventing  a  separation  between  Kngland
and  America.  His  methods  were  eminently  con-
ciliatory; but  the  independence  of  character  with
which  he  told  unwelcome  truths  made  him  an  ob-
ject of  intense  dislike  to  the  king  and  his  friends,
who  regarded  him  as  aiming  to  undermine  the
royal  authority  in  America.  George  III.  is  said  to
have  warned  his  ministers  against  "  that  crafty
American,  who  is  more  than  a  match  for  you  all.
En  1774  this  dread  and  dislike  found  vent  in  an
explosion,  the  echoes  of  which  have  hardly  yet
died  away.  This  was  the  celebrated  affair  of  the
"  Hutchinson  letters."

For  several  years  a  private  and  unofficial  corre-
spondence had  been  kept  up  between  Hutchinson.
Oliver,  and  other  high  officials  in  Massachusetts,  on
the  one  hand,  and  Thomas  Whately.  who  had  for-
merly been  private  secretary  to  George  Grenville,
on  the  other.  The  choice  of  Whately  for  corre-
spondent was  due  to  the  fact  that  he  was  supjiosed
to  be  very  familiar  at  once  with  colonial  affairs  and
with  the  views  and  purposes  of  the  king's  friends.
In  these  letters  Hutchinson  had  a  great  deal  to  say
about  the  weakness  of  the  royal  government  in
Massachusetts,  and  the  need  for  a  strong  military
force  to  support  it ;  he  condemned  the  conduct  of
Samuel  Adams  and  the  other  popular  leaders  as
seditious,  and  enlarged  upon  the  turbulence  of  the


[K-ople  <»f  Boston;  he  doubted  if  it  were  pradica-
>le  for  a  colony  removed  by  8,000  miles  of  ocean
to  enjoy  all  the  liberties  of  the  mother  country


without  severing  its  connection  with  her;  and  he
had  therefore  reluctantly  come  to  the  conclusion
that  Massachusetts  niusi  submit  to  "an  abridg-
ment of  what  are  called  Knglish  liU-rtics."  Oliver.
in  addition  to  such  general  views,  maintained  that
(odfSJ  and  other  crown  officers  should  have  fixed
salaries  assigned  bv  the  crown,  so  as  to  become  in-
de|»endent  of  popular  favor.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  such  suggestions  were  made  in  perfect  good
faith. or  that  II ut ch inx >n  and  Oliver  had  the  true  in-
terests of  Massachusetts  at  heart,  according  to  their
lamentably  inadequate  understanding  of  the  mat-
ter. But  to  the  poopta  of  Massachusetts,  at  that
;imc.  -uch  suggestions  could  but  seem  little  short
Of  treasonable.  Thomas  Whately  died  in  .lune,
177'J.  and  all  his  papers  imssed  into  the  custody  of
William,  his  brother  and  executor. In  the  follow-


;,:?<>


FRANKLIN


11;  AN  KLIN


ing  December,  before  William  Whately  had  opened
or  looked  over  tin-  packet  of  letters  from  Hutcliin-
toa  and  his  frit-mis.  it  was  found  that  they  had
been  purloined  bv  some  pecSOD  linknoWU.  It  is
not  certain  that  (lie  letters  had  ever  really  passed
into  William  Whately's  hands.  They  may  have
been  left  lying  In  some  place  where  they  Bright
have  attracted  the  notice  of  some  curious  busy-
body, who  forthwith  laid  hands  upon  them.  This
point  has  never  been  satisfactorily  cleared  up.  At
nil  events,  they  were  brought  to  Franklin  as  con-
taining jM>litical  intelligence  that  might  prove  im-
portant. At  this  time  Massachusetts  was  furiously
excited  over  the  attempt  of  Lord  North's  govern-
ment to  have  the  salaries  of  the  judges  fixed  and
paid  by  the  crown  instead  of  the  colonial  assembly.
The  judges  had  been  threatened  with  impeachment
should  they  dare  to  receive  a  penny  from  the  royal
treasury,  and  at  the  head  of  the  threatened  judges
was  Oliver's  younger  brother,  the  chief  justice  of
Massachusetts.  As  agent  for  the  colony,  Frank-
lin felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  give  information  of  the
dangerous  contents  of  the  letters  now  laid  before
him.  Although  they  purported  to  be  merely  a
private  and  confidential  corres|>ondence,  they  were
not  really  "  of  the  nature  of  private  letters  between
friends."  As  Franklin  said,  "they  were  written
by  public  officers  to  persons  in  public  station,  on
public  affairs,  and  intended  to  procure  public
measures " ;  they  were  therefore  handed  to  other
public  persons,  who  might  lie  influenced  by  them  to
produce  those  measures  ;  their  tendency  was  to  in-
cense the  mother  country  against  her  colonies,  and,
by  the  steps  recommended,  to  widen  the  breach,
which  they  effected.  The  chief  caution  "from  the
writers  to  Thomas  Whately  "with  respect  to  pri-
vacy was,  to  keep  their  contents  from  "  the  knowl-
edge of  the  colonial  agents  in  London,"  who,  the
writers  apprehended,  "might  return  them,  or
copies  of  them,  to  America."  Franklin  felt  as
Walsingham  might  have  felt  on  suddenly  discover-
ing, in  private  and  confidential  papers,  the  incon-
trovertible proof  of  some  popish  plot  against  the
life  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  From  the  person  that
brought  him  the  letters  he  got  permission  to  send
them  to  Massachusetts,  on  condition  that  they
should  be  shown  only  to  a  few  people  in  authority,
that  they  should  not  be  copied  or  printed,  that  they
should  presently  be  returned,  and  that  the  name
of  the  person  from  whom  they  were  obtained  should
never  be  disclosed.  This  last  condition  was  most
thoroughly  fulfilled.  The  others  must  have  been
felt  to  ue  mainly  a  matter  of  form ;  it  was  obvious
that,  though  they  might  be  literally  complied  with,
their  spirit  would  inevitably  be  violated.  As  Or-
lando Hutchinson  writes,  "  we  all  know  what  this
sort  of  secrecy  means,  and  what  will  be  the  end  of
it";  and,  as  Franklin  himself  observed,  "there
was  no  restraint  proposed  to  talking  of  them,  but
only  to  copying. The  letters  were  sent  to  the

S  roper  person,  Thomas  Cushing,  speaker  of  the
lassachusetts  assembly,  and  he  showed  them  to
Hancock,  Hawley,  and  the  two  Adamses.  To  these
gentlemen  it  could  have  been  no  new  discovery
that  Hutchinson  and  Oliver  held  such  opinions  as
were  expressed  in  the  letters ;  but  the  documents
seemed  to  furnish  tangible  proof  of  what  had  long
been  suspected,  that  the  governor  and  his  lieuten-
ant were  plotting  against  the  liberties  of  Massa-
chusetts. They  were  soon  talked  about  at  every
town-meeting  and  on  every  street-corner.  The
assembly  twitted  Hutchinson  with  them,  and  asked
for  copies  of  these  and  other  such  papers  as  he
might  see  fit  to  communicate.  He  replied,  some-
what sarcastically,  "  If  you  desire  copies  with  a


view  to  make  them  public,  the  originals  a«e  more
proper  for  the  purpose  than  any  copies."  Mi-
takenand  dangerous  as  Hutchinson's  policy  was,  his
conscience  acquitted  him  of  any  treasonable  pur-
pose,  and  he  must  naturally  have  preferred  to  has.-
the  people  judge  him  by  what  be  had  really  writ-
ten rather  than  by  vague  and  distorted  rumors.
His  reply  was  taken  as  sufficient  warrant  for  print-
ing the  letters,  and  they  were  soon  in  the  poaaee-
sion  of  every  reader  in  England  or  America  who
could  afford  sixpence  for  a  political  tract.  <  >n  i lit-
other  side  of  the  Atlantic  they  aroused  as  much
excitement  as  on  this,  and  William  Whately  !m>-
came  concerned  to  know  who  could  have-  purloined
the  letters.  On  slight  evidence  he  charged  a  Mr.
Temple  with  the  theft,  and  a  duel  ensued  in  which
Whately  was  wounded.  Hearing  of  this  affair,
Franklin  published  a  card  in  which  he  avowed  his
own  share  in  the  transaction,  and  in  a  measure
screened  all  others  by  drawing  the  full  torrent  of
wrath  and  abuse  upon  himself.  All  the  ill-sup-
pressed spleen  of  the  king's  friends  was  at  once
discharged  upon  him.  Meanwhile  the  Massachu-
setts assembly  formally  censured  the  letters,  as
evidence  of  a  scheme  for  subverting  the  constitu-
tion of  the  colony,  and  petitioned  the  king  to
remove  Hutchinson  and  Oliver  from  offic
January,  1774,  the  petition  was  duly  brought  before
the  privy  council  in  the  presence  of  a  large  and
brilliant  gathering  of  spectators.  The  solicitor-
general,  David  Wedderburn,  instead  of  discussing
the  question  on  its  merits,  broke  out  with  a  violent
and  scurrilous  invective  against  Franklin,  whom
he  derided  as  a  man  of  letters,  calling  him  a  "  man
of  three  letters,"  the  Roman  slang  expression  for
f-u-r,  a  thief.  Of  the  members  of  government
present.  Lord  North  alone  preserved  decorum  ;  the
others  laughed  and  clapped  their  hands,  while
Franklin  stood  as  unmoved  as  the  moon  at  the
baying  of  dogs.  He  could  afford  to  disregard  the
sneers  of  a  man  like  Wedderburn,  whom  the  king,
though  fain  to  use  him  as  a  tool,  called  the  greatest
knave  in  the  realm.  The  Massachusetts  petition
was  rejected  as  scandalous,  and  next  day  Franklin
was  dismissed  from  his  office  of  postmaster-general.
They  are  in  error  who  think  it  was  this  personal
insult  that  led  Franklin  to  favor  the  revolt  of  the
colonies,  as  they  are  also  wrong  who  suppose  that
his  object  in  sending  home  the  Hutchinson  letters
was  to  stir  up  dissension.  His  conduct  imme-
diately after  passing  through  this  ordeal  is  sufficient
proof  of  the  unabated  sincerity  of  his  desire  for
conciliation.  The  news  of  the  Boston  tea-party
arriving  in  England  about  this  time,  led  presently
to  the  acts  of  April,  1774,  for  closing  the  port  of
Boston  and  remodelling  the  government  of  Massa-
chusetts. The  only  way  in  which  Massachusetts
could  escape  these  penalties  was  by  indemnifying
the  East  India  company  for  the  tea  that  had  been
destroyed  ;  and  Franklin,  seeing  that  the  attempt
to  enforce  the  new  acts  must  almost  inevitably  lead
to  war,  actually  went  so  far  as  to  advise  Massachu-
setts to  pay  for  the  tea.  Samuel  Adams,  on  hear-
ing of  this,  is  said  to  have  observed:  "  Franklin
may  be  a  good  philosopher,  but  he  is  a  bungling
politician.  Certainly  in  this  instance  Franklin
showed  himself  less  far-sighted  than  Adams  and  the
people  of  Massachusetts.  The  moment  had  come
when  compromise  was  no  longer  possible.  To  have
yielded  now,  in  the  face  of  the  arrogant  and  tyran-
nical acts  of  April,  would  have  been  not  only  to
stultify  the  heroic  deeds  of  the  patriots  in  the  last
December,  but  it  would  have  broken  up  the  n
union  of  the  colonies;  it  would  virtually  ha
rendered  them,  bound  hand  and  foot,  to  the  tender


IK  WKUS


PRANKLIN


fi31


■ercics  of  the  kin;:. That l-'ntnkliii ehovld  have

enggested  such  ■  step,  iii  order  to  avoid  precipi-
tating •  contL  i.  etowi  forcibly  bow  anxl

keep  the  paw* He  remained in Kngland

nearly  n  rear  longer,  though many  things  were

s  tin-  kin tr"^  paftf  t<>  make  his  stay  unplcas-

During Dm autumn  ami  winter  In-  had
conversations  with persona  mar  the  gov-

ii,  who  were  anxious  lo  timl  mit  Imw  the
Americans  might  be  conciliated  wit  limit  tag*
land's  abandoning  *  single  one  <>f  the  wrong  po-
rtions that  she  hail  taken.  'Phis  was  an  insolv-
ai*le  problem,  and  when  Franklin  had  lieeome  con-
vinced of  this  he  reluctantly  gave  it  op  and  re-
turned to  America,  arriving  in  Philadelphia  on  B
:  7  7">,  t.i  timl  that  the  shedding  <>f  blood  had
just  begun.  <  m  the  next  day  the  assembly  <>f  Penn-
nrlvania  unanimously  elected  him  delegate  to  the
2d  Continental  congress,  then  alxxit  to  assemble.
He  now  became  a  zealous  supporter  of  the  war,
and  presently  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.
When  congress,  in  July,  decided  to  send  one  more

K'tition  to  the  king,  he  wrote  a  letter  which  Da\  id
art  ley  read  aloud  in  the  house  of  common-. ••  If
vim  flatter  yourselves,"  said  Franklin,  "with  beat
into  submission,  you  know  neither  the  peo-
r  the  country. The  congress  will  await  the
result  of  their  /</*/  petition." A  little  more  than
us  afterward,  in  December,  1777,  as  parlia-
ment Nit  overwhelmed  with  chagrin  at  the  tidings

of  Burgoyne's  sur-
render. Hartley
pulled  out  thi-  let-
ter again  and  up-
braided the  house
with  it. "  You
were then,"  said
he,  "confident  of
having America
under your  feet,
ami  dented  every
proposition rec-
ommending peace
and  lenient  meas-
ures." When  this
unvielding  temper
had driven the
Americans  to  de-
clan- their  imle|N>ndence  of  Great  Britain,  Frank-
lin was  one  of  the  committee  of  five  chosen  by
congress  to  draw  up  a  document  worthy  of  the
n. To  the  document,  as  drafted  by  Jeffer-
son, he  seems  to  have  contributed  onlv  a  few  ver-
bal emendations. The  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence made  it  necessary  to  seek  foreign  alliances,
and  tir>t  of  all  with  England's  great  rival,  France,
'ranklin's  world-wide fame  and  his  long  ex-
^BpBce  of  public  life  in Kngland  enabled  him  to
play  a  part  that  would  have  l>ecii  impossible  for
her  American. He  had  fifteen  years  of  prac-
ii n  ambassador,  and  was  thoroughly  familiar
with European politics. In  his  old  davs  of  edi-
torial work  in  Philadelphia,  with  his  noble  schol-
arly habit  of  nutting  every  moment  to  some  good
nse,  he  had learned the French language,  with
Italian and Spanish also,  besides  getting  some
•  dge  of Latin. He was  thus possessed of
talismans  for  opening  many  a  treasure-house,  and
Mtong  all  the  encyclopedist  philosophers  of  Paris
it  would have  been hard  to  point  to  a  mind  more
[Medic  than  his  own. Negotiations  with  the
i  court  had  lieen  begun  already,  through  the

••f  Arthur  Lee  and  Silas  Deane,  and  in  the
autumn  of  177*1  Franklin  was  sent  out  to  join  with
these  gentlemen  in  securing  the  active  aid  and  oo-


o|HTiition  of  France  in  tin  war.  Hi-  arrival,  ..n
tl  iK-c.,  was  tie  of  great  excitement  in
the fashionalile  world  of |  I]  thinkers  like

D'Alemhert  and  Diderot  he  was  regarded  as  the.
bodineat Of  practical  «h| To  many  beseemed

tO  tUIIl  Up  in  himself  the  excellences  of  the  Alllcri-

can  cause—  ju-t  h  • .  good  sense,  and  moderation.  It
wasTurgot  that  said  of  him.  "  Kripuit  Bflelo  fulmeti,

seejitruiiKpie tvniunis." Asiymbolialng the liberty

for  which  all  France  was  yearning,  he  was  greeted
with  a  |* ipular  enthusiasm  such  as  perhaps  no
French  man  of  letters  except  Voltaire  ha*  ever
called  forth.  BhQpfceepefl  rushed  to  their  doors  to
catch  a  glimpse  of  him  as  he  passed  alone;  tin-  side-
walk, while  III  evellilie;  salons  Jewelled  ladies  (>f  the
court  vied  with  one  another  in  paying  him  homage.
As  the  first  fruits  of  his  negotiations,  the  French
government  agreed  to  furnish  two  million  livres  a
year,  in  quarterly  instalments,  to  aid  the  Ameri-
can cause.  Arms  and  ammunition  were  sent  over,
and  Americans  were  allowed  to  fit  out  privateers
in  French  ports,  and  even  to  bring  in  ami  sell  their
prizes.  Further  than  this  Franco  was  not  yet
ready  to  go.  She  did  not  wish  to  incur  the  risk  of
war  with  Kngland  until  an  American  alliance  could
seem  to  promise  her  some  manifest  advantage.
This  surreptitious  aid  continued  through  the  year
1777,  until  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne  put  a  new
face  upon  things.  The  immediate  consequence  of
that  great  event  was  an  attempt  on  the  part  of
Lord  North's  government  to  change  front,  and
offer  concessions  to  the  Americans,  which,  if  they
hail  ever  been  duly  considered,  might  even  at  this

!  late  moment  have  ended  in  some  compromise  be-
tween Kngland  and  the  United  States.  Now,  if
ever,  was  the  moment  for  France  to  interpose,  and

I  she  seized  it.  On  6  Feb..  177N,  the  treaty  was
signed  at  Paris  which  ultimately  secured  the  inde-

!  pendence  of  the  United  States.  For  the  successful
management  of  this  negotiation,  one  of  the  most
important  in  the  annals  of  modern  diplomacy,  the
credit  is  almost  solely  dae  to  Franklin.  Another
invaluable  service  was  the  negotiation  of  loans  with-
out which  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the
United  States  to  carry  on  the  war. As  the  Conti-

|  nental  congress  had  no  power  to  levy  taxes,  there

I  were  but  three  ways  in  which  it  could  pay  the  ex-
penses of  the  army:  (1)  By  requisitions  upon  the
state  governments;  (2)  by  issuing  its  promissory
notes,  or  so-called  "  paper  money  ' ;  (8)  by  foreign

!  loans. The  first  method  brought  in  money  alto-

Srether  too  slowly:  the  second  served  its  purpose
or  a  short  time,  but  by  1780  the  continental  notes

'  had  became  worthless.  The  war  of  indc|M>ndcnce
would  have  been  an  ignominious  failure  but  for

:  foreign  loans,  and  these  were  made  mostly  by
France  ami  through  the  extraordinary  sagacityand

!  tact  of  Franklin.  It  is  doubtful  if  any  other  man
of  that  time  could  have  succeeded  in  getting  so
much  money  from  the  French  government,  which
found  it  no  easy  matter  to  pay  its  own  debts  and
support  an  idle  imputation  of  nobles  and  clergy
Bpoa  taxes  wrung  from  a  groaning  jieasantry.
During  Franklin's  stay  in  Paris  the  annual  con-
tribution of  2.000,000  livres  was  at  first  increased
to  :i.iXXU»O0,  and  afterward,  in  17*1.  to  4,000,000.
Besides  this,  which  was  a  loan,  the  French  govern-
ment sent  over  lyOOQyOOQ  aj  a  free  gift,  and  guar-
anteed the  interest  upon  a  loan  of  10,000,000  to
be  raised  in  Holland. Franklin  himself,  just  be-

j  fore  sailing  for  France,  had  gathered  together  all
thecaafa  be  OOOid  command  for  the  moment,  be-
yond what  was  nets  led  for  immediate  necessities,
and  amounting  to  nearly  £4.000,  and  put  it  into  the
I'nited  States  treasury  as  a  loan.


582


PRANK  I.I  X


PRANKLIN


On  the  fall  of  Lord  North's  ministry  in  March,
1>:.  I- Yanklin  sent  a  letter  to  his  friend.  Lord
Shelburne.  expressing  a  hope  that  peace  miyrht
soon  be  made.  When  the  letter  reached  London,
the  new  ministry,  in  which  Shelburno  was  secre-
tary of  state  for  home  and  colonies,  had  already
been  formed,  and  Shelburne,  with  the  consent  of
the  cabinet,  replieil  by  sending  over  to  Paris  an
agent  to  talk  with  Franklin  informally,  and  ascer-
tain the  terms  upon  which  the  Americans  would
make  peace.  The  person  chosen  for  this  purpose
was  Ki<  hard  Oswald,  a  Scottish  merchant  of  frank
disposition  and  liberal  views.  In  April  there  were
several  conversations  between  Oswald  and  Frank-
lin, in  one  of  which  the  latter  suggested  that,  in
order  to  make  a  durable  peace,  it  was  desirable  to
remove  all  occasion  for  future  quarrel;  that  the
line  of  frontier  between  New  York  and  Canada
was  inhabited  by  a  lawless  set  of  men,  who  in  time
of  peace  would  be  likely  to  breed  trouble  between
their  respective  governments;  and  that  therefore
it  would  be  well  for  England  to  cede  Canada  to
the  United  States.  A  similar  reasoning  would
apply  to  Nova  Scotia.  By  ceding  these  countries
to  the  United  States,  it  would  be  possible,  from  the
sale  of  unappropriated  lands,  to  indemnify  the
Americans  for  all  losses  of  private  property  during
the  war,  and  also  to  make  reparation  to  the  Tories
whose  estates  had  been  confiscated.  By  pursuing
such  a  policy,  England,  which  had  made  war  on
America  unjustly,  and  had  wantonly  done  it  great
injuries,  would  achieve  not  merely  peace,  but  re-
conciliation with  America,  and  reconciliation,  said
Franklin,  is  "  a  sweet  word."  This  was  a  very  bold
tone  for  Franklin  to  take;  but  he  knew  that  al-
most every  member  of  the  Whig  ministry  had  pub-
licly expressed  the  opinion  that  the  war  against
America  was  unjust  and  wanton ;  and  being,
moreover,  a  shrewd  hand  at  a  bargain,  he  began
by  setting  his  terms  high.  Oswald  seems  to  have
been  convinced  by  Franklin's  reasoning,  and  ex-
pressed neither  surprise  nor  reluctance  at  the  idea
of  ceding  Canada.  The  main  points  of  this  con-
versation were  noted  upon  a  sheet  of  paper,  which
Franklin  allowed  Oswald  to  take  to  London  and
show  to  Lord  Shelburne,  first  writing  upon  it  an
express  declaration  of  its  informal  character.  On
receiving  this  memorandum,  Shelburne  did  not
show  it  to  the  cabinet,  but  returned  it  to  Franklin
without  any  immediate  answer,  after  keeping  it
only  one  night.  Oswald  was  presently  sent  back
to  Paris,  empowered  as  commissioner  to  negotiate
with  Franklin,  and  carried  Shelburne's  answer  to
the  memorandum  that  desired  the  cession  of  Cana-
da for  three  reasons.  The  answer  was  terse:  "  1.
By  way  of  reparation. — Answer:  No  reparation
can  be  heard  of.  2.  To  prevent  future  wars. — An-
swer: It  is  to  be  hoped  that  some  more  friendly
method  will  be  found.  3.  As  a  fund  of  indemnifi-
cation to  loyalists. — Answer:  No  independence  to
be  acknowledged  without  their  being  taken  care
of."  Besides,  added  Shelburne,  the  Americans
would  be  expected  to  make  some  compensation  for
the  surrender  of  Charleston,  Savannah,  and  the
city  of  New  York,  still  held  by  British  troops.
From  this  it  appears  that  Shelburne,  as  well  as
Franklin,  knew  how  to  begin  by  asking  more  than
he  was  likely  to  get.  England  was  no  more  likely
to  listen  to  a  proposal  for  ceding  Canada  than  the
Americans  were  to  listen  to  the  suggestion  of  com-
pensating the  British  for  surrendering  New  York.
But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  bold  stand
thus  taken  by  Franklin  at  the  outset,  together  with
the  influence  he  acquired  over  Oswald,  contributed
materially  to  the  brilliant  success  of  the  American


negotiations.  This  is  the  more  important  to  be
noted  in  connection  with  the  biography  of  Frank-
lin, since  in  the  later  stages  of  the  negotiations  the
initiative  passed  almost  entirely  out  of  his  hands,
and  into  those  of  his  colleagues,  .lay  and  Adams.
The  form  that  the  treaty  tooK  was  mainly  the  wotft
of  these  younger  statesmen ;  the  services  of  Frank-
lin were  chiefly  valuable  at  the  beginning,  and
again,  to  some  extent,  at  the  end.  There  wen  two
grave  difficulties  in  making  a  t  reaty.  The  first  was.
that  France  was  really  hostile  to  the  American
claims.  She  wished  to  see  the  country  between  the
Alleghanies  and  the  Mississippi  divided  between
Kngland  and  Spain ;  England  to  have  the  region
north  of  the  Ohio,  and  the  region  south  of  it  to
remain  an  Indian  territory  under  the  protectorate
of  Spain,  except  a  narrow  strip  on  the  western
slope  of  the  Alleghanies,  over  which  the  United
States  might  exercise  protectorship.  In  other
words,  France  wished  to  confine  the  United  States
to  the  east  of  the  Alleghanies,  and  forever  prevent
their  expansion  westward.  France  also  wished  to
exclude  the  Americans  from  all  share  in  the  fish-
eries, in  order  to  prevent  the  United  States  from
becoming  a  great  naval  power.  As  France,  up  to  a
certain  point,  was  our  ally,  this  antagonism  of  in-
terests made  the  negotiation  extremely  difficult.
The  second  difficulty  was  the  unwillingness  of  the
British  government  to  acknowledge  the  indepen-
dence of  the  United  States  as  a  condition  that  mi
precede  all  negotiation.  The  Americans  insisted
upon  this  point,  as  they  had  insisted  ever  since  the
Staten  Island  conference  in  1776;  but  England
wished  to  withhold  the  recognition  long  enough  to
bargain  with  it  in  making  the  treaty.  This  diffi-
culty was  enhanced  by  the  fact  that,  if  this  point
were  conceded  to  the  Americans,  it  would  transfer
the  conduct  of  the  treaty  from  the  colonial  secre-
tary, Shelburne,  to  the  foreign  secretary,  Fox ;  and
these  two  gentlemen  not  only  differed  widely  in
their  views  of  the  situation,  but  were  personally
bitter  enemies.  Presently  Fox  heard  of  the  private
memorandum  that  Shelburne  had  received  from
Franklin  but  had  not  shown  to  the  cabinet,  and  he
concluded,  quite  wrongly,  that  Shelburne  was  play-
ing a  secret  part  for  purposes  of  his  own.  Accord-
ingly, Fox  made  up  his  mind  at  all  events  to  \
the  American  negotiations  transferred  to  his  own
department ;  and  to  this  end,  on  the  last  day  ot
June,  he  moved  in  the  cabinet  that  the  indepen-
dence of  the  United  States  should  be  uncondition-
ally acknowledged,  so  that  England  might  treat  i
with  a  foreign  power.  The  motion  was  lost,  and
Fox  prepared  to  resign  his  office;  but  the  very
next  day  the  death  of  Lord  Rockingham  broke  up
the  ministry.  Lord  Shelburne  now  became  prime
minister,  and  other  circumstances  occurred  which
simplified  the  problem.  In  April  the  French  fleet
in  the  West  Indies  had  been  annihilated  by  Rod-
ney; in  September  this  was  followed  by  the  total
defeat  of  the  combined  French  and  Spanish  forces
at  Gibraltar.  This  altered  the  situation  seriously.
England,  though  defeated  in  America,  was  victori-
ous as  regarded  France  and  Spain.  The  avowed
object  for  which  France  had  entered  into  alliance
with  the  Americans  was  to  secure  the  in
deuce  of  the  United  States,  and  this  point  wa
substantially  gained.  The  chief  object  for  which
Spain  had  entered  into  alliance  with  Fran
to  drive  the  English  from  Gibraltar,  and  this  point
was  now  decidedly  lost.  France  had  bound  i
not  to  desist  from  the  war  until  Spain  should  re-
cover Gibraltar;  but  now  there  was  little  1
accomplishing  this,  except  by  some  fortunate  bar-
gain in  the  treaty. Vergennes  now  tried  I


FRANKLIN


PR  WKLIS


688


fatfy  Spain  at  the  expense  of  the  United  States,  nn.l

emuMn  under  an  assumed  i

Lord  Shelburne,  to  develop  his  plan  fordhrld*

i !»•  Mississippi  viiiii-v  between  Bngtend  ad

i. Tin-  was  discovered  by  Jay,  win.  ooonter-

it  of  bis  own  toShel-

borne. who  thus  peroaiTed the antagonism that  bad

tin-  allies. It  now  Itccame  manifest-

r  t In-  7i<  1  > mit .-i^r«'  of  Kngland  and  tin-  United

tee  to  carry  on  their  negotiation*  without  the

i) of Francv.  as Kngland preferred to

oonotarioiM  t"  the  Americans  rather  than
the  house  of  llourhon. By  first  detaching  the
United  States  from  the  alliance,  she  could  proceed
|o  browbeat  France  and  Spain. There  was  an  ob-
atai'le  in  the  way  of  a  separate  negotiation. The
ilicr  Luzerne,  the. French  minister  at  Phila-
delphia, hud been busy  with  congress,  and that
had  sent  instructi'ons  to  its  commissioners  at
t<>  U-  guided  in  all  things  hv  the  wishes  of
the French court. Jay and Adams,  overruling
Franklin,  took  the resj>onsihilitv  of  disregarding
these  instructions  ;  and  the  provisions  of  the  treaty,
so  marvellously  favorable  to  the  Americans,  were
arranged  by  a  se|>arate  negotiation  with  England,
In the  arrangement  of the  provisions. Franklin

Slaved  an  imj>ortant  part,  especially  in  driving  the
ritish  commissioners  from  their  position  with  re-
gard to  the  compensation  of  loyalists.  After  a
long  struggle  upon  this  point,  Franklin  observed
that,  if  the  loyalists  were  to  be  indemnified,  it
would  Ik?  necessary  also  to  reckon  up  the  damage
they  had  done  in  burning  villages  and  shipping,
antf  then  strike  a  balance  between  the  two  ac-
counts; and  he  gravely  suggested  that  a  special
commission  might  be  appointed  for  this  purpose.
It  was  now  getting  late  in  the  autumn,  and  Shel-
hunie  felt  it  to  be  a  political  necessity  to  bring  the

nation  to  an  end  before  the  assembling  of
parliament.  At  the  prospect  of  endless  discussion,
which  Franklin's  suggestion  involved,  the  British
commissioners  gave  way  and  accepted  the  Ameri-
can terms.  Affairs  having  reached  this  point,  it
remained for  Franklin  to  lay  the  matter  before

jennes  in  such  wise  as  to  avoid  a  rupture  of
the  cordial  relations  between  America  and  France.
It  was  a  delicate  matter,  for,  in  dealing  separately
with  the  English  government,  the  Americans  laid
themselves  open  to  the  charge  of  having  com-
mitted a  breach  of  diplomatic  courtesy;  but
Franklin  managed  it  with  entire  success.

On  the  iiart  of  the  Americans  the  treaty  of  1783
was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  triumphs  in  the  whole

ry  of  modern  diplomacy.  Had  the  affair  been
managed  by  men  of  ordinary  ability,  the  greatesl
results  of  the  Revolutionary  war  woidd  probably
have  been  lost;  the  new  republic  would  have  been
cooped  up  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Allegha-

;  our  west  ward  expansion  would  have  been  im-
possible without  further  warfare;  and  the  forma-
tion of  our  Federal  union  would  doubtless  have
been  effectively  hindered  or  prevented.  To  the
grand triumph the varied talents  of Franklin.

ins,  and  Jay  alikt ntributed. To  the  latter  is

the  credit  of  detecting  and  baffling  the  sinister

,u- of Franc;  but  without  the  tad  of  Frank-
lin  this probably could not have been accom-
plished without  offending  Frame  in  such  wise  as
il  everything.
Franklin's  last  diplomatic  achievement  was  the
negotiation  of  a  treaty  with  Prussia,  in  which  was

rted  an  article  looking  toward  the  aliolitiou  of
privateering.  This  treaty,  as  Washington  obsem  •!
at  the  tune,  was  the  most  lil>cral  that  had  ever  been
made  between independent  powers,  and  marked  a


new  era  in  international  morality. In  September,
• Franklin returned to  America,  and in the

month  was  chosen  president  of  lYnnnvlvania.
He  was  re-elected  in  ITM  and  17N7.  In  tin- sum-
mer of  the  latter  year  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  im-
mortal convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  lie  toot  a  comparatively  small
|»art in the  delates, but some  of h

\ery  timely,  sj  when  he  seconded  the  C'onnec-
ticut  compromise.  At  the  cloee  of  the  proceedings
he  made  a  short  speech,  in  which  he  said:  "  I
sent  to  this  constitution,  because  I  tI|MOt  no  Utter,
and  because  I  am  not  sun-  that  it  is  not  the  best,"
1 1  i ■ —  last  public  act  was  the  signing  of  a  memorial
addressed  to  congress  by  an  anti-slavery  society  of
which  he  was  president.  This  petition,  which  was
presented  on  ||  Feb.,  171X),  asked  for  the  addition
of  the  slave-trade,  and  for  the  emancipation  of
slaves.  The  southern  members  of  congress  were
verv  indignant,  and  Mr*  Jackson,  of  Georgia,  under-
took to  prove,  with  the  aid  of  texts  from  .Scripture,
the  sacredness  of  the  institution  of  slavery.  On  23
March.  Franklin  wrote  an  answer,  which  was  pnb*
lished  in  the  "National  Gazette."  It  was  an  in-
genious parody  of  Jaokoorfi  ■ftaeoh,  put  into  the
mouth  of  a  mcml>er  of  the  "divan  of  Algiers,"  and
fortified  by  texts  from  the  Koran.  This  character-
istic article,  one  of  the  most  amusing  he  ever  pub-
lished, was  written  within  four  weeks  of  his  death.
The  abilities  of  Franklin  were  so  vast  and  so
various,  he  touched  human  life  at  so  many  points,
that  it  would  require  an  elaborate  essay  to  charac-


terize him  properly.  He  was  at  once  philosopher,
-man.  diplomatist,  scientific  discoverer,  in-
ventor, philanthropist,  moralist,  and  wit.  while  as
a  writer  of  English  he  was  surpassed  by  few  ROM
Of  his  time.  History  presents  few  examples  of  a
Career  starting  from  such  humble  beginning!  and
attaining  to  such  great  and  enduring  splendor.
The  career  of  a  KapoleOQ,  for  example,  in  com-
parison with  Franklin's,  seems  vulgar  and  trivial.
I'he  ceaseless  industrv  of  Franklin  throughout  his
long  life  was  guided  to  an  ext  raordinary  degn  •<•
by  the  clear  light  of  reason,  and  inspired  by  a
warm  and  enthusiastic  desire  for  the  improvement
of  mankind.  He  is  in  many  rcs|tects  the  greatest
Of  Americans,  and  one  of  the  greatest  nun  who-.-
names  are  recorded  in  history.  In  accordance  with
his  wishes.  Franklin's  remains  were  deposited  be-
side those  of  big  wife  and  daughter,  in  the  van!  of
Christ  church,  at  the  corner  of  5th  and  Arch
streets, Philadelphia,  under  a  plain marble  stone

Inscribed  "  Benjamin  and  I>ci>orah  Franklin."

mpanyinft  illustration.) In  early  life  he  had


534


li;  WKLIN


FRANKLIN


writ ti»n  a  fanciful  epitaph  for  himself,  which  was
published  In  the  ••  New  saclaad  Consul  "  and  has

(mcihiic  famous:  "The  body  of  Benjamin  Frank-
lin, printer,  likt>  the  cover  of  an  old  book,  it>  con-
tent ~  torn  out.  and  stripped  of  its  lettering  and
gilding,  lies  here,  food  for  worms.  But  the  work
shall  not  be  lost;  for  it  will,  as  ho  believed,  appear
once  more  in  a  new  and  more  elegant  edition,  re-
vised and  corrected  by  the  Author."

Franklin  left  a  charming  "  Autobiography,"  cov-
ering the  earlier  part  of  his  life  down  to  his  arrival
in  London  in  1<57.  The  best  edition  is  the  one
edited  by  John  Bigelow  (Philadelphia,  1868).  His
works  were  edited  by  .Fared  Sparks  (10  vols..  Bos-
ton, 1850).  In  1885  a" largo  mass  of  unedited  manu-
scripts, by  Franklin  or  relating  to  him,  collected  by
the  late  Henry  Stevens,  of  Vermont,  for  a  long  time
a  resident  in  London,  was  purchased  by  congress.
A  new  edition  of  Franklin's  complete  works, edited
by  John  Bigelow  and  containing  much  new  mate-
rial obtained  from  the  Stevens  manuscripts,  is
now  in  course  of  publication  (10  vols.,  New  York,
1887).  See  (  ondorcet's  "  Eloge  de  Franklin  "  (Paris,
1790) :  Bauer's  •'  Washington  und  Franklin  "  (Ber-
lin, 1803-'6);  Schmaltz's-  Leben  Bern.  Franklin's  "
(Leipsic,  1840) ;  Parton's  "  Life  and  Times  of  Ben-
jamin Franklin  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1864) ;  Mig-
net's  "  Vie  de  Franklin  "  (Paris,  1873) ;  and  Hales
"  Franklin  in  France  "  (Boston,  1887).

FRANKLIN,  Jesse,  statesman,  b.  in  Orange
county,  Va.,  24  March,  1760;  d.  in  Surry  county,
N.  ('.,  in  September,  1823.  His  father  removed  to
North  Carolina  just  before  the  Revolution.  Jesse
served  as  major  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  was  a
member  of  the  house  of  delegates  of  North  Caro-
lina in  1794,  1797,  and  1798,  and  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1805-'6,  a  member  of  congress  from
7  Dec,  1795,  till  3  March,  1797.  U.  S.  senator  from
4  March,  1799,  till  3  March,  1805,  and  again  from
4  March,  1807,  till  3  March,  1813,  acting  a  part  of
the  time  as  president  pro  tempore  of  the  senate.
In  1816  he  was  appointed  by  the  president  a  com-
missioner to  treat  with  the  Chickasaw  Indians,  and
in  1820  he  was  elected  governor  of  North  Carolina.

FRANKLIN,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Canaan,
Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1749;  d.  in  Athens,  Pa.,  1  March,
1831.  He  removed  to  the  Wyoming  valley  in
1776,  settled  in  Huntington,  and  was  an  active
participant  in  the  settlement  of  that  region.  Dur-
ing the  Revolution  he  was  a  captain  in  the  24th
regiment  of  Connecticut  militia,  was  with  his  com-
pany in  the  Sullivan  campaign,  and  was  severely
wounded  in  the  shoulder  at  the  battle  or  skirmish
at  Chemung.  He  was  a  justice  of  the  peace,  colo-
nel of  militia,  and  several  times  member  of  as-
sembly. He  was  an  active,  energetic,  and  resolute
man,  with  talents  of  a  high  order,  much  beloved
and  confided  in  by  the  people.  He  and  Col.  Jen-
kins stood  side  by  side  in  their  resistance  to  the
encroachments  of  the  "  Pennimites "  upon  their
rights  and  possessions,  and  for  thirty  years  sus-
tained the  rights  of  the  settlers  against  the  pro-
prietors and  the  state  who  were  led  by  Alexander
Patterson,  Gen.  John  Armstrong,  and  Col.  Timo-
thy Pickering.  Franklin  was  kidnapped  by  Pick-
ering with  a  band  of  frontier  roughs,  2  Oct.,  1787,
taken  t<>  Philadelphia,  imprisoned,  loaded  with
irons,  and  detained  fourteen  months  without  trial.

FRANKLIN,  Sir  John,  English  explorer,  b.  at
Spilsby,  Lincolnshire,  16  April,  1786;  d.  in  the
arctic  regions,  near  lat.  69°  37'  N.,  Ion.  98°  4'  W.,
11  June,  1847.  He  was  destined  for  the  church,
but  his  father  yielded  to  the  boy's  desire  to  become
a  sailor,  and  procured  him  admission  to  the  navy
as  a  midshipman  at  the  age  of  fourteen. He  first


■erred  OH  board  the  M  Polyphemus."  and  was  at  the
battle  of  Copenhagen.  2  April.  1801.  Two  months
later  he  joined  the  "  Investigator,"  and  was  com-
missioned by  the  English  government  to  explore
and  map  the  coasts  of  Australia.  After  nearly  two
years  spent  in  this  service,  he  sailed  for  home  in
the  store-ship  "Porpoise";  but  that  vessel  was
wrecked,  18  Aug.,  1803,  on  a  reef  about  200  miles
from  the  coast  of  Australia,  where  Franklin  and  his
companions  remained  for  fifty  days.  He  was  finally
rescued  and  carried  to  England,  where  he  joined  t  he
ship-of-the-line  "  Bellerophon,"  and  in  1805  took

f>art  in  the  battle  of  Trafalgar.  He  served  as  2d
ieutenant  in  the  "  Bedford  on  the  coast  of  the
United  States  during  the  war  of  1812-'15,  and
commanded  the  boats  of  the  "  Bedford  "  in  a  fight
with  the  U.  S.  gun-boats  at  New  Orleans,  one  of
which  he  boarded  and  captured.  He  was  wounded
in  this  engagement,  and  for  his  gallantry  was  made
a  1st  lieutenant.  In  1818,  the  British  government
having  fitted  out  an  expedition  to  attempt  the  pas-
sage to  India  by  crossing  the  polar  sea  to  the  north
of  Spitzbergen,  Franklin  was  appointed  to  the
command  of  the  "  Trent,"  one  of  the  two  vessels
of  the  expedition,  the  other,  the  "  Dorothea,"  being
commanded  by  Capt.  Buchan.  After  passing  lat.
80°  N.  the  "  Dorothea "  received  so  much  damage
from  the  ice  that  her  immediate  return  to  England
was  decided  on.  Franklin  begged  to  be  permitted
to  continue  the  voyage  with  the  "  Trent "  alone,
but  Capt.  Buchan  would  not  consent,  his  vessel  be-
ing almost  in  a  sinking  condition.  In  1819  he  was
appointed  to  the  command  of  an  expedition  to
travel  overland  from  Hudson's  bay  to  the  Arctic
ocean,  through  Rupert's  Land,  and  explore  the
coast  of  America  eastward  from  the  Coppermine
river,  while  Lieut.  Parry  was  despatched  with  two
vessels  to  Lancaster  sound.  The  expedition  win-
tered the  first  year  on  the  Saskatchewan  river,  and
was  fed  by  the  Hudson's  bay  company  ;  the  second
winter  was  spent  on  the  '•barren  grounds,"  the
party  subsisting  on  game  and  fish  procured  by
their  own  exertions,  or  purchased  from  their  native
neighbors.  In  the  following  summer  the  expedi-
tion descended  the  Coppermine  river,  and  surveyed
a  considerable  extent  of  the  sea-coast  to  the  east-
ward. Franklin  returned  to  England  in  1822.
Shortly  after  his  arrival  he  was  made  a  post-cap-
tain, and  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society.  In
1825  he  submitted  a  "plan  for  an  expedition  oxer-
land  to  the  mouth  of  the  Mackenzie  river,  and
thence  by  sea  to  the  northwest  extremity  of  Amer-
ica, with  the  combined  object  also  of  surveying  the
coast  between  the  Mackenzie  and  Coppermine  riv-
ers." The  proposition  was  accepted,  and  he  was
appointed  to  superintend  the  expedition.  He  em-
barked at  Liverpool,  16  Feb.,  1825,  descended  the
Mackenzie  river,  and  traced  the  coast-line  through
thirty-seven  degrees  of  longitude,  from  the  mouth
of  the  Coppermine  river,  where  his  former  survey
began,  to  near  the  150th  meridian,  and  approached
within  160  miles  of  the  most  easterly  point  attained
by  Capt.  Beechey,  who  was  co-operating  with  him
from  Behring's  straits.  (See  Beechey,  Frederic*
William.)  In  1829  he  was  knighted,  and  received
the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Oxford  university,  and
the  gold  medal  of  the  Geographical  society  of  Paris.
His  next  official  employment  was  on  the  Mediter-
ranean station  in  1830,  in  command  of  the  "  Rain-
bow." In  1836  he  was  made  governor  of  Tasma-
nia, in  which  office  he  continued  till  1843.  He  was
a  very  popular  governor,  and  originated  and  car-
ried out  many  measures  of  importance  to  the
colony.  In  1845  he  was  appointed  to  tie
mand  of  a  new  expedition  to  diricover  the  north-


PR  WKI.IN


11:  WKI.IN


S80


01


• passage. Tin-  ships  chosen MN  l hi-  "  I
boa "  and '"Terror,"  whioh  were  fitted  out  in  tin-

ugest  and  mo»t  complete  manner,  timl  manned
by picked  crews,  amounting,  officers  and im-ii.  t«>
us,  with  n  transjjort-ship  to  convey  addi-
tional viurniufar  18  Disco  in  Orecnland. They

I  from  Shcvrness,  11)  May,  l*l">.  Franklin's
orders  won*  to  return  in  1*47. Hi-  was  lost  seen

whaler  in  Baffin  bay,  20  July,  1843,  uml  parsed
Hrst  winter  in  a  cove  U'Iwitii  Cajie Riley  an<I

hey  island.  In  1*4*.  n<»  tiding  of  the  expedi-
tion having  reached  England,  the  anxiety  ox  1 1  >«*
|-»nl »1  i< •  led  to  the  fitting  out  <>f  several  expedition!

arch  of  him.  Between  1848  and  18o4  ulMiut
fifteen  expeditions  were  aenl  out  by  England  and
America  in  the  hope  of  rescuing,  or  at  least  Bod*
ing  traces  of.  the  missing  explorers.  In  1*54,  Dr.
Rao,  in  conducting  an  exploring  jwrty  of  the  Bod-
bay  company,  found  some  relies  of  the  party.
After  long  and  persistent  endeavors  on  the  part  of
Lady  Franklin,  of  the  British  government,  and  of
private  explorers,  the  mvsterv  was  finally  solved  by
the  expedition  of  McClintock  in  1*59,  sent  out  by
Lady  Franklin  in  l*">7.  Be  discovered,  on  the
shore  of  King  William's  Land,  a  record  deposited
in  a  cairn  by  tin-  survivors  of  Franklin's  oompanT,
dated  •„'•*>  April,  1848,  saying  that  Sir  John  died  11
June.  1847;  that  the  ships  were  abandoned  L"J
April,  1848,  when  the  survivors,  105  in  number,  set
out  for  Great  Fish  river.  Many  relies  were  found
of  this  partv,  who  perished,  one  by  one,  on  their
southward  journey,  after  leaving  their  vessels.
Further  intelligence  was  gained  by  the  Stewart  ex-
pedition in  1854,  which  found  shoes,  cooking  uten-
sils, etc..  among  the  Esquimaux,  bearing  the  Frank-
lin mark.  The  natives  deelared  that  the  party  died
of  starvation.  It  ap|*>ars  that  to  Sir  John  belongs
the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  discover  a  north-
west passage,  and  this  is  awarded  him  in  the  in-
scription on  the  monument  erected  to  him  in  Wa-
terloo plaee.  London,  in  1800.  He  attained  the  rank
of  rear-admiral.  See  Capt  F.  L.  McClintock,
"Narrative  of  the  Fate  of  Sir  John  Franklin"
(London  and  Boston,  1*(W));  (apt.  S.  Osborn,  "The
Career.  Last  Voyage,  and  Fate  of  Sir  John  Frank-
lin "  (I^ondon,  1800);  also  the  works  of  Kane,
Richardson,  and  Inglefield.  The  titles  of  the  works
published  by  Sir  John  are  "Captain  John  Frank-
lin's Narrative  of  a  Journey  to  the  Shore*  of  the
Polar  Sea,  1819-'22,  with  an  Appendix  on  various
Subjects  relating  to  Science  and  Natural  History"
(London,  l*'j:5):  and  "Captain  John  Franklin's
Narrative  of  a  Second  Expedition  to  the  Shores  of
th.  Polar  Sea,  1825-'7"  (Philadelphia,  1828,  and
London,  1*20).

I  I!  VNKLIN,  Thomas  Levering,  elergvman.
b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa..  10  April,  1822.  After  his
graduation  at  Trinity,  in  1841,  he  was  ordained
deacon  by  Bishop  Meade,  in  Alexandria.  \'a..  in
1844,  and  priest  in  Camden,  N.  J„  in  the  follow-
ing  year.  His  charges  have  been  Trinity  church,
Mootvstown.  N.  J.;  St.  Ann's.  Amsterdam,  N.  Y. ;
St.  John's.  Mount  Morris.  N.  V.  ;  Christ  church,
Madison,  Ind.:  and  the  Church  of  the  Evangelists,
Philadelphia,  where  he  still  remains  (1**7).  He  lia>
travelled  extensively  through  the  United  States
and  built  churches  and  rectories.  Be  founded  the
•lane  Qrey  School,  Mount  Morris.  N.  V..  in  1800,
and  was  it*  rector  till  1*70. For  six  yean  ha  edited

Episcopal  Register."  and  he  has  contributed
to  religious  and  secular  journals.  Be  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Holwrt  in  1*71.

I  I:  VNKLIN.  William,  the  last  royal  governor
I),  in Philadelphia  in 172":  d.  in

iiid,  17  Nov..  l*i:i. H,.  was  an  illegitimate


son  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Franklin. A I  tout  a  year  aj
ins  birth  his  father  aMfriedi  took  the  child  im

house,  and  liroiight  him  up  as  a  son.  In  his  child-
hood be  was  remarkably  fond  of  books,  and  of  an
adventurous  dis|M>sition.  During  the  French  war
of  1744  '*  ha  "lilained  a  commission  in  the  Penn-
sylvania forces,  with  which  he  served  in  one  or  two
campaigns  on  the  Canadian  frontier,  ar.
In-  captain  U-fore  he  was  of  age,  gaining  praise  for
his  conduct  at  TJOOOdofOga.  From  17">4till  1786
he  was  comptroller  of  the  general  •  and

during  part  of  that  period  was  d.  rk  of  the  pro-
vincial a.sscuibly.  In  1757  he  accompanied  his  fa-
ther to  Loudon,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1758.  He  then  visited  S-otland,  and  bfJOfJM
acquainted  with  the  Karl  of  Bute,  who  recom-
mended him  to  I^onl  Fairfax,  and  the  lattn
cured  for  him,  unsolicited,  the  appointment  of
governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1702.  to  which  province
he  returned  the  next  year.  His  ajppointment
caused  great  disgust,  probably  from  his  birth  as
well  as  his  time-serving  conduct  and  courtier-like
propensities,  as  he  had  bean  originally  a  Whig,  but
iiccame  a  Tory  on  being  made  governor.  In  the
revolutionary  contest  he  remained  loyal  to  Great
Britain,  and  some  of  his  letters,  containing  strong
expressions  of  Tory  sentiments,  having  been  inter-
cepted, a  guard  was  put  over  him  in  January,  1770,
by  the  new  government,  to  prevent  his  escape  from
Perth  Amboy,  and  he  was  declared  an  enemy  to
his  country.  Be  gave  his  parole  that  he  would
not  leave  the  province,  but  in  June  he  issued  a
proclamation,  as  governor  of  New  Jersey,  summon-
ing a  meeting  of  the  abrogated  legislative  assem-
bly. For  this  he  was  arrested  by  order  of  the
(irovincial  congress  of  New  Jersey  and  removed  to
mrlington.  He  was  soon  afterward  sent  to  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  where  he  was  strictly  guarded  for
about  two  years,  till  in  November,  1778,  he  was  ex-
changed. Gov.  Franklin  remained  in  New  York
till  August,  1782,  and  for  a  short  period  served  as
president  of  the  board  of  loyalists  in  New  Jersey,
when  he  sailed  for  England,  in  which  country  ha
continued  to  reside  till  his  death.  The  English
government  granted  him  £1,800  in  remuneration
of  his  losses,  and  a  pension  of  £800  per  annum.
William  Franklin's  adhesion  to  the  roval  cause  led
to  an  estrangement  between  him  and  his  father,
but  in  1784  the  two  became  partially  reconciled.
Dr.  Franklin  bequeathed  to  William  his  lands  in
Nova  Scotia,  and  released  him  fnun  all  debts  that
his  executors  might  find  to  be  due  from  him,  and
added  this  clause  in  his  will:  "The  part  he  acted
against  me  in  the  late  war,  which  is  of  public  no-
toriety, will  account  for  my  leaving  him  do  more
of  an  estate  he  endeavored  to  deprive  me  of."  Ib-
was  the  author  of  "A  Humble  Attempt  at  Scur-
rility, in  Imitation  of  those  Great  Masters  of  the
Alt,  the  Bar.  Dr.  S— th,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Al— n.  the
Bar.  Mr.  Ew — n.  the  Rev.  I).  J.  D — oe,  and  the
heroic  J — n  D — n.  Baa,  betas; a  Full  Answer  to  the
Observations  on  Mr.  IPs  Advertisement.  By  Jack
Retort.  Student  in  Scurrility,  (^uilsilvania,'  11
A  defence  of  Dr.  Franklin,  by  his  son.  Printed  at
Philadelphia."  The  initials  in  the  title  severally
signify  Smith.  Alison,  Ewing.  Dove,  John  Dickin-
son, and  Hughes.  (iov.  Franklin  also  published
"Th*  Answer  of  his  Excellency  William  Franklin,
IN.,.'- (Philadelphia).—  His  son,'  William  Temple,
d.  in  Paris.  France,  25  May.  1*2:5.  accompanied  his
grandfather  to  Paris,  acting  aj  bis  secretary.  lie
published  editions  of  Franklin's  works  (London
and  Philadelphia.  1819-191

FRANKLIN. William lluel. soldier, b. in
York.  Pa..  27 Feb., lsj.j. H„  was  graduated  at


586


FRANKLIN


PKANSI0L1


the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1H4^J  at  the  head  of
his  class.  among  the  members  of  which  wen  l'l\>-
si-  S.  (Jrant,  Christopher  C.  Augur,  and  James  A.
Hardie.  He  served  in  the  topographical  engineers
until  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war,  the  dates  of  his
various  commissions  being  as  follows :  2d  lieuten-
ant. II  Sept.,  1846;  1st  lieutenant,  3  March,  1853;
and  captain,  1  July.  1857.  He  was  brevetted  1st
lieutenant,  23  Feb..  1847,  for  gallantry  at  the  battle
of  Buena  Vista.  In  the  Mexican  war  he  was  at-
tached to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Taylor  as  a  topographi-
cal engineer,  was  engaged  in  making  reconnois-
saiKis.  and  carried  Taylor's  orders  on  the  battle-
field of  Buena  Vista.  His  other  service  prior  to
1861  was  such  as  ordinarily  falls  to  an  engineer
officer.  He  was  engaged  in  surveys  on  the  western
plains  and  mountains,  as  assistant  professor  at  West
Point,  as  engineer-secretary  of  the  light-house
board,  and  in  charge  of  the  construction  of  light-
houses and  public
buildings.  At  the
beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  was
stationed  in  Wash-
ington in  charge
of  the  construction
of  the  capitol,  the
treasury  depart-
ment, and  the  gen-
eral post-office.  He
was  appointed  col-
onel of  the  12th
infantry,  14  .May,
1861,  brigadier-
general  of  volun-
teers, 17  May,  1861,
and  major-general
of  volunteers,  4
July,  1862.  He  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  in  the  regu-
lar army,  30  June,  1862,  for  his  gallant  conduct  in
the  battles  before  Richmond,  and  of  major-general,
13  March,  1865,  for  services  during  the  rebellion.
His  first  active  service  was  at  Bull  Run,  where  he
commanded  a  brigade  in  Heintzleman's  division,
and  was  engaged  in  the  heaviest  part  of  the  battle,
around  the  Henry  house.  On  the  organization  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  he  received  a  division,
and,  when  the  6th  army  corps  was  formed,  he  was
placed  in  its  command,  retaining  it  throughout  the
year  1862. He  was  in  most  of  the  battles  on  the

g'ltinsula — Yorktown,  West  Point,  White  Oak
ridge,  Savage's  Station,  Malvern  Hill,  and  Harri-
son's Landing.  After  his  return  to  Maryland  with
the  army,  he  was  in  command  on  the  field  of  Cramp-
ton's  Gap,  South  Mountain,  14  Sept.,  1862,  and  was
engaged  in  the  battle  of  Antietam,  17  Sept.,  1862.
At  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  13  Dec,  1862,  he
commanded  the  left  grand  division,  consisting  of
his  own  corps,  the  6th,  under  William  F.  Smith,
and  the  1st  corps,  under  John  F.  Reynolds.  (See
Burnside.)  Gen.  Burnside  complained  to  the  com-
mittee on  the  conduct  of  the  war  that  Franklin  did
not  obey  his  orders  in  this  battle,  and  the  latter
was  sharply  censured  by  the  committee.  He  was
also  one  of  the  generals  removed  by  Burnside  for
insubordination,  and  the  failure  of  the  president  to
approve  the  order  of  removal  led  to  Burnside's
resignation  of  his  command.  After  being  on  wait-
ing orders  for  several  months,  Gen.  Franklin  was
returned  to  active  service  in  July,  1863,  and  on
15  Aug.,  1863,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  19th  army  corps.  He  took  part  in  the  Red
river  expedition  of  1864,  and  was  wounded  in  the
battle  of  Sabine  Cross-Roads,  8  April,  1864. He


xirO .  ^^lccJ^oo


was  obliged  to  leave  the  army  on  account  of  ill-
ness, 29  April,  1864,  and  remained  on  leave  of  ab-
sence till  2  Dec,  when  he  was  assigned  to  duty  on
a  retiring  board  at  Wilmington,  Del.  During  his
leave  he  was  captured  by  Confederate  raiders
while  he  was  riding  on  the  Philadelphia  and  Bal-
timore railroad,  11  July,  1864,  but  escaped  tram
them  on  the  following  night.  He  resigned,  15
March,  1866,  and  since  nas  been  engaged  as  vice-
president  of  the  Colt's  fire-arms  company  at  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  and  in  various  other  manufacturing
enterprises.  He  has  had  charge  of  the  const  ruc-
tion of  the  new  state-house  at  Hartford,  was  state
commissioner  at  the  Centennial  exposition  of  1876,

E residential  elector  in  1876,  adjutant-general  of
onnecticut  in  1877  and  1878,  and  president  of  the
board  of  managers  of  the  National  home  for  dis-
abled soldiers  in  1880-'7.  He  has  contributed  vari-
ous articles  to  the  "American  Cyclopaxlia"  and
to  periodical  literature  on  military  subjects. —  His
brother,  Samuel  Rhoads,  naval  officer,  b.  in  York,
Pa.,  25  Aug.,  1825,  was  appointed  midshipman,  18
Feb.,  1841,  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Cumberland,"  of
the  Pacific  squadron,  in  1841-'3,  and  to  the  frigate
"  United  States  "  and  store-ship  "  Relief,"  in  the
Pacific,  in  1845-'7.  He  was  present  at  the  demon-
stration on  Monterey  during  the  Mexican  war,  pro-
moted to  passed  midshipman,  10  Aug.,  1847,  and
assigned  to  duty  on  the  "  Independence,"  of  the
Mediterranean  squadron  for  1849-'52,  and  to  the
coast  survey,  1853-'5.  He  was  commissioned  mas-
ter, 18  April,  1855,  and  lieutenant,  14  Sept.  follow-
ing, served  in  the  naval  academy  in  1855-'6,  on
the  sloop  "  Falmouth,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in
1857-9,  on  the  " Macedonian "  in  1859-'60,  and  on
the  steam  sloop  "  Dacotah,"  on  the  Atlantic  coast,
in  1861-'2.  He  was  a  volunteer  on  board  the
"  Roanoke  "  in  the  action  with  the  "  Merrimac  "  in
March,  1862,  in  which  the  "Congress"  and  the
"Cumberland"  were  destroyed.  He  became  ex-
ecutive officer  of  the  "  Roanoke,"  and  engaged  with
the  forts  at  Sewell's  point,  but  the  sloop  grounded,
and  did  not  get  fairly  into  action.  He  was  com-
missioned lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
commanded  the  "  Aroostook,"  of  the  James  river
flotilla,  in  1862,  the  "  Aroostook,"  of  the  western
Gulf  blockading  squadron,  in  1863,  and  was  on
special  duty  in  New  Orleans  in  1864.  During  the
operations  in  Mobile  bay  in  the  spring  of  1865  he
was  on  the  staff  of  acting  rear-admiral  Thatcher,
and  was  the  naval  representative  in  the  demand
for  the  surrender  of  trie  city  of  Mobile.  He  was
made  commander,  26  Sept.,  1866,  and  given  the
steamer  "  Saginaw,"  of  the  north  Pacific  squadron,
in  1866-'7,  on  ordnance  duty  at  Mare  Island,  CaL,
in  1868-'9,  was  advanced  to  the  grade  of  captain,
13  Aug.,  1872,  and  commanded  the  "  Wabash  and
afterward  the  "  Franklin  "  until  transferred  to  duty
as  hydrographer  to  the  bureau  of  navigation  at
Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  promoted  to  commo-
dore, 15  Dec,  1880,  assigned  to  special  duty  in  the
bureau  of  equipment  department,  and  became  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  examiners,  16  June,  1883.  1  ■
received  the  appointment  of  rear-admiral,  24  Jan.,
1885,  was  assigned  to  duty  as  superintendent  of  the
naval  observatory,  and  in  1886  became  command*
ant  of  the  European  station.  In  August,  1887,  he
will  be  of  legal  age  to  be  retired.

FRANSIOLI,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  the
canton  of  Ticino,  Switzerland,  30  Nov.,  1817.  He
studied  in  the  College  of  Pollegio  and  the  semi-
naries of  Monza  and  Milan,  and  in  1840  was  or-
dained priest.  His  first  missionary  work  was  in
his  native  canton,  but  he  was  soon  promoted  to
the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  SJ.  Maurice,  where


PRASKR


ri:  •


y.n


be  remained  twelve  years. He  m  then  appointed

prim  i;  a!  of  th<<  Normal  school  by  the  government

ii,  .iii.l had three  hundred teachers  under

ntml. II'-  filled  this  |m»s(  f..r  two  yeai
tlul  mm  h  to  advance  |»opular  education. Be  e*at

lied  to  resign  it  through  ill  health,  and.  with

of  his  bishop.  In-  sailed  f»»r  the  United

States  in  the  following  year.  Shortly  after  land-
went  t<>  Brooklyn  end  was  assigned  t<>  duty
iwrish  <>f  St.  Charli-s. In IfW  he  was  ap-

i  t<>  open  u  new  1'nn^ii  in  the  neighborhood

ks  ami  Warren  streets.  In  tin-  following
year  the  pariah  <>f  St.  Peters  was  founded,  and  a
•lurch  erected  with  a  Ofaiiiegnthni  of  3,000,
which  under  his  ministry  has  increased  to  17,000,
thus  forming  the  largest  parish  in  the  diocese  of
Brooklyn.  In  1888,  at  a  cost  of  over  $60,000,  he
built  the  academy  that  adjoins  St.  Peter's  church,
in  which  about  2.000  children  receive  free  inst ruc-
tion. During  the  war  he  established  a  home  for
orphans,  and  afterward  erected  St.  Peter's  hospital.
In  1878  he  purchased,  at  a  cost  of  $80,000,  the  re-
maindcr  of  the  block  on  which  St.  Peter's  church
stands,  and  all  the  buildings  on  it  were  devoted  to
charitable  purposes.  He  is  now  (1887)  about  to
erect  on  this  estate  a  hospital  at  a  cost  of  $200,000.
He  afterward  secured  possession  of  the  chapel  of
the  Church  of  the  Pilgrims,  and.  after  completely
jjJmdliMinj,  it  and  building  additions,  converted  it
into  a  library,  school,  and  kindergarten.

KRASKR,  Charles,  artist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  ('..  80  Am;..  17*2;  d.  there,  5  Oct,,  1800.  In
his  y.nth  he  made  sketches  of  the  scenery  about
Charleston.  He  studied  law,  and  three  years  later
began  the  study  of  art,  but  was  discouraged  and
resumed  his  legal  studies.  He  was  admitted  to
the  l»r  in  1807,  and  retired  from  practice  in  1818
with  sufficient  competency  to  continue  art.  He
devoted  much  attention  to  miniature  painting,  in
which  he  was  successful.  In  1825  he  painted  a
portrait  of  Lafayette,  and  subsequently  a  great
■■nber  of  citizens  of  South  Carolina.  He  pro-
duced many  landscape  and  genre  pictures.  In
18,")?  his  works  were  exhibited  in  Charleston.  For  a
short  time  he  resided  in  Boston.  He  contributed
to  various  periodicals,  published  addresses,  and
"  Reminiscences  of  Charleston."

KRASKR.  Christopher  Finlar,  Canadian
state-man.  I>.  in  Broekvdle,  Ont.,  in  October.  is:i«*.
Early  in  life  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,  but
began  the  study  of  law  in  1859,  and  was  called  to
the  bar  of  Upper  Canada  in  1865.  He  was  first
elected  to  the  legislative  assembly  of  Ontario  for
South  Orenviile  in  1H72.  but  was  unseated  on  peti-
tion. He  was  returned  for  the  same  constituency  in
October,  1H72,  re-elected  in  1875,  represented  Brock-
ville  in  1n7!».  and  again  in  1883.  He  was  appointed
a  meiiiU'r  of  the  provincial  executive  council  in
November,  1H7:{,  and  was  provincial  secretary  and
Ngiatrar  from  that  date  till  April,  1*74;  he  was
then  appointed  commissioner  of  public  works,
which  office  he  has  since  retained.  Mr.  l'ra-er  was
instrumental  in  organizing  the  Ontario  Roman
Catholic  league  for  political  purposes,  and  has  l»een
ice  regarded  as  the  political  director  of  his
no-religionists  in  that  province.  He  is  a  bencher  of
the  law  society  <»f  Ontario,  president  of  the  Roman
Catholic  literary  society  of  Brockville,  and  one  of
rectors  of  the  Ontario  hank.

PHASER,  Simon. British  soldier,  b.  in  1729;

V  V..  7  Oct, 1777. He  was  the

-t son of Alexander Prater, of Hal  wain

ml",  of  the  Lovat  family,  by  a  daughter  of

kintosh,  of  Killachy.  from whom the

9ur  Jamea  Mackintosh  was  directly  do-


eeended. Me  entered th,-  army  at an  early  age,
became  lieutenant  of  the  78th  foot,  8  Jan.,  :
captain.  22 April, 17.*»0. major. 8 I  and

Inuteiiaiit-coloiu-l.  M  .Inly.  17<>*.  Me  served  with
distinction  in  Holland  and  Germany,  was  in  the
expedition  against  Loufabvrg.  and  accompanied
Qea.  Wolfe  to  Quebec. He  did  garrison  duty  at

(iibraltar  for  several  years,  and  was  afterward  sta-
tioned  in  Ireland,  whence  he  embarked  for  America
with  the  21th  regiment,  8  April.  1770.  arriving  at
Qnefaea  <>n  M  Mav.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  I
ada  he  was  appointed  by  Carleton.  10  .lime.  1776,
a  brigadier-general  for  America  only.  His  last
commission  was  that  of  colonel  in  the  armv,  his
ap|H»intment  being  gazetted  22  July.  1777.  He  as-
sisted in  driving  the  Americans  out  of  Canada  in
1770,  und  was  in  command  in  the  severely  contested
action  at  Three  Rivers.  Having  acquired  a  high
reputation  for  judgment  and  cool  daring,  he  was
selected  by  Burgoyne  to  command  the  light  bri-
gade, which  formed  the  right  wing  of  the  British
armv.  He  thus  was  constantly  in  the  advance,
tendering  most  etlicient  service, and,  had  his  advice
been  followed,  the  blunder  of  advancing  on  Ben-
nington with  heavy  mounted  German  dragoons,
on  an  expedition  requir-
ing the  greatest  celer-
ity of  movement,  would
never  have  been  com-
mitted. After  the  evac-
uation of  Ticonderoga
he  pursued  the  retreat-
ing Americans  under  St.
Clair,  and,  assisted  by
his  German  ally.  Gen.
Riedesel,  gained  a  sig-
nal victory  at  Hubbaru-
ton,  7  July,  1777.  He
opened  the  battle  of  19
Sept.  by  engaging  Mor-
gan's skirmishers,  and
in  the  action  of  7  Oct.
was  shot  and  mortally
wounded  by  "  Tim  Mur-
phy," one  of  Morgan's
riflemen,  in  obedience  to
special  instructions  from  that  officer.  During  the
succeeding  night  he  was  tenderly  ministered  to  by
the  Baroness  Riedesel,  who  did  all  in  her  power  to
alleviate  his  sufferings,  and  at  eight  o'clock  of  the
following  morning  he  died.  He  was  buried  at  sun-
set, by  his  particular  request,  on  a  knoll  overlooking
the  Hudson,  Chaplain  Brudenell  officiating.  As  the
funeral  cortege  moved  up  the  hill  the  American  bat-
teries opened  fire,  but  ceased  as  soon  as  the  nature
of  the  gathering  was  known.  To  Burgoyne  the
loss  of  Fraser  was  a  severe  blow,  and  contemporary
military  writers  affirm  that,  had  he  lived,  the  British
would  have  made  good  their  retreat  into  Canada.
It  was  said  of  him  that  he  had  always  shown  as
great  skill  in  conducting  a  retreat  as  bravery  in
leading  an  attack,  having,  during  the  seven  years'
war.  brought  olT  in  safety  500  chasseurs  in  sight  of
the  Pre ni  h  army.  (Jen.  Praser's  temper  was  warm,
open,  and  communicative,  but  reserved  in  matters
of  confidence.  Burgoyne  paid  him  a  touching
tribute  in  his  "Narrative."  and  in  his  report  to
Lord  (ieorge  (ierniaine.  dated  Allwnv.  20  Oct.,
1777.  said:  "  The  extensive  merits  which  marked
the  puhiic  ami  private  character  of  Brig.-tien.
Prater  will  long  remain  upon  the  memory  of  this
army,  and  make  his  loss  a  subject  of  particular  re-
gret." He  married  in  1769  Mrs.  (irant.  .,f  London,
who  survived  him,  and  who,  in  17H1.  married  at
Edinburgh an advocate named George Buchan


umi.


^Jratfer-^


088


FRASEB


FRECHETTE


Hepburn.  The  statement  that  the  remains  of  Gen.
Fni-<  r  WON  removed  to  England  after  the  Revo-
lutionary war  is  without  foundation.

FRASER,  William,  Canadian  EL  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Scotland  about  1790:  d.  in  Antigonish,  Nova
Scotia,  4  Oct..  1H.">7.  He  was  consecrated  vicar-
apostolic  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1821,  with  the  title  of
bishop  of  Fanes.  He  devoted  himself  exclusively
to  tin-  Scottish  members  of  his  flock,  rarely  stirring
from  the  Scottish  settlement  of  Antigonish,  in  the
northern  part  of  the  peninsula.  The  Irish  Catholics
complained  bitterly  of  their  bishop,  and  reproached
him  with  taking  no  interest  in  them.  Finally  they
laid  their  complaints  before  the  pope,  who  erected
Halifax  into  a  bishopric  with  the  object  of  forcing
Bishop  Fraser  to  reside  in  it.  Father  William
Walsh,  an  Irish  priest,  was  also  appointed  coad-
jutor in  1842.  The  appointment  of  a  coadjutor
annoyed  Bishop  Fraser,  who  appealed  against  it  to
Rome,  and  in  the  mean  time  refused  to  recognize
Father  Walsh.  In  order  to  settle  these  difficulties
the  pope  divided  the  province  of  Nova  Scotia  into
two  dioceses,  Antigonish  being  united  to  Cape  Bre-
ton and  erected  into  the  diocese  of  Arishat,  with
Dr.  Fraser  as  titular  bishop.

FRAZEE,  John,  sculptor,  b.  in  Rahwav.  N.  J.,
18  July.  1790;  d.  in  Compton  Mills.  R.  I.,  24  Feb.,
1852.  He  was  a  farmer  and  a  stone-cutter  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  early  life,  but  afterward  re-
moved to  New  York  city  and  opened  a  marble-yard
on  Broadway.  From  1819  till  1823  his  work  con-
sisted chiefly  of  mantel-pieces  and  monuments.
He  was  long  unsurpassed  in  beauty  of  finish  and
in  the  delicacy  of  his  lettering.  Turning  his  at-
tention to  sculpture,  he  produced  in  1824.  for  St.
Paul's  church,  a  mural  tablet  and  bust  of  John
Wells,  which  was  an  elaborate  and  highly  finished
work.  In  1834  he  modelled  several  busts  of  emi-
nent men  for  the  library  of  the  Boston  athenaeum,
among  which  were  those  of  Daniel  Webster,  Pres-
cott,  Lowell,  Story,  Bowditch,  and  T.  H.  Perkins.
Subsequently  he  made  busts  of  John  Marshall,  La-
fayette, De  Witt  Clinton,  John  Jay,  Gen.  Jackson,
Bishop  Hobart,  Dr.  Stearns,  and  Dr.  Milnor.  He
was  the  architect  of  the  New  York  custom-house,
in  which  he  served  for  some  time  as  an  officer.

FRAZER,  John  Fries,  scientist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  8  July,  1812 ;  d.  there,  12  Oct.,  1872.  His
grandfather,  Lieut.-Col.  Persifor  Frazer,  served
during  the  Revolutionary  war  in  the  5th  Pennsyl-
vania regiment  under  Col.  Anthony  Wayne.  John
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1830.  During  his  college  career,  and  for  some
time  afterward,  he  acted  as  laboratory  assistant
to  Prof.  Alexander  D.  Bache,  and  in  that  capacity
aided  in  determining  with  accuracy,  for  the  first
time  in  the  United  States,  the  periods  of  the  daily
variations  of  the  magnetic  needle,  and  the  connec-
tion of  the  aurora  borealis  with  magnetic  forces.
He  also  assisted  Dr.  Robert  Hare,  who  at  that
time  held  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania.  Subsequently  he  studied
law  with  John  M.  Scott,  and  also  followed  a  medi-
cal course.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  ab-
sence from  Philadelphia  at  the  time  when  the  ex-
aminations were  held  prevented  his  receiving  a
medical  degree.  In  1836,  when  the  first  geologi-
cal survey  of  Pennsylvania  was  organized,  he  be-
iame  first  assistant  geologist  under  Prof.  Henry
D.  Rogers,  but  held  the  office  only  one  year,  when
he  resigned  to  accept  the  professorship  of  chem-
istry and  natural  philosophy  in  the  Philadel-
phia high  school.  In  1844,  Prof.  Bache  having
been  appointed  superintendent  of  the  coast-survey,
his  vacant  chair  of  chemistry  and natural phi-


losophy was  offered  to  Prof.  Fra/.er.  who  thonoo
fortli  l»ecame  connected  with  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  fM
senior  professor,  was  vice-provost  from  1855  till
18(58.  and  acting  provost  during  the  year  1859-'60.
In  addition  to  his  duties  in  the  university  he  de-
livered many  courses  of  lectures  on  phvsical  and
chemical  science  in  the  Franklin  institute,  and
from  1850  till  1866  edited  its  "Journal."  His
studies  to  keep  abreast  of  the  progress  of  the
sciences  that  he  taught  fully  occupied  his  time,
and  in  consequence  he  was  unable  to  carry  on  any
original  researches,  or  to  devote  his  attention  to
the  preparation  of  papers.  He  received  the  degree
of  Ph.D.  from  the  University  of  Lewisburg  in
1854,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1857.
Prof.  Frazer  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society  in  1842,  and  its  secretary
in  1845,  becoming  vice-president  in  1855.  He  was
one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  and  served  on  several  of  its
committees  which  furnished  reports  to  the  U.  S.
government.  See  the  sketch  by  Prof.  John  L.  Le-
conte  in  the  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the  National
Academy  of  Sciences"  (vol.  i.,  Washington,  1877).
— His  son,  Persifor,  geologist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  24  July,  1844,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1862,  and  at  once  became  an
aide  on  the  U.  S.  coast-survey,  serving  in  the
South  Atlantic  squadron  till  June,  1863.  He
joined  the  cavalry  and  remained  in  active  service
at  the  front  during  the  Gettysburg  campaign.  In
October,  1863,  he  was  made  acting  ensign  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  and  served  in  the  Mississippi  squadron
until  the  end  of  the  war,  when  he  was  honorably
discharged  in  November,  1865.  Subsequently  he
spent  three  years  in  Germany,  studying  princi-
pally in  the  Royal  Saxon  school  of  mines  in  Frei-
berg, where  he  completed  his  course  in  1869.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was  appointed
mineralogist  and  metallurgist  on  the  U.  S.  geologi-
cal survey,  and  wrote  the  report  on  these  subjects
in  1869.  In  1870  he  was  appointed  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and
four  years  afterward  resigned  this  chair  to  become
assistant  on  the  geological  survey  of  the  state.  He
presented  a  thesis  to  the  scientific  faculty  of  Lille
in  the  University  of  France,  for  which,  in  1882,  he
received  the  degree  of  doctor  of  natural  sciences.
This  was  the  first  time  that  this  degree  was  ever
awarded  to  one  not  a  native  of  France.  He  was
connected  with  the  Franklin  institute  as  professor
of  chemistry,  and  also  as  one  of  the  editors  of  its
"  Journal "  in  1881,  and  its  board  of  managers.  1 1  is
investigations  have  included  researches  on  the  cause
of  the  white  color  of  the  moon  by  day ;  on  the  ap-
plication of  composite  photography  to  testing  the
genuineness  of  signatures;  and  on  carbon  buttons
to  register  delicate  variations  of  pressure.  Prof.
Frazer  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,
both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  sec-
retary of  the  committee  representing  American
geologists  in  t he  International  congress.  Besides
memoirs  published  in  various  journals  and  trans-
actions, he  has  published  "Tables  for  Determina-
tion of  Minerals"  (Philadelphia,  1874),  and  the
volumes  C,  CC,  CCC,  and  C4  of  the  geological  sur-
vey of  Pennsylvania  (1874-'80).

FRECHETTE,  Lonis  Honore\  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  Levis,  Quebec,  16  Nov.,  1*39.  His  pa-
ternal ancestor  was  among  the  first  settlers  of  New
France.  Louis  was  educated  at  Nicolet  college
and  at  Laval  university,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  Sep:
1864. From  1866  till  1871  he  resided  in  Chicago,


I»ET


MAN


589


1


* . ■  n«  1  •  •< I  tn  tin-  foreign  correspondem f  the

!  'nil railway. 1 1  «*  returned  to  I

in  1871,  ru  i  looted  In  iv7t  to  the  Dominion  par-
liament for  tin-  county  nf  Ijevis.  ami  represented
it  until  is7'.i.  when  be  was  defeased.  In  '
went  to  reside  in  Mini! 111. and  in  I860  l"  Nioolet,
■Mbec.  M.  Frechette  iditiil  ••  I.i-  journal  de  Que-
journal  dc  Levis"  in  1864  '•">.
"L'Amerique"  in  Chicago  in  l888-'70,  and  "La
P  '  in  Montreal  in  l884-'5.  He  has  also  been
a  oontributor  t<>  "L'Opinion  pubuque,"  of  Mon-
treal, and  haa  written  occasionally  for  other  |k»-
riodJoahv  Two  viiiiiiiK-s  of  his  poems,  M  Lea  Bonn
borcales  "  and  "  Les  oiscaux  dc  n
■roamed  by  tin-  French  academy  at  Paris  in  1HH().
The  author  was  granted  the  hist  .Mont yon  prize
unanimously.  McOill  university,  Montreal,  and
Onirn's  university,  Kingston,  conferred  uj)on  him
free  of  LL.  I),  His  volumes  of  poems  in-
clude  "  Mes  loisirs"  ((Quebec,  1NM);  ••  Ija  voix
d'un  rvtlr"  (1869):  "  Pclc-uiele "  (Montreal,  1877):
ami  "I.i-  ouhlies"  and  "Voix  d'outre-mer  "
.(1886).  His  published  dramas  and  comedies  are
-Felix  Poutre"(1868);  "  Papineau  "  (1880) ;  ••  The
Thunderbolt"  (1882);  and  "  Un  Dimanche  matin
a  I'hotel  du  Canada."  His  prose  works  include
"  lA'ttres  a  Basile"  (1872),  and  "  Petite  histoire  des
Boil  da  France."  He  has  translated  into  French
"  A  Chance  Acquaintance,"  by  William  I>.  Howells,
and  "Old  Creole  Days,"  bv  Qeorge  W.  Cable.

FREDFT, Peter,  author, I), in  Sebasat, Au-
vergne.  Franc*,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Ellicott's  Mills.  Md..
1856. He  received his  preparatory  education

the  College  of  Clermont,  and  afterward  entered
the  eocleaiaetieaJ  seminary  of  Clermont-Ferrand.
After  his  promotion  to  the  priesthood  he  joined
the  Society  of  St.  Sulpice,  and  was  sent  as  professor
to  the  Sulpitian  rtrmfnary  of  fTonVai  Here  he  re-
inauicil  six  years,  when  he  embarked  for  the  United

ites,  and  arrived  in  Baltimore  in  1831. He  spent
ie  remainder  of  his  life  as  professor  of  various
iches  of  ecclesiastical  learning  in  St.  Mary's
I'lninarv.  lialtimore,  and  published  an  "Ancient
History*  (Baltimore,  1850).  and  a  "Modern  His-
tory "  (1842). These  were  adopted  as  text-books  in
ie  Roman  Catholic  colleges  of  the  United  States,
and  also  in  the  Roman  Catholic  university  of  Ire-
"md. His  other  works  are  controversial  or  theo-

ical,  and  include  "  Inspiration and Canon  of

ripture";  "Original  Texts  and  Translations  of
ie  Bible";  "  Interpretation  of  Scripture";  "Ne-

sity  of  Baptism'  :  M  Bffecta  of  Baptism  and  the
Obligations  attached  to  it  ** ;  "  I^ay  Baptism  " ;  and
"  Doctrine  of  Exclusive  Salvation."

PREEDLET,  Edwin  Troxell,  author,  b.  in

hiladelphia.  Pa.,  98  .Inly. 1*27. His  youth  was

nt  in  Bucks  county,  where  he  attended  school.

I  afterward  entered  Treemounl  seminary,  Norris-

wn,  and  stadied  law  at  Harvard  in  184*>.  II.
then  remOTed  to  Cincinnati  and  became  part  pro-
jirietor  of  a  large  steam  inarble-niill.  He  Battled
in  Philadelphia  in  1851.  In  1860  be  published,  in
connection  with  Edward  Young,  the  "Manufac-
turers' Gazette,"  which  was  discontinued  in  1861.
He  has  lieen  interested  in  forming  societies  for  the
dissemination  of  useful  knowledge.  His  pubUoa-
■onaare  -Practical  Treatise  on  Bnsineaa  (Phila-
delphia, lsoi  ;  republished  in  England);  "The
Business  Man's  Legal  Adviser  "<  lN-Vl)  ;  "  leading
Pursuits  and  Leading  Men" (1856);  M  Philadelphia
and  its  Mamifacti.  .  :  2d  ed..  Ih',7);  -op-

portunities for Industry"  (1858); "History  o[
Manufactures  "<:{  vols.,  1867);  "Common

nse  in  Business  "(1877);  and  "  Home  ComfortoN

i-;;.  i  N..i..  is.so).


I III 1 I \  Y Vli., | hi,.,.  r.l,.  inColcH-

vilie,  Broom  i  .'i  F.i...  1886. she  was

graduated  at  the  University  of  Michigan  in
and  was  ■ppotlltod  teacher  of  Greek,  I^itin,  and
mathematics  at  (Jeneva  I^ake,  Wis.,  where  she  re-
mained .me  year.  Fr..in  1*77  till  1878  tin-
principal  of  "the  hifh«eobool  at  East  Saginaw,  Mich,
she  booaae  professor  of  btotorr  in  wallaaara  in
I*7'.».  which  pool  she  bald  until  1HM1.  In  that  year
she  became  acting  president  of  the  college,  and  in

1882  she  accepted  the  presidency.  The  degree  of
Ph.  I),  was  conferred  on  her  b?  the  University  of
Michigan  in  1HN*2,  and  that  of  doctor  of  letters  l.y
Columoia  in  1HM7.  In  the  latter  year  she  resigned,
and  in  Decern  I  >er  married  Prof,  George  II.  Palmer,
of  Harvard.

FREEMAN,  HarnardiiH,  clergvman.  b.  at
(iilhuis,  in  Hanover,  in  1660  J  d.  at  New  Utrecht.
L.  L  in  .January.  174.'J.  He  was  at  one  time  a  tailor
in  Westphalia,  but  was  ordained  bv  the  classis  of
Lingen.  It!  March.  1698.  At  the"  call  of  Gcrrit
Bancker,  of  Albany,  he  resolved  to  go  to  America.
He  reached  Schenectady,  28  July,  1700,  and  at  OBOa
began  his  labors  as  dominie  of  the  Reformed  Dutch
church,  which  was  then  indejiendent  of  the  Am-
sterdam classis.  He  was  of  great  natural  abilities,
and,  in  addition  to  a  knowledge  of  English.  Dutch,
and  German,  he  mastered  the  Mohawk  tongue,  and
soon  began  teaching  and  catechising  the  Mohawks.
With  the  aid  of  the  half-breed  interpetar  Hillities,
he  translated  portions  of  the  Anglican  liturgy  and
the  Bible  into  their  tongue.  His  influence  over  the
Indians  was  spiritually  powerful,  in  addition  to  its
being  a  strong  factor  in  promoting  their  friend-
ship with  the  Dutch  and  English.  He  married
25  couples,  baptized  101,  and  received  14  adults,
all  Indians,  into  the  church.  After  his  removal,
they  petitioned  for  his  return  to  them.  Under  a
commission  from  Lord  Cornbury,  dated  25  Dec.,
1705,  he  removed  to  Long  Island,  and  officiated  as
dominie  in  the  Reformed  churches  of  New  Utrecht,
Flatbush,  Bushwick,  and  Brooklyn.  This  act  of  the
governor  was  a  part  of  his  settled  policy  to  obtain
control  over  the  Dutch  churches,  and  to  eatabUah
episcopacy.  He  used  his  influence  to  have  an
American  classis  established,  so  that  the  Dutch
churches  in  America  would  be  free  from  the  juris-
diction of  the  classis  of  Amsterdam.  He  was  made
pastor  emeritus  in  1741,  after  forty-one  years'  ser-
vice. A  portrait  in  oil  of  Mr.  Freeman,  showing  a
vigorous  physique,  exists.  He  published  parts  of
the  English  liturgy  in  Mohawk  (1705);  "DeSpi-
zel  der  Self -Kennis  "  (Minor  of  Self- Knowledge)
(1720);  "  De  Weegshale der  (inade  GmIs"  (Balance
of  God's  Grace)  (1721);  and  "  Verdigiging"  (De-
fence against  the  church  of  Baritan)  (17'J'i>.

FREEMAN,  Florence,  sculptor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1836.  After  receiving  instruction  in
sculpture  from  Richard  S.  Greenough,  she  went  to
Italy  with  Charlotte  Cushman.  and  studied  for  one
year  in  Florence  with  Hiram  Powers.  In  1862  she
opened  a  studio  in  Koine,  when-  she  has  s|ient  her
professional  life.  She  has  executed  several  lias-
reliefs  of  Dante  j  a  luist  of  Sandalphon ;  "  The  Sleep-
ing Child  "  ;  "Thckla,  or  the  Tangled  Skein  "  ;  and
d  chimney-pieces,  one  of  which.  "Children
and  the  Yule  Log  and  Fireside  Spirits,"  was  at  the
Centennial  exhibition  in  Philadelphia  (lN7»i).

FREEMAN,  Fort  u  nut  uh,  sea-captain,  b.  in
Yarmouth.  England:  d.  in  New  York  city,  22. July,
l^n.  lie  came  to  the  United  States  at  an  early
age.  fust  commanded  vessels  sailing  from  Balti-
more, and  was  subsequently  commander  of  the
s|,i|.s  -.Sea."  "  Marmion,"  "  lb-solute."  "Guy  Man-
nering,"  and  "Silas  Wright,"  all  from  New  York.


.vio


FREEMAN


FREEMAN


When  captain  of  the  M  Sea,"  he  took  over  the  last

f  resident  ial  message  ever  carried  by  a  sailing  vessel.
[g  w.i-  afterward  commander  of  the  steamers
"Colorado"  and  "Minnesota."  The  latter  took
fire  in  mid-ocean,  and  after  twelve  hours'  heroic
exertion,  in  which  Capt.  Freeman  distinguished
liimsclf,  the  flames  were  subdued.

F 11 K  EM  A  N,  George  Wash  1  ngton,  P.  K.  bishop,
b.  in  Sandwich,  Mass.,  13  June,  1789;  d.  in  Little
Rock,  Ark.,  29  April,  1858.  His  early  manhood
was  spent  in  secular  occupation,  but  he  afterward
went  to  North  Carolina  ana  studied  for  the  ministry
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in  Christ  church,  Raleigh,  N.  C,  by
Bishop  Ravenscroft,  8  Oct.,  1826,  and  priest  in
Christ  church,  Newborn,  N.  C,  20  May,  1827,  by
the  same  bishop.  For  two  years  he  served  as  mis-
sionary in  the  diocese  of  North  Carolina.  In  1829
he  was  elected  rector  of  Christ  church,  Raleigh,
which  office  he  filled  until  1840.  He  then  removed
to  Columbia,  Tenn.,  and  thence,  a  year  later,  to
Swedesborough,  N.  J.  After  a  short  stay  in  the
latter  place,  he  accented  a  call  to  become  rector  of
Immanuel  church,  Newcastle,  Del.  He  was  soon
afterward  elected  missionary  bishop  of  Arkansas
and  the  Indian  territory,  and  was  consecrated  in
St.  Peter's  church,  Philadelphia,  26  Oct.,  1844.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University
of  North  Carolina  in  1839.

FREEMAN,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  22  April,  1759;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,
14  Nov.,  1835.  He  received  his  first  education  in
the  public  Latin-school  of  Boston,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1777,  after  which  he  visited
Cape  Cod  and  drilled  a  company  about  to  join  the
colonial  troops.  In  1780  he  went  to  Quebec,  where
he  was  captured  and  detained  till  1782,  when  he
went  to  Boston  and  became  lay-reader  of  King's
chapel.  This  was  originally  an  Episcopal  church,
founded  in  1686.  He  became  a  Unitarian  in  his
views,  and  induced  the  Episcopal  society  of  this
church  to  alter  its  liturgy  in  1785,  and,  as  the
bishop  refused  to  ordain  him,  he  was  consecrated
with  a  peculiar  service  by  his  own  wardens  and
people,  18  Nov.,  1787.  He  was  the  first  minister
in  the  United  States  to  avow  the  name  of  Uni-
tarian, and  through  his  means  the  first  Episcopal
church  in  New  England  became  the  first  Unitarian
church  in  this  country.  He  continued  sole  minister
of  King's  chapel  until  1809,  when  the  Rev.  Samuel
Cary  was  given  him  as  a  colleague.  After  the
death  of  Mr.  Cary  in  1815  Dr.  Freeman  served
alone  till  1824,  when  Rev.  Francis  W.  P.  Green-
wood was  associated  with  him.  In  1826  Dr.  Free-
man gave  up  his  duties  to  his  colleague,  owing  to
failing  health,  and  retired  to  a  country  residence
near  Boston,  where  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life.
Dr.  Freeman  printed  no  controversial  sermons,  and
seldom  preached  them.  He  was  thoroughly  liberal
and  intimate  with  the  best  men  of  all  denomina-
tions, though  he  disliked  what  he  called  "  the  cant
of  liberality."  He  was  a  member  of  the  first
school  committee  of  Boston,  chosen  in  1792,  the
schools  previous  to  this  time  having  been  man-
aged by  the  selectmen  of  the  town.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  histori-
cal society,  to  which  he  rendered  valuable  service.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1811.  He  was  an  accomplished  scholar,  and  his
style  was  a  model  of  pure  English.  Besides  many
contributions  to  periodical  literature,  he  published
a  "Description  of  Boston"  ("Boston  Magazine."
1784);  a  "Sermon  on  the  Death  of  Rev.  John
Eliot,  D.  D."  (1813) ;  and  a  volume  of  "  Sermons  and


Charges "  (1882),  which  were  criticised  bv  Robert
Southey  in  a  letter  to  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Limerick,
6  March.  1833.

FREEMAN,  James  Edward,  artist,  b.  in  Nova
Scotia  in  1808;  d.  in  London,  England.  21  Nov.,
1884.  His  parents  removed  to  Otsego,  N.  V..  where
his  early  life  was  spent.  After  many  hardships
and  difficulties  he  made  his  way  to  New  York.
where  he  entered  the  National  academy  of  design.
He  became  an  associate  in  1831  and  was  elected
an  academician  in  1833.  For  a  while  he  painted
in  western  New  York,  and  removed  to  Rome  in
1836,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He  was  a
painter  of  genre  pictures  and  portraits.  Among
his  works  are  "The  Beggars,"  "The  Flower  Girl,"
"  The  Savoyard  Boy  in  London."  "  Young  Italy/
"  The  Bad  Shoe,"  "  The  Crusaders'  Return,"  "  Study
of  an  Angel,"  "Studv  of  a  Head  of  Judith."  "  The
Mother  and  Child""  (1868),  and  "The  Lucchese
Peasants  on  the  Sands  of  the  Sezchio  "  (1883).  He
published  "Gatherings  from  an  Artist's  Portfolio"
(New  York,  1877).— His  wife,  Horatia  Augusta
Lat  ilia,  sculptor,  b.  in  London,  England, 28  Aug.,
1826,  was  of  Italian  and  English  parentage.  She
was  married  in  1847,  and,  devoting  her  life  to
sculpture,  has  executed  several  works  that  show
artistic  talent.  Among  these  are  "  The  Princes  in
the  Tower,"  "  The  Triumph  of  Bacchus,"  and  "  The
Culprit  Fay,"  which  is  the  most  ideal  of  her  pro-
ductions. She  has  also  made  fonts,  chimney-pieces,
and  vases,  both  in  marble  and  wood.

FREEMAN,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in  Den-
nis, Mass.,  8  April,  1741 ;  d.  in  Sandwich,  Mass.,
20  Sept.,  1827.  He  studied  medicine  and  in  1765
settled  in  Sandwich,  where  he  studied  law  with  his
relative,  Col.  James  Otis.  He  was  an  active  patriot
during  the  Revolution,  held  command  of  a  regi-
ment of  militia  in  the  expedition  to  Rhode  Island,
and  served  as  brigadier-general  of  militia  from
1781  till  1793.  He  performed  various  services  in
the  legislature,  was  judge  of  probate  for  forty-
seven  years,  judge  of  the  common  pleas  for  thirty
years,  and  a  member  of  congress  from  Massachu-
setts from  1795  till  1799.  He  was  one  of  the  best
extempore  speakers  of  the  day,  and  was  distin-
guished as  a  physician  and  surgeon.  He  was  the
author  of  "  A  Charge  to  the  Grand  Jury  at  Barn-
stable" (Barnstable,  1802).— His  son,  Frederick,
clergyman,  b.  in  Sandwich,  Mass.,  in  1800  ;  d.
there,  in  1883,  was  engaged  as  a  school-teacher  and
for  a  time  studied  law.  Subsequently  he  taught
in  the  academy  at  Newbern,  N.  C.,  and  was  finally
made  its  principal.  In  1823  he  began  to  preach,
and  in  the  next  year  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  where  he
remained  ten  years.  He  afterward  took  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  held  charges
in  Philadelphia,  Bangor,  and  Augusta.  He  then
returned  to  Sandwich,  where  he  established  a  col-
legiate institute  in  1834.  He  was  the  author  of  a
"  History  of  Cape  Cod";  "Annals  of  Barnstable
County"  (l&58-^62);  "Genealogy  of  the  Freeman
Family"  (1875);  and  " Civilization  and  Barbarian
illustrated  by  Especial  Reference  to  Metacomet  and
the  Extinction  of  his  Race"  (1878).

FREEMAN,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Falmouth
(now  Portland),  Me.,  15  June,  1743;  d.  there,  2
Sept.,  1831.  He  was  an  active  patriot  during  the
Revolutionary  struggle,  was  secretary  of  the  ( Cum-
berland county  convention  in  1774,  a  member  of
the  provincial  congress  in  1775,  and  of  the
chusetts  house  of  representatives  in  1776  and  177*.
When  the  courts  were  reorganized  in  1775  he  was
appointed  clerk,  which  office  he  held  for  fort y-tiv.-
years. He  was  register  of  probate  until  commis-


FRKK.M  VN


PRRIRE  i'i:  win:  \i».\


Ml


sioned  judge  in  I80<  remaining  i»  the  l»

till 1890. Prom  1 77**  till  1  *'»."»  In-  was  postmaster

•rtland. He  was  an  active  and  efficient  friend

in college. His publications include

Jutte*  (1808):  mid  ••Pro-

.ii.l  he  edited  the  "Jour-

FRKKMAN,  William  Grlfrabr,  soldier,  b.  in

ii 1^1".; d.  in  Cornwall.  Pa.. 12 Nov.,
graduated «t the I".  S. military
.  imv  in  1884  «iid  a— igmd  to  the  4th  artillery.
■  rved in  the  Florida  war.  mid  was  made 1-t
lieutenant for  gallantry  on  several  occasion-.. In
1  hi-  Itecame  iiistnicior  of  infantry  and  artillery
tactics  at  Weal Point,  and in  the  following  year
ed  on  the  northern  frontier  at  Huffalo,  during
the  Canada  border  disturlwnees. From 1*11  till
•  he  served  as  assistant  in  the  adjutant-pen-
's office  in  Washington.  I>.  C He  was  aftcr-
!  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Scott,  commanding  the
army  headquarters  at  New  York. He  was  brcvet-
te.l  major  in  IK47,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  1848,
••for  meritorious  conduct,  particularly  in  the  per-
formance of  his  duty  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war
with Mexico." He  made  a  tour  of inspection  of
the  Department  of  Texas  in  1853,  and  served  as  as-
i it t  adjutant-general  from  1853  till  1856,  when
he  resigned  on  account  of  failing  health,  which
prevented  his  taking  part  in  the  civil  war.

Fit  KIRK.  Luiz  Jose  J  illiquid™  (fry -re),  Bra-
zilian poet,  b.  in  Sio  Salvador  da  Hahia.  81  Dec..
.':  d.  there.  21  July,  1H.V>.  At  the  age  of
seven  he  was  disabled  by  illness,  und  at  fourteen
he  could  not  read:  but  after  that  he  made  rapid
progress.  In  1848  lie  entered  the  Lyceum  of
Hahia,  where  he  -hulled  especially  the  Latin  and
Portuguese  poets,  and  in  a  short  time  was  able  to
recite  from  memory  some  of  their  best  production-.
At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  published  poems,  which
were  received  with  general  favor:  but  about  that
time  he  fell  passionately  in  love  with  a  young
lady  who  did  not  return  his  affection,  and  he
consequently  renounced  the  world  and  entered  a
cloister.  29  March,  1851.  But  his  superiors,  seeing
his  disgust  with  monastic  life,  obtained,  in  1854,
permission  for  his  |>erpetual  secularization,  and  he
left  the  cloister.  He  continued  writing,  but  his
health  was  undermined,  and  he  died  eight  months
after  leaving  the  convent.  The  greater  part  of
his  manuscripts  are  lost,  or  probablv  suppressed  bv
opponents  of  his  ideas.  Dr.  Fraiddin  Doris  col-
lected and  published  the  following:  "Estudo,"
'•('ontradiecoes  Poeticas,"  and  "  Inspiracoes  do
Claustro."  The  last-named  work  has  been  trans-
lated into  several  languages.

FHKIKK,  Nicolas,  Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  Lima
in 1810; d.  there  about 1880. His parents,  to
escape Spanish persecution, had emigrated to
i.  and  young  Freire  received  his  education  in
the  University  of  Chili. But  earlv  in  life  he  was
enrolled  in  the  Chilian  army,  participating  in  the
campaign  of  Chiloe  in  1825  and  in  the  battle  of
Lircay  in  1880,  and  after  the  latter  event  returned
to  his  country. From  1S4'.»  till  1hT>:}  he  was  Peru-
vian  consul-general in Chili, in 1M54 military
nmander  of  the  northern  provinces  of  Peru,  in
i  assistant  secretary  and  afterward  minister  of
war,  which  place  he  held  until 1856,  when  he  was
api>ointed  general  of  division  and  military  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  southern  departments,  In-
coming  next year  chief  of  stall  of  the  army of
ration  <>f  the  south. In  W>n  he  was  appointed

ff  tin- department  of  Lima,  and  in  lv<>"
rusted  again  with  the  ministry  of  war.  In
:  lie  went  as  prefect and  commander  of  the


nary  station  to  Callao,  |>ut  returned  toward  the
sad  of  the  vi  ar  to  the  mini-try  of  war.  which  he
held  until  1*01.  when  he  was  elected  senator  for
the  department  of  Cajamarca.  In  1*68  he  was
•tooted  a  marine  <>f  the -upreine  council  of  war,
prefect  of  .Moqtiegua.  and  commanding  general
of  artillery.  In  1*72  he  was  ap|M>intcd  in-|Mitor-
ra]  of  the  army  and  navy,  and  mxt  vear
minister  of  war  and  the  navy,  which  office  he  held
until  the  expiration  of  Pre-ident  PardoV  term
in  1*7(1.  when  he  retired  to  private  life.

PKKIKK,  Kuiunn,  Spanish-American Midair,
b. in Santiago,  Chili, '-J!* Nov.. I7X?;  d.  tin  •

Dec., 186L In 1811 I nli-ted in the Chilian

army,  and  within  two  years  was  promote*  1  to  lieu-
tenant, having  taken  jmrt  in  several  battles.
With  the  grade  of  captain  he  served  in  the  battle
of  Hancagua,  where,  under  command  of  o'Hig-
gins,  he  cut  his  wav  through  the  ranks  of  the
enemy.  After  this  disastrous  campaign  he  emi-
grated to  the  Argentine  Republic.  In  1 M 1  r>  he
joined  a  company  of  privateers,  commanded  by  II.
Puchard,  engaged  in  capturing  Spanish  vessels  on
the  Pacific.  In  1816  he  joined  the  army  of  San
Martin,  and  in  December  of  the  same  year  received
from  this  general  an  order  to  penetrate  into  Chili
by  the  southern  Cordilleras  ami  take  Talca,  which
he  accomplished,  11  Feb.,  1817,  at  the  same  time
that  San  Martin  routed  the  Spanish  army  in
Chacabuco.  Afterward  he  de-t roved  the  remain-
der of  the  Spanish  army  in  several  sharply  con-
tested battles.  He  was  made  a  ineinlx-r  of  the
Legion  of  Merit,  which  replaced  the  titles  of  no-
bility. On  27  Nov.,  1880,  in  command  of  a  small
regiment,  he  defeated  an  army  of  2,000  men  under
command  of  Benavides.  In  1888,  on  the  abdica-
tion of  Gen.  O'Higgins.  Freire  was  elected  dicta-
tor. Toward  the  close  of  1825  he  left  Valjwraiso
with  a  force  of  3,000  men  and  drove  the  Spaniards
from  the  archipelago  of  Chiloe,  and  on  his  return
from  this  expedition  resigned  the  supreme  magis-
tracy and  retired  to  private  life.  In  1827  he  was
again  elected  dictator,  but  resigned,  and  in  1830,
when  the  Conservative  party  got  possession  of  the
supreme  power,  the  Liberals  rose  in  arms  under
(Jen.  Freire,  but,  after  several  mouths  of  bloody
struggle,  they  were  defeated  at  Lin-ay.  Fivire
was  taken  prisoner  and  lianished  to  Peru.  In  1K{(!
he  attempted  another  insurrectionary  movement
against  the  conservative  government,  hiring  two
Teasels  in  Peru,  and  landing  with  an  armed  force
at  Chiloe:  but  the  government  at  once  arrested
him,  and  he  was  l>anishcd  again.  In  1842  he
once  more  returned  to  his  native  countrv.

FRKIKK  UK  ANDRABA,  Gomez.  Portu-
guese soldier,  b.  in  Lisbon,  19  Dec.,  1636;  d.  at
Para.  Brazil.  3  Jan..  1702.  He  was  a  nephew  of
the  famous  historian  Jacintho  Freire  de  Andrada.
He  served  in  the  artillery,  and  soon  reached  the
highest  grades  as  an  officer.  In  May.  1886,  he  was
made  captain-general  of  Maranhfto,  and  in  June.
1887,  of  Para.  This  ini|>ortant  post  he  filled  until
his  death,  serving  his  country  most  efficiently, and
doing  for  the  north  of  Brazil  what  his  cousin  of
the  same  name  was  doing  for  the  south.  Para  and
the  other  cities  under  his  jurisdiction  owed  hap0f>
tant  improvements  to  him.  He  brought  under
cultivation  immense  stretches  of  land  hitherto  un-
productive, introduced  the  cultivation  of  rice,  and
encouraged  that  of  cocoa  and  coffee.  He  took
particular  interest  in  the  Indian  question,  subdued
the  ferocious  tribe  of  Tayupes,  and  founded  at
Beam  an  ethnographic  museum,  which,  though
still  incomplete,  has  DOM  of  great  service  to  -ci-
I'niler  his  administration  the  |>opulation  of


:.j-2


FREITES


FRELINGHUYSEN


the  province  of  Para  increase<l  threefold.  II is  life,
written  by  Father  Domingo*.  <!''  Teixe\  ra,  con-
tains much  valuable  information  <>n  the  rebellion
of  Beekman  against  Kreire  de  Andrada,  which
may  be  regarded  as  the  first  attempt  of  the  Bra-
zilians to  establish  their  independence.  It  also
contains  the  only  authentic  documents  relative  to
the flrtt  dihVultics  between  France  and  Portugal
OOnoerning  the  regions  about  Cape  North. — His
cousin.  Gomez,  count  of  Bobadella,  Portuguese
statesman,  b.  in  Coimbra  in  1685;  d.  in  Rio  Ja-
neiro, 1  Feb.,  1763,  studied  at  Coimbra,  and  entered
the  armv  at  an  early  age.  In  1707  he  distin-
guished himself  in  the  war  between  Portugal  and
Spain,  in  1708  was  promoted  colonel,  and  in  1712
to  general.  On  8  May,  1733,  he  was  appointed
governor  of  Rio  Janeiro,  and  in  1735  was  also
given  the  administration  of  the  rich  province  of
Minas  Geraes.  He  erected  in  Rio  Janeiro  many
fine  buildings  and  monuments,  and  made  impor-
tant improvements  in  the  bay.  In  1744  the  mines
of  the  district  of  Paracatu  were  discovered,  and
Freire  organized  a  scheme  for  working  them,  and
published  a  description  of  his  system,  which  is
even  to-day  an  authority  on  mining  engineering.
On  17  Jan.,  1752.  he  founded  the  first  Brazilian
academy,  called  I  )os  Selectos  da  Rio  Janeiro,  which
association  established  in  1754  the  first  printing-
office  in  Portuguese  America.  In  1754  a  boundary
dispute  led  to  war  with  Spain,  and  Freire  marched
against  the  territory  of  the  seven  missions,  gaining
the  victory  in  four  battles.  As  a  reward  for  this
service  he  was  made  count  of  Bobadella  in  1757.
The  loss  of  the  colony  of  Sacramento  by  Portugal
in  October,  1762,  was  such  a  serious  blow  to  Freire
that  he  died  in  a  few  months.
FREITES,  Pedro  Maria  (fry'-tes),  Venezuelan

Satriot,  b.  in  Barcelona  in  1790;  d.  in  Caracas,  7
lav,  1817.  His  father  was  a  colonel  and  governor
of  Barcelona,  and  Freites  was  also  employed  in  the
Spanish  administration  ;  but  when,  in  1811,  the  in-
dependence of  Venezuela  was  declared,  he  joined
the  republican  army.  He  took  part  in  Bolivar's
expedition  to  Venezuela,  and  commanded  the  in-
fantry of  Piar  in  the  battle  of  Juncal,  27  Sept.,
1816,  in  which  Morales's  forces  were  annihilated.
When  Bolivar,  in  the  beginning  of  1817,  resolved
to  evacuate  Barcelona,  he  left  there  a  battalion  of
700  men  under  the  command  of  Freites,  who  had
been  promoted  to  brigadier-general.  Freites's
forces  were  not  sufficient  to  defend  the  whole  city,
and  he  therefore  occupied  Casa  Fuerte,  an  in-
trenched fort  constructed  out  of  the  convent  of  St.
Francis,  where  also  many  of  the  principal  families
of  Barcelona  took  refuge.  This  was  captured  by
the  Spanish  on  7  April  after  a  protracted  resistance,
but  Freites  made  a  desperate  sally  and  had  already
nearly  gained  the  neighboring  woods,  when  he  fell,
and  all  his  followers  were  overpowered  and  killed.
Freites  and  the  governor,  Rivas,  were  spared  and
sent  as  prisoners  to  Caracas,  where  the  captain-
general,  Moxo,  ordered  their  execution.

FREJES,  Francisco  (freh-es),  Mexican  histo-
rian, b.  in  Guadalajara;  d.  in  Zacatecas  in  1845.
He  was  a  Franciscan  monk  in  the  convent  of  his
native  city,  where  he  distinguished  himself  as  a
pulpit  orator.  His  love  of  study  caused  him  to
obtain  his  transfer  to  the  convent  of  Guadalupe,
in  Zacatecas,  where  he  had  the  advantage  of  a  valu-
able library  containing  many  manuscripts  of  the
time  of  the  conquest.  He  was  appointed  chronicler
of  the  convent  in  1835,  and  in  1838  became  its  su-
perior. Here  he  finished  his  "  Historia  Breve  de  la
Conquista  de  los  Estados  Independientes  del  Im-
perio  Mejicano  "  (new  ed.,  Guadalajara,  1878). He


is  a  clear  and  impartial  writer,  and  as  some  mate-
rial, which  never  had  become  public,  was  at  his
command,  his  history  may  be  considered  the  moot
authentic  one.  Frejes  also  published  "Memoria
Historica  de  los  Sucesos  mas  notables  de  la  0on-
(piista  particular  de  Jalisco  por  los  Espafioles"
(lsl-J).  and  a  pamphlet  on  education.

FRELINGHUYSEN,  Theodoms  Jacobns,
clergyman,  b.  in  West  Friesland  in  1 « Ji » 1  ;  d.  in
New  Jersey  in  1747.  After  receiving  a  thorough
classical  education  he  began  the  study  of  theology,
was  ordained  to  the  ministry  in  the  Reformed  I»nt<  h
church  at  the  age  of  twenty-six,  and  was  for  abovl
two  years  the  pastor  of  a  church  in  his  native  land.
A  movement  to  establish  a  missionary  of  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  in  the  new  settlements  on  the
Raritan  river  in  New  Jersey  resulted  in  the  choice
of  Mr.  Frelinghuysen,  who  removed  thither  in  1720,
and  thus  became  the  founder  of  the  Frelinghuysen
family  in  New  Jersey.  The  field  of  his  pastoral
charge  extended  over  the  greater  part  of  Somerset
and  Middlesex  counties.  He  was  an  indefatigable
worker,  and  remarkably  successful  in  all  his  diffi-
cult undertakings.  George  Whitfield  and  Jona-
than Edwards  speak  of  him  as  "  one  of  the  greatest
divines  of  the  American  church."  He  was  an  early
advocate  for  the  establishment  in  America  of  an
ecclesiastical  judicatory  possessing  larger  powers
than  had  hitherto  been  granted  by  the  church  in
Holland.  As  a  member  of  the  first  convention  of
his  church  held  in  New  York,  he  gave  efficient
support  to  a  measure  which  resulted  in  the  inde-
pendence of  that  church  in  the  New  World.  He  is
spoken  of  as  a  man  of  great  fearlessness  of  spirit,
of  eloquence  as  a  speaker,  and  of  vigor  as  a  writer.
Mr.  Frelinghuysen  had  five  sons  who  were  ordained
to  the  ministry,  and  two  daughters  who  married
ministers.  Three  of  his  sermons,  in  the  Dutch
language,  were  published  in  New  York  as  early  as
1721,  two  others  in  1729,  and  all  these  were  trans-
lated into  English  and  published  in  1730.  Ten
sermons,  in  Dutch,  were  published  in  New  York  in
1733,  and  a  second  edition  Of  the  same  in  Holland,
under  approval  and  with  the  commendation  of
the  theological  faculty  of  the  University  of  Gro-
ningen,  who  called  them  "The  noble  fruit  brought
from  the  New  World  to  our  doors."  Two  sermons
were  published  in  Utrecht  in  1738,  four  in  Phila-
delphia in  1745.  All  these  were  translated  into
English  by  Rev.  William  Demarest,  and  published
by  the  board  of  publication  of  the  Reformed  Dutch
church  in  1856,  with  an  introduction  by  Dr.  Thomas
De  Witt,  and  a  biographical  sketch  by  the  trans-
lator.— His  second  son,  John,  b.  in  Three  Mile
Run,  N.  J.,  in  1727;  d.  on  Long  Island,  in  Septem-
ber, 1754,  was  sent  to  Holland  to  complete  his  aca-
demic course,  and  in  1750  was  ordained  to  the
ministry  by  the  classis  of  Amsterdam.  Soon  after-
ward he  returned  to  his  native  country,  and  entered
on  his  duties  as  the  successor  of  his  father,  fixing
his  residence  at  Somerville,  N.  J.  In  addition  to
his  pastoral  work,  he  undertook  the  education  of
young  men  for  the  ministry,  and  to  his  labors  in
this  direction  Queen's  college,  now  Rutgers,  is
largely  indebted  for  its  establishment.  While  on  a
journey,  in  September,  1754.  he  was  suddenlv  taken
sick  and  died.— John's  only  son,  Frederick,  law-
yer, b.  in  Somerset  county,  N.  J..  13  April,  1  ?•">:; :  d.
13  April,  1804,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1770.
enterr^'on  the  study  of  the  law,  and  was  admitted
to  theV  .\r  at  the  age  of  twenty-one.  When  he  had
barely  y.'ompleted  his  twenty-third  year  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  New
.  where  he  was  placed  on  the  important  <  om-
mittee  of  public  safety. The  following  year


niKI.INiilll N


FRKLINGHI \


54B


was  chosen  to  the  same  IhmIv.  which  edoj

ind  changed  its  title  from  "  Pi

grass"  to  the  "Convention  <»f  tin*  si

.  wu  elected,  on  Joint  bal-
lot of  the  legislature,  to  repr»  ■  •>■  in
the  Continental  congress. Fit-  vm  ■tronglv  >

looepting  this  position,  declaring  that  toe  trust

was  too  important  for  his  jean  and  abilities. In

following  year  In-  resigned  it.  but  in  17N2  and

-  :  In-  name  may  lie  found on tin-  rolls  of  the

tincntal  congresses  a  representative  from  New

my. Hi-  was  instrumental,  it  is  said,  in  raising

•rj»s  of  artillery,  of  which  he  Itecame  ca|)taiu.

ami  at the  head  of  which,  while  "till  holding  his

•eat  in  the  Provincial  congress,  he  took  part  in  the

Itle  of  Trenton. There  is  a  tradition  that  it  was

■  shot  from  his  pistol  that  Col.  Rahl,  the  com-
mander of  the  Hessian  forces,  was  mortally  wound-
ed. Having  heen  made  colonel  in  the  militia  of
his  native  county,  he  became  actively  engaged  in
the  war.  He  was  present  in  the  skirmishes  at
Springfield  and  PJizabethtown,  as  well  as  at  the
battle  of  Monmouth  Court-House  in  June,  1778.
After  the  war  had  I >een  brought  to  a  close  he  re-
ceived appoint  incuts  to  various  offices  in  the  county
and  state,  and  in  1 71)3  was  chosen  to  a  seat  in  the
senate  of  the  United  States,  but,  on  account  of
family  liereavemeuts,  resigned  this  position  in
1 7'.t»i.  In  1794.  when  Gen.  Washington  undertook
to  put  an  end  to  the  whiskey  insurrection  in  Penn-
sylvania, he  summoned,  among  other  forces  em-
ployed for  that  purpose,  the  militia  of  New  Jersey,
placing  (iov.  Howell  at  their  head,  and  giving  to
Mr.  Frelinghuysen  a  major-general's  command.
In  1N04  he  fell  seriously  sick,  and,  on  taking  to  his
bad,  predicted  that  the  end  was  at  hand,  and  that
he  would  die  on  his  ensuing  birthday.  The  pre-
diction was  verified. — (Jen.  Frederick's  eldest  son,
John,  lawver,  b.  near  Millstone,  Somerset  co.,
N.J.,  21  March.  1776;  d.  there,  10  April,  1833,
was  graduated  from  Queen's  college  (now  Rutgers)
in  1792,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1797.  By  rea-
son of  his  great  aversion  to  public  speaking  he  fig-
ured but  little  in  the  courts,  but  as  an  office  law-
ver enjoyed  an  extensive  practice.  For  many  years
be  was  a  member  of  the  state  council,  and  for  three
consecutive  terms,  of  five  years  each,  was  surrogate
of  his  county.  Inheriting  from  his  father,  Gen.
lerick  Frelinghuysen,  a  great  fondness  for
military  life,  he  promptly  offered  his  services  at
the  licginning  of  the  second  war  with  Great  Brit-
ain, and  was  for  many  months  encamped  with  a
regiment  of  New  Jersey  militia,  whicn  he  com-
manded, at  Sandy  Hook,  with  a  view  to  preventing
the  enemy's  vessels  from  passing  up  the  bay  to  at-
tack New  York.  At  the  close  of  the  war  lie  was
mm le  a  brigadier-general.  He  was  a  man  of  pro-
found piety,  and  while  on  duty  at  Sandy  Hook  fre-
quently conducted  public  services  at  the  head  of
hi-  regiment.  So  tenderly  did  he  can-  for  his  sol-
diers that  the  sick  among  them  were  sheltered  in
hi-  own  tent,  and  made  to  eat  at  his  own  table.
He  freely  used  his  own  means  to  relieve  their
wants,  even  going  so  far  as  to  embarrass  his  estate
for  this  purpose. — Gen.  Frederick's  second  son,
I  heodore,  lawver.  I>.  in  Franklin.  Somerset  co..
March."  1787;  d.  in  New  Brunswick.  N.  J.,

\pril.  1861,  was  sent  at  the  age  of  eleven  to  the
grammar-school connected  with Queen's  college
.  where he  remained two  years,  but,
on  the  resignation  of  the  rector  of  the  school,  re-
turned to  hi-  home  at  Millstone. Having  no  groat
n  to  apply  himself  to  study,  he  persuaded
lather  to  give  him  the  privilege  of  remaining
at  home  and  becoming  a  farmer. But  consent  to


this  plan  had  bm  only  |«artially  obtained  when
his  father  was  called  away  on  public  business,
step-mother,  a  wise  and  estimable  woman.  Udicv-
ing  that  this  arrangement  would  not  In-  a  judi-
cious one,  packed  young  Theodore's  trunk  and
sent  him  to  the  classical  academy  recently  estab-
lished at  Baskincridgc.  N.  .1..  by  the  |{ev.  Dr.
Bobatl  Plnley,  Hen  he  completed  his  pre|«ra-
tory  studies,  and  in  1S02  was  admitted  to  the  jun-
ior class  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey,  at  Prince-
ton, from  which  he  was  graduated  witli  high  hot
in  1N04.  In  the  mean  time,  his  father  having  died,
his  elder  brother.  John,  a  lawyer,  had  taken  ehi

of  the  homestead  at  Millstone. In  tl ffloeof  this

brother  he  begun  the  study  of  law.  and.  after  bdbjg
admitted  to  the  l»ar,  removed  to  Newark.  N.  I
where  he  married,  ami  entered  Djpofj  tin-  practice
of  his  profession,  in  which  he  soon  attained  emi-
nence. In  1K17  he  was  appointed  attorncy-geii-
eral  by  a  legislature  whose  majority  was  op|*osed
to  Mm  in  |M>litics.  T«  ice  afterward  he  was  reap-
pointed on  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office,  and
finally  resigned  it  in  18H\  having  been  slatted  a
senator  of  the  United  States.  Prior  to  this,  how-
ever, he  had  de-
clined the  office
of  justice  of  the
supreme  court,
tendered  to  him
in  1826.  The
first  important
matter  on  which
he  addressed  the
senate  was  the
bill  for  the  re-
moval of  the  In-
dians beyond  the
Mississippi  riv-
er. This  speech
availed  nothing,
however,  except
to  bring  its  au-
thor prominent-
ly before  the  na-
tion, and  to  give
to  him  the  title
of  the  "Chris-
tian statesman."
He  also  took  an
active  part  in  the  discussion  of  the  pension  bill,
the  president's  protest,  the  removal  of  the  deposits
from  the  U.  S.  bank,  the  compromise,  and  the
tariff.  His  senatorial  term  expired  in  1835.  when
be  resumed  his  professional  labors  in  Newark.  In
18M  Newark  was  incoriwrated  as  a  city.  In  the
following  vear  Mr.  Frelinghuysen  was  elected  its
mayor,  and  in  1838  he  was  re-elected  to  the  same
poateon.  In  1839  he  was  unanimouslv  chosen
chancellor  of  the  University  of  New  Vork.  and
while  in  the  occupancy  of  this  office  was,  in  May,
1844,  nominated  by  the  Whig  national  convention
at  Baltimore  for  the  vice-presidency  of  the  United
States  on  the  same  ticket  with  Henry  (lay.  He
continued  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  as  chan-
cellor of  the  university  until  1N50,  when  he  accept-
ed the  presidency  of  Rutgers  college,  and  in  the
same  year  was  formally  inducted  into  that  office,
continuing  in  it  until  the  day  of  his  death.  Mr.
Frelinghuysen  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  the
claims  of  organized  Christian  benevolence,  and  it
b) StJd  of  him  that  no  American  layman  was  ever
associated  with  mi  many  gnat  national  organiza-
tions of  religion  and  charity.  He  was  president  of
no  less  than  three  of  these  during  some  period  of
their  existence,  while  his  name  maybe  found  on


rf/£yf^&u£7yA~~~y^~^.


.V14


FRELINGHUYSEN


frelixghi^


the  lists  of  officers  of  all  tin-  rest  with  scarcely  an
■mention.  For  sixteen  years  he  was  president  of
the  American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign
missions.  From  April,  1846,  till  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  American  Bible  society;  from
[848  till  1848, of  the  American  tract  society;  from
LSM  till  near  the  close  of  his  life,  vice-president  of
the  American  Sunday-school  union ;  and  for  many
years  vice-president  of  the  American  colonization
society.  In  the  work  of  all  these  institutions  he
took  an  active  part.  His  remains  were  buried  in
the  grounds  of  the  1st  Reformed  Dutch  church  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.  See  a  memoir  of  him  by
Rev.  Talbot  W.  Chambers,  D.  D.  (1863).— Freder-
ick Theodore,  son  of  Gen.  Frederick's  third  son,
Frederick,  lawver,  b.  in  Millstone,  N.  J.,  4  Aug.,
1817;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  20  May,  1885.  was
but  three  years  of  age  when  his  father  died,  and
was  at  once  adopted  by  his  uncle,  Theodore.  He
was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1836,  studied  law
with  his  uncle,  Theodore,  at  Newark,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1839.  In  this  year  his  uncle
was  called  to  the  chancellorship  of  the  University
of  New  York,  and  the  young  attorney  succeeded
to  his  practice.  He  was  chosen  city  attorney  in
1849,  and  in  the  following  year  was  also  elected
city  counsel.  Not  long  afterward  he  became  the
retained  counsel  of  the  New  Jersey  central  railroad
company,  and  of  the  Morris  canal  and  banking

company,  and  be-
came generally
known  through-
out the  state.
His  name  was
mentioned  as  a
candidate  for  at-
torney-general of
New  Jersey  in
1857,  and  in  1861
was  appointed  to
that  office.  In
this  same  year
Mr.  Frelinghuy-
seo  was  a  member
of  the  peace  con-
gress in  Washing-
ton, where  he  was
a  conspicuous  fig-
ure. On  the  ex-
piration of  his
term  as  attorney-general,  in  1866,  he  was  reap-
pointed by  Gov.  Marcus  L.  Ward,  but  in  the  same
year  was  appointed  by  the  governor  to  the  U.  S.
senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of
William  Wright.  He  took  his  seat  in  the  senate
in  December,  1866,  and  was  elected  in  the  winter
of  1867  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Mr.  Wright,
which  would  end  on  4  March,  1869.  He  now  re-
signed the  office  of  attorney-general  to  occupy  one
which,  it  is  said,  had  long  been  the  summit  of  his
ambition.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1869
the  majority  of  the  legislature  of  New  Jersey
was  opposed  to  him  in  politics,  and,  as  a  matter  of
course,  his  re-election  was  impossible.  In  1870  Presi-
dent Grant  nominated  him  as  minister  to  England,
and  the  nomination  was  promptly  confirmed  by
the  senate  without  the  usual  reference  to  the  com-
mittee. Mr.  Frelinghuysen,  however,  declined  the
appointment ;  why  he  did  so  was  a  question  that
was  variously  answered  by  political  friends  and
foes.  Years  afterward  it  became  known  that  it
was  at  the  request  of  his  wife,  who  was  unwilling
to  expose  her  children  to  the  various  influences  to
be  encountered  during  a  residence  at  a  foreign
court. On  25  July,  1871, he  was  again  elected


(J.nJ . JT^t-^-"--^^*^**^'


U.  S.  senator  for  the  full  term  of  >ix  years.  Dur-
ing his  service  in  the  senate  he  was  a  member  ol
the  judiciary  committee,  and  of  thoee  on  the
finance,  naval  affairs,  claims,  and  railroads,  and
was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  agriculture.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  committee  on  foreign
relations,  and  acting  chairman  of  the  same  during
the  negotiation  of  the  Alaliama  claims  by  the  joint
high  commission.  When  he  came  into  the  senate
the  civil  war  had  ended,  but  he  brought  with  him
the  feelings  which  had  governed  him  throughout
its  progress,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  work
of  restoring  the  Union.  In  the  impeachment  trial
of  President  Johnson  he  voted  for  conviction.  He
was  always  prominent  in  the  debates  of  the  senate.
and  introduced  into  that  body  several  measures  of
great  importance.  In  the  matter  of  the  Washing-
ton treaty,  in  the  French  arms  controversy,  in  the
currency  question,  he  was  especially  active.  A  bill
was  introduced  by  him  to  restore  a  gold  currency,
and  so  well  sustained  by  argument  that  a  measure
similar  to  his  own  was  subsequently  adopted.  A
tariff  for  protection  always  received  his  support,
and  he  left  nothing  undone  to  promote  the  indus-
tries of  his  own  state.  The  civil-rights  bill,  intro-
duced by  Charles  Sumner,  was  personally  intrust-
ed to  him  by  that  gentleman,  and  was  advocated
by  Mr.  Frelinghuysen  until  it  passed  the  senate.
He  introduced  a  bill  against  polygamy,  and  secured
its  passage  in  the  senate ;  also  a  bill  to  return  to
Japan  what  is  known  as  the  Japanese  indemnity
fund,  which  also  passed.  The  soundness  of  his
argument  in  the  Sue  Murphy  case  was  at  first
doubted,  but  it  was  afterward  conceded  that  he
was  right  in  denying  the  claims  of  even  loyal  per-
sons at  the  south  for  damages  resulting  from  the
war,  insisting  that  they  must  suffer  as  did  loyal
persons  at  the  north,  and  that  the  results  of  the
war  must  rest  where  they  fall.  He  succeeded  in
defeating  this  bill,  and  thus  saved  the  country
from  innumerable  claims  of  a  similar  character,
which  would  have  exhausted  the  national  treasury.
The  trouble  which  arose  in  1877  in  regard  to  count-
ing the  electoral  vote  seems  to  have  been  antici-
pated by  Mr.  Frelinghuysen  in  the  summer  of  the
previous  year,  and,  to  avoid  it,  he  introduced  a  bill
referring  the  decision  of  any  such  controversy  to
the  president  of  the  senate,  the  speaker  of  the
house,  and  the  chief  justice.  The  senate  ad-
journed before  the  bill  could  be  acted  upon.
When,  in  1877,  his  anticipations  were  realized,  he
was  one  of  the  joint  committee  of  the  senate  and
house  that  reported  a  bill  creating  the  electoral
commission,  and  he  was  appointed  a  member  of
that  commission.  In  1877,  a  majority  of  the  legis-
lature of  New  Jersey  being  again  Democratic,  he
was  succeeded  bv  John  R.  McPherson.  On  12
Dec.,  1881,  President  Arthur  invited  Mr.  Freling-
huysen to  a  seat  in  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  state,
and  this  appointment  was  promptly  confirmed  by
the  senate.  Peaceful  and  prosperous  as  was  the
administration  of  President  Arthur,  yet  the  labors
of  Mr.  Frelinghuysen  were  none  the  less  arduous,
and,  though  always  regarded  as  a  man  of  great
physical  vigor,  he  retired  from  them  thoroughly
exhausted.  Surrendering  his  seat  to  his  successor
in  the  cabinet  on  4  March,  1885,  he  went  at  once  to
his  home  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  where,  on  his  arrival,
he  found  himself  too  ill  to  receive  the  citizen-  and
friends  who  had  filled  his  house  to  welcome  him.
For  many  weeks  he  lay  in  a  lethargic  condition,
which  continued  until  the  end.  Like  all  his  ances-
tors, Mr.  Frelinghuysen  was  the  possessor  of  a
strong  religious  sentiment.  He  was  a  closi
dent  of  the  Bible,  and  an  active  member  of  that


MIX


>loXT


648


i  >f  the  church  in  which  -»>  many  of  hi*  f..n-

l.n^hl ikiii) «hiiiin^  light
. lively  Interest in  educational  nuili.

mid  licnevolcnt  institutions.  Ue  was
:ii  of  the  American  Bible  society,  and  for
vears  a  trustee  of  Kutgcr*  college.  Bll
not  numerous,  imr  did  he
iucIi  time  t«.  literary  work.  Many  of  his
-  were  never  written  until  after  they  had
livered: bill he  never  s|>oke,  lt>  he  OB

the  writer,  without  engraving  on  his  inemory,  in

|  word  that he  was  about  to

ntler: and so tenacious was that memory that.

whenever  he  deemed  it  iiii|M>rtaiit to  commit  any-

lo writing, the manuscript was fur him

ter  a  useless  paper,
I  REMIX.  Jacques,  missionary,  1).  in  France;  d.
in  Quebec,  Canada,  2  July,  1091. He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  was  sent  m  a  mis-
lo  Canada,  but at  what time is  unknown.

•'>-'N  he  lived  among  the  Onondagas,  was
then  for  two  years  at  Moscow,  and  next  at  Three
Hivers  and  Cape  dc  la  Madeleine.  At  the  earnest
request  of  the  Cayuga  chief,  (iaraconthic  (j.  v.),  he
set  out  in  company  with  Father  Pierre  HatTeiu  to
establish  a  mission  among  theC'ayugas  in  1000.  In
KWi?  he  was  selected  to  renew  ihe  mission  in  the
Mohawk  valley,  which  had  been  founded  by  Gogues.
He  remained  a  month  at  Fort  Saint  Anne,  on  [ale
I>a  .Mothe,  where  he  conducted  the  first  Roman
Catholic  mission  in  Vermont.  He  was  then  taken
by  his  guides  to  Gandouaguc.  where  a  congrega-
tion of  Algonquin  and  Huron  captives  had  already
been  formed.  These  he  gathered  in  an  isolated
cabin,  and  prepared  for  bapt ism.  lie  then  visit-
ed Tionnontoguero,  the  capital,  and  in  a  general
assembly  of  the  six  villages  of  the  Mohawks,  held
14  Sept..  he  reproached  the  tribe  for  their  faith-
lessness and  cruelty,  and  s|K»ke  at  length  on  the
advantages  of  peace.  Father  Fremin,  who  was
already  skilled  in  the Huron  and  Onondaga  dia-

earned  the  Mohawk  very  quickly,  thus  ob-
taining extraordinary  intluence  among*  the  tribe.
As  soon  as  the  mission  of  St.  Mary  of  the  Mo-
hawks was  firmly  established,  he  sent  one  of  his
associates  to  Albany  to  gain  the  friendship  of  the
English,  and  another  to  Quebec  to  announce  the
that  he  had  obtained.  In  October,  10(58,
set  out  for  the  Seneca  country,  where  he  was  re-
ceived with  great  honor.  It  was  at  his  suggestion
that  Catharine  Ganneaktena  (q.  v.)  founded  the  vil-
lage of  La  Prairie  for  Indian  converts.  Be  was
recalled  to  the  St.  Lawrence  in  1070,  but  returned
to  the  inissiuii  of  La  Prairie,  where  he  remained
several  years.  He  made  numerous  voyages  to
France  in  the  interests  of  this  mission,  and  is  said
to  have  been  again  employed  among  the  Iroquois.
I  REMONT,  John  Charles,  explorer,  b.  in  Sa-
vannah, Ga,,  21  .Ian.,  1818.  Hia  father,  who  was  a
Frenchman,  had  settled  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  married
Anne  Beverley  Whiting,  a  Virginian  lady,  and  su[>-
■Ofted  himself  by  teaching  his  native  language.
After  his  death,  which  took  place  in  1M1M.  his  widow
■Bored  with  her  three  infant  children  to  Charles-
ton. S.C.  John  Charles  entered  the  junior  class
of  Charleston  college  in  1828,  and  for  some  time
Mod  high,  especially  in  mat  hematics;  but  his  in-
attention and frequent aliscnecs  at length  caused

pulsion. lie  then  employed himself  as  a

teacher  of  mathematics,  and at the  same

time  taught  an  evening  school. He  became  teacher

.thematic  on  the  sloop-of -war  "  Natchez  "  in

and  after  a  cruise  of  two  years  returned,  and  I
was  given  hi>  degree  by  the  college  that had

I him. He  then  (lasscd  a  rigorous  examine-  |
vol.  ii. — 36


tion  at Baltimore for  a  professorship in  th. !
naw.  and  was  appointed  to  the  frigate  "IndspStt*

i|.  ii.  .-."  i.ut  declined,  and  became  an  assistaal  ••ntri-

i r  under  (apt.  William  (J.  William-,  of  the  '

tOpOgraphiCA* corps,  on surveys for a proj.
railroad  between  Charleston  and  Cincinnati,  aiiling
|tarticularly in  the  exploration  of the  mountain
oasses tM-tweeii Xorth Carolina and TenMsSJSfj,
This  work  was  suspended in 1X17,  and Fremont

•npanied  ('apt.  Williams in a military i.
noissance  of  the  mountainous  Cherokee  country  jn

„'ia.  Xorth  Carolina,  and  Tennessee,  made
rapidly,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  in  Mltfrf|mtfffW  04
hostilities  with  the
Indians.  On  7
July.  1KW.  while
engaged  with  Jean
Xicolas  Xicollet  in
exploring,  under
governinent  au-
thority, the  coun-
try between  the
Missouri  and  the
northern  frontier,
he  was  com  mis-
sioned bf  I'resj-
dent  Van  Burcn  as
Id  lieutenant  of  to-
|>ographical  engi-
neers. He  went
to  Washington  in
1840  to  prepare  his
report,  and  while  there  met  Jessie,  daughter  of
Thomas  H.  BentOQ,  then  senator  from  Missouri.
An  engagement  was  formed,  but,  as  the  lady  was
only  fifteen  years  of  age,  her  parents  objected  to
the  match;  and  suddenly,  probably  through  the
intluence  of  Col.  Benton, the  young  officer  received
from  the  war  department  an  order  to  make  an
examination  of  the  river  Des  Moines  on  the  west-
em  frontier.  The  survey  was  made  rapidly,  and
shortlv  after  his  return  from  this  duty  the  lovers
were  secretly  married,  19  Oct.,  1841.  In  1842,
Fremont  was  instructed  by  the  war  department  to
take  charge  of  an  expedition  for  the  exploration  of
the  Boofcy  mountains,  particularly  the  South  pass,
lb'  left  Washington  on  2  May.  and  in  four  months
had  carefullv  examined  the  South  pass  and  ex-
plored the  Wind  River  mountains,  ascending  their
highest  jMiint.  since  known  as  Fremont's  peak
(1 :{,.")?()  ft.).  His  report  of  the  expedition  was  laid
before  congress  in  the  winter  of  1842-'8,  and  at-
tracted  much  attention  both  at  home  and  abroad.
Immediately  afterward,  Fremont  determined  to
explore  the  unknown  region  between  the  Kocky
mountains  and  the  Pacific,  and  set  out  in  May,
1S4:{,  with  thirty-nine  men.  On  OScpt..  after  trav-
elling over  l.T(M)  miles,  he  came  in  sight  of  Great
Salt  lake.  His  investigations  corrected  many  vague
and  erroneous  ideas  about  this  region,  of  which  no
accurate  account  had  ever  been  given,  and had

free!  influence  in  promoting  the  settlement  of
'tah  and  the  Pacific  states.  It  was  his  report  of
this  expedition  thai  gave  to  the  Mormons  then  first
idea  or  Utah  as  a  place  of  residence.  After  leav-
ing Great  Salt  lake,  he  explored  the  ut>j>er  tribu-
taries of  the  Columbia,  descended  the  valley  of  that
river  to  Fort  Vancouver,  near  its  mouth,  and  on
10  Xov.  set  out  on  his  return.  His  route  lay
through  an  almost  unknown  region  leading  from
the  Lower  Columbia  to  the  L'pper  Colorado,  and
was  crossed  by  high  and  rugged  mountain-chains.
Deep  snow  soon  forced  him  to  descend  into  the  great

bnsm,  and  be  presently  found  himself,  in  the  depth
of  winter,  in  a  desert,  "with  the  prospect  "f  death  to


r>-i<5


FREMONT


FREMONT


hi<  whole  party  from  cold  and  hunger.  By  astro-
nomical observation  lie  found  that  he  was  in  the
latitude  of  tlif  bay  of  Ban  Francisco;  but  between
It i in  ami  t lit-  valleys  of  California  VM  a  snow-clad
range  of  mountains,  which  the  Indians  declared  no
man  oould  cross,  and  over  which  no  reward  could
induce  them  to  attempt  to  guide  him.  Fremont
undertook  the  passage  without  a  guide,  and  accom-
plished it  in  forty  days,  reaching  Sutter's  Fort,  on
the  Sacramento,  earfv  in  March,  with  his  men  re-
duced almost  to  skeletons,  and  with  only  thirty-
three  out  of  si  xtv-scven  horses  and  mules  remain-
ing. Resuming  his  journey  on  24  March,  he  crossed
the  Sierra  Nevada  through  a  gap,  and  after  another
visit  to  Great  Salt  lake  returned  to  Kansas  through
the  South  pass  in  July,  1844,  having  been  absent
fourteen  months.  The  reports  of  this  expedition
occupied  in  their  preparation  the  remainder  of  1844.
Fremont  was  given  trie  double  brevet  of  1st  lieuten-
ant and  captain  in  January,  1845,  at  the  instance  of
Geo,  Scott,  and  in  the  spring  of  that  year  he  set
out  on  a  third  expedition  to  explore  the  great  basin
and  the  maritime  region  of  Oregon  and  California.
After  spending  the  summer  in  exploring  the  water-
shed between  the  Pacific  and  the  Mississippi,  he
encamped  in  October  on  the  shore  of  the  Great  Salt
lake,  and  after  crossing  the  Sierra  Nevada  with  a
few  men,  in  the  dead  of  winter,  to  obtain  supplies,
left  his  party  in  the  valley  of  the  San  Joaquin
while  he  went  to  Monterey,  then  the  capital  of  Cali-
fornia, to  obtain  from  the  Mexican  authorities  per-
mission to  proceed  with  his  exploration.  This  was
f  ranted,  but  was  almost  immediately  revoked,  and
'remont  was  ordered  to  leave  the  country  without
delay.  Compliance  with  this  demand  was  impossi-
ble, on  account  of  the  exhaustion  of  Fremont's
men  and  his  lack  of  supplies,  and  it  was  therefore
refused.  The  Mexican  commander,  Gen.  Jose  Cas-
tro, then  mustered  the  forces  of  the  province  and
prepared  to  attack  the  Americans,  who  numbered
only  sixty-two.  Fremont  took  up  a  strong  posi-
tion on  the  Hawk's  peak,  a  mountain  thirty  miles
from  Monterey,  built  a  rude  fort  of  felled  trees,
hoisted  the  American  flag,  and,  having  plenty  of
ammunition,  resolved  to  defend  himself.  The  IVlexi-
can  general,  with  a  large  force,  encamped  in  the

Elain  immediately  below  the  Americans,  whom  he
ourly  threatened  to  attack.  On  the  evening  of
the  fourth  day  of  the  siege  Fremont  withdrew  with
his  party  and  proceeded  toward  the  San  Joaquin.
The  fires  were  still  burning  in  his  deserted  camp
when  a  messenger  arrived  from  Gen.  Castro  to  pro-

Eose  a  cessation  of  hostilities.  Fremont  now  made
is  way  northward  through  the  Sacramento  valley
into  Oregon  without  further  trouble,  and  near  Tla-
math  lake,  on  9  May,  1846,  met  a  party  in  search
of  him  with  despatches  from  Washington,  direct-
ing him  to  watch  over  the  interests  of  the  United
States  in  California,  there  being  reason  to  appre-
hend that  the  province  would  be  transferred  to
Great  Britain,  and  also  that  Gen.  Castro  intended
to  destroy  the  American  settlements  on  the  Sacra-
mento. He  promptly  returned  to  California,  where
he  found  that  Castro  was  already  marching  against
the  settlements.  The  settlers  flocked  to  Fremont's
camp,  and  in  less  than  a  month  he  had  freed  north-
ern California  from  Mexican  authority.  He  re-
ceived a  lieutenant-colonel's  commission  on  27  May,
and  was  elected  governor  of  California  by  the
American  settlers  on  4  July.  On  10  July,  learning
that  Com.  Sloat,  commander  of  the  United  States
squadron  on  that  coast,  had  seized  Monterey,  he
marched  to  join  him,  and  reached  that  place  on  19
July,  with  100  mounted  riflemen.  About  this  time
Com.  Stockton  arrived  at  Monterey  with  the  frigate


"Congress"  and  took  command  of  the  squadron,
with  authority  from  Washington  to  conquer  Cali-
fornia. At  his  raquari  Fivinont  organized  a  force
of  mounted  men.  known  as  the  "California  hattal-
ion."  of  which  he  wasappointed  major.  He  wasalso
appointed  by  Com.  Stockton  military  command-
ant and  civil  governor  of  the  territory,  the  project
of  making  California  independent  baring  been  re-
linquished on  receipt  of  intelligence  that  war  had
begun  between  the  United  States  and  Mexico.  On
13  Jan.,  1847,  Fremont  concluded  with  the  Mexi-
cans articles  of  capitulation,  which  terminated  tin-
war  in  California  and  left  that  country  perma-
nently in  the  possession  of  the  United  States.
Meantime  Gen.  Stephen  W.  Kearny,  with  a  small
force  of  dragoons,  had  arrived  in  California.  A
quarrel  soon  broke  out  between  him  and  Com.
Stockton  as  to  who  should  command.  Each  had
instructions  from  Washington  to  conquer  and  or-

fanize  a  government  in  the  country.  Fremont
ad  accepted  a  commission  from  Com.  Stockton
as  commander  of  the  battalion  of  volunteers,  and
had  been  appointed  governor  of  the  territory.  Gen.
Kearny,  as  Fremont's  superior  officer  in  the  regu-
lar army,  required  him  to  obey  his  orders,  which
conflicted  with  those  of  Com.  Stockton.  In  this
dilemma  Fremont  concluded  to  obey  Stockton's
orders,  considering  that  he  had  already  fully  recog-
nized that  officer  as  commander-in-chief,  and  that
Gen.  Kearny  had  also  for  some  time  admitted  his
authority.  In  the  spring  of  1847  despatches  from
Washington  assigned  the  command  to  Gen  Kear-
ny, and  in  June  that  officer  set  out  overland  for
the  United  States,  accompanied  by  Fremont,  whom
he  treated  with  deliberate  disrespect  throughout
the  journey.  On  the  arrival  of  the  party  at  Fort
Leavenworth,  on  22  Aug.,  Fremont  was  put  under
arrest  and  ordered  to  report  to  the  adjutant-gen-
eral at  Washington,  where  he  arrived  on  16  Sept.,
and  demanded  a  speedy  trial.  Accordingly  a  court-
martial  was  held,  beginning  2  Nov.,  1847,  and  end-
ing 31  Jan.,  1848,  which  found  him  guilty  of  "  mu-
tiny," "disobedience  of  the  lawful  command  of  a
superior  officer,"  and  "  conduct  to  the  prejudice  of
good  order  and  military  discipline,"  and  sentenced
him  to  be  dismissed  from  the  service.  A  majority
of  the  members  of  the  court  recommended  him  to
the  clemency  of  President  Polk.  The  president
refused  to  confirm  the  verdict  of  mutiny,  but  ap-
proved the  rest  of  the  verdict  and  the  sentence,
of  which,  however,  he  remitted  the  penalty.  Not-
withstanding this,  Fremont  at  once  resigned  his
commission,  and  on  14  Oct.,  1848,  set  out  on  a  fourth
expedition  across  the  continent,  at  his  own  expense,
with  the  object  of  finding  a  practicable  passage  to
California  by  way  of  the  upper  waters  of  tin'  Rio
Grande.  With  thirty-three  men  and  120  mules  he
made  his  way  through  the  country  of  the  Utes,
Apaches,  Comanches,  and  other  Indian  tribes
then  at  war  with  the  United  States.  In  attempt  ing
to  cross  the  great  Sierra,  covered  with  snow,  his
guide  lost  his  way,  and  Fremont's  party  encoun-
tered horrible  suffering  from  cold  and  hunger,  a
portion  of  them  being  driven  to  cannibalism
of  his  animals  and  one  third  of  his  men  perished!
and  he  was  forced  to  retrace  his  steps  to  Santa  Fe.
Undaunted  by  this  disaster,  he  gathered  another
band  of  thirty  men,  and  after  a  long  search  dis-
covered a  secure  route  by  which  he  reached  the
Sacramento  in  the  spring  of  1849.  He  now  deter-
mined to  settle  in  California,  where,  in  1847.  M
had  bought  the  Mariposa  estate,  a  large  trad  of
land  containing  rich  gold-mines.  His  title  to  this
estate  was  contested,  but  after  a  long  litigation  it
was  decided  in  his  favor  in  1855  by  the  supreme


I  i;i  MONT


MONT


M7


eourt  <>f  tin-  United  State* II--  teoelfed  horn
9  the  appointment  of  oom-

ioniT  t . .  run  the  houndanr-line between  the

states  and  Mexico,  hut,  having  been  elected

ire  of  California,  in  IWcihImt of  that

rear,  to  represent  the  new  state  in  the  17,  s.  mnate,

he  resigm  <1  In-  eoiiimi>-ion«T!«hip  ami  departed  for
Washington  bv  wav  of  the  isthmus.  1 1 « -  t.M.k  his
neat  in  the  senate.  10  Sept,  1850,  the  day  after  the

i.HMnn  of  (  'alifornia  as  a  state.  In  drawing  l"ts
f. -r  the  terms  of  the  respective  senators,  Fremont

*  the  short  term,  ending  1  March.  1851.  The
senate  remained  in  nation  i»ut  three  weeks  after

ulmission  of  California,  ami  during  that  period

nont  devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to
measures  relating  to  the  interests  of  the  state  he
represented.  For  this  pur|M>se  he  introduced  and
advocated  a  comprehensive  series  of  hills,  embrac-

almost  every  object  of  legislation  demanded  by
the peculiar  circumstances  of  California. In  the

.  election  of  1851  in  California  the  Anti-slavery
party,  of  which  Fremont  was  one  of  the  leader-,
was  defeated,  and  he  consequently  failed  of  re-elec-
tion to  the  senate,  after  142  balloting*. After  de-

ng  two  years  to  his  private  affairs,  he  visited
Europe  in  1852,  and  spent  a  year  there,  being  re-
red  with  distinction  bv  many  eminent  men  of
letters  and  of  science, lie  had  already,  in 1850,

ived  a  gold  medal  from  the  king  of  Prussia  for
his  discoveries,  had  been  awarded  the  "founder's
medal  "  of  the  Royal  geographical  society  of  Ijon-
don,  and  had  been  elected  an  honorary  member  of
the  Geographical  society  of  Berlin,  His  explora-
tions had  gained  for  him  at  home  the  name  of  the
•Pathfinder."  While  in  Europe  he  learned  that
congress  had  made  an  appropriation  for  the  survey
of  three  routes  from  the  Mississippi  valley  to  the

iflc,  and  immediately  returned  to  the  United
States  for  the  purpose  of  fitting  out  a  fifth  expe-
dition on  his  own  account  to  complete  the  Burvey
of  the  route  he  had  taken  on  his  fourth  expedition.
Be  left  l'aris  in  June,  1H58,  and  in  September  was
on  his  march  across  the  continent.  He  found
passes  through  the  mountains  on  the  line  of  lati-
tudes :{s  and  69*, and  reached  California  in  safety,
after  enduring  great  hardships.  For  fifty  days
his  party  lived  on  horse-flesh,  and  for  forty-eight
hours  at  a  time  were  without  food  of  any  kind.
In  the  spring  of  1855  Fremont  with  his  "family
took  up  his  residence  in  New  York,  for  the  pur-
pose of  preparing  for  publication  the  narrative  of
his  last  expedition.  He  now  began  to  be  mentioned
as  an  anti-slavery  candidate  for  the  presidency.
In  the  first  National  Republican  convention,  which

in  Philadelphia  on  17  June,  1856,  he  received

k-otcs  to  l!»t;  for  John  McLean,  on  an  informal
ballot,  and  on  the  first  formal  ballot Fremont  was

nimouslv  nominated.  In  his  letter  of  accept-
ance, dated  s  Julv,  KiO,  he  expressed  himself
strongly  against  the  extension  of  slavery  ami  in
favor  of  free  labor.  A  few  days  after  the  Phila-
delphia convention  adjourned, a  National  American

vent  ion  at  New  York  also  nominated  him  for

the presidency. He  a< pted their  support in  a

ter  dated  80  June,  in  which  he  referred  them  for
an  exposition  of  his  view-  t<>  his  forthcoming  let-

.ccepting  the  Republican  nomination. After

irited  ami  exciting  contest,  the  presidential  elec-
tion resulted  in  the  choice  of  Mr.  Buchanan  by  174

total  votes  from  nineteen  states,  while  Fremont

ived 114 votes  from  eleven states,  including

w  Filmland  states.  New  York.  Ohio,  Michi-

i.  and Wisconsin. Maryland  gave her

-  for  Mr.  Fillmore. The  jiopu-

l*r  •  was  1,341,000;  for  Buchanan.


for  Fillmore,  874,000. It  b«H

Irani  to  <  alifornia,  where  he  resided  for  some  time.
In  1*«»<1  he  vi-itid  BttTOfM.  BOOB  after  the  (..gin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  a  major-general
of  the  regular  army  and  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  newly  created  western  department.  After
purcha-ing  arms  for  the  [J,  S.  goM-num-nt.  in  Ku-
rope.  he  returned:  he  arrived  in  St.  LOOM 01
July,  1851,  ami  made  his  headquarters  there,  forti-
fying the  city,  and  placing  Cairo  in  security  by  a
demonstration  with  4.<MM(  troops.  After  the' battle
of  Wilson's  Creak.  OH  10  Aug.,  where  (m n.  Nathan-
iel Lyon  was  slain,  Fremont  proclaimed  martial
law,  arrested  active  secessionists,  and  susix-nded
the  publication  of  pajwrs  charged  with  disloyalty.
On  551  Aug.  he  lamed  a  proclamation  assuming  the
government  of  the  state,  and  announcing  that  he
would  emancipate  the  slaves  of  those  in  arms
against  the  I  sited  States.  President  Lincoln
wrote  to  him.  approving  all  of  the  proclamation
except  the  emancipation  clause,  which  he  consid-
ered premature.  He  asked  Fremont  to  withdraw
it.  which  he  declined,  and  the  president  annulled
it  himself  in  a  public  order.  In  the  autumn  Fre-
mont moved  his  army  from  the  Missouri  river  in
pDXMlil  of  the  enemy.  Meanwhile  many  complaints
lui'l  ban  made  of  his  administration,  it  being  al-
leged that  it  was  inefficient,  though  arbitrary  and
extravagant,  and  after  an  investigation  by  the  sec-
retary of  war  he  was,  on  2  Nov.,  1861,  relieved
from  his  command  just  as  he  had  overtaken  the
Confederates  at  Springfield.  It  is  claimed  by  Fre-
mont's friends  that  this  was  the  n-ult  of  I  politi-
cal  intrigue  against  him.  On  leaving  his  army,  he
went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  was  enthusiastically
received  by  the  citizens.  In  March,  1N«!2.  he  was
riren  the  command  of  the  newly  created  "  moun-
tain district "  of  Virginia,  Kentucky. and  Tennessee.
In  the  early  part  of  June  his  army  engaged  a  su-
perior force  under  Gen.  Jackson  for  eight  day-,
with  constant  sharp  skirmishing,  the  enemy  n
treating  slowly  and  destroying  culverts  and
bridges  to  cause  delay.  The  pursuit  was  termi-
nated with  a  severe  engagement  on  the  evening  of
6  June,  in  which  Jackson's  chief  of  cavalry.  Gen.
Ashbv.  was  killed,  and  bv  the  battle  of  Croat  B
on  8  June.  It  is  claimed  by  Gen.  Fremont  that  if
Mi  Do  well's  force  had  joined  him,  as  promised  by
the  president,  Jackson's  retreat  would  have  been
cut  off;  as  it  was,  the  latter  made  good  his  escape,
having  accomplished  his  purpose  of  delaying  re-en-
forcements to  McClellan.  On  26  June  the  presi-
dent issued  an  order  creating  the  "Armvof  Vir-
ginia," to  include  Fremont's  corps,  and  giving  the
command  of  it  to  (Jen.  Pone.  Tnewnpon  Fremont
asked  to  be  relieved,  on  the  ground  that  he  could
not  serve  under  Gen.  Pope,  tat  sufficient  personal
reasons.  Hiireqneel  having  been  granted,  he  went
to  New  York  to  await  further  orders,  but  received
no  other  command  during  the  war.  though.  M  he
says,  one  was  constantly  promised  him.  Ottal  May,
186a,a  convention  of  Republicans,  dissatisfied  with

Mr.  Lincoln,  met  at  Cleveland  and  tendered  to
Gen.  Fremont  a  nomination  for  president,  which
he  accepted.  In  the  following  September  a  com-
mittee of  Republicans  representing  the  administra-
tion waited  on  him  and  urged  his  withdrawal,  as
"  vital  to  the  snecess  of  the  party."  After  consid-
ering the  matter  for  a  week,  he  acceded  to  their
request,  saying  in  his  letter  01  withdrawal  that  he
•  lid  so  ••  noi  to  aid  in  the  triumph  of  Mr.  Lincoln,
i  ait  to  do  my  pari  toward  preventing  the  election
of  the  Democratic,  candidate."

Since  18<M  (Jen.  Fremont  has  taken  little  part  in
public  affairs,  but has  U-cn  Retire  in  railway  mat-


fi-48


FRENCH


FRENCH


ters.  Hi'  ptoaaani  from  the  Texas  h •gislature  ■
grant  of  state  land  In  the  interest  <>f  the  Memphis
ami  El  PaflO  railway,  which  was  to  1m>  part  of  a  pro-

Bxnl  trans-continental  rood  from  Norfolk  to  San
iego  and  San  Francisco.  The  French  agents  em-
ployed to  place  the  land-grant  bonds  of  this  road
mi  the  market  made  the  false  declaration  that  they
were  guaranteed  by  the  United  States.  In  1869
the  senate  passed  a  bill  giving  Fremont's  road  the
right  of  way  through  the  territories,  an  attempt  to

defeat  it  by  fixing
on  him  the  onus  of
the  misstatement
in  Paris  having
been  unsuccessful.
In 1873 he was

grosecuted  by  the
'rench  govern-
ment for  fraud  in
connection  with
this  misstatement.
He  did  not  appear
in  person,  and  was
sentenced  by  de-
fault to  fine  and
imprisonment,  no
judgment being

fiven  on  the  merits
'reinont  was  gov-
ernor of  Arizona.  He  has  published  "  Report  of
the  Exploring  Expedition  to  the  Rocky  Mountains
in  1842,  and  to  Oregon  and  North  California  in
184:J-*4 "  (Washington,  1845;  New  York,  1846;
London,  1849);  "Col.  J.  C.  Fremont's  Explora-
tions." an  account  of  all  five  of  his  expeditions
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1859) ;  and  "  Memoirs  of  my
Life  "  (New  York,  1886).  See  also  the  campaign
biographies  by  John  Bigelow  (New  York,  1856),
and  Charles  W.  Upham  (Boston,  1856). — His  wife,
Jessie  Benton,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1824,  has  pub-
lished "  Story  of  the  Guard ;  a  Chronicle  of  the
War,"  with  a  German  translation  (Boston,  1863) ;
a  sketch  of  her  father,  Thomas  H.  Benton,  prefixed
to  her  husband's  memoirs  (1886) ;  and  "Souvenirs
of  mv  Time  "  (Boston,  1887).

FRENCH,  Benjamin  Franklin,  historian,  b.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  8  June,  1799;  d.  in  New  York
city,  30  May,  1877.  He  studied  law,  but  abandoned
it  on  account  of  failing  health.  From  his  early
manhood  he  contributed  to  magazines  and  news-
papers. He  removed  to  Louisiana  in  1830,  and
engaged  in  planting  and  commerce,  continuing  his
literary  work  and  collecting  an  extensive  library,
which  he  afterward  presented  to  the  Fiske  free
library  of  New  Orleans.  In  1853  he  removed  to
New  York,  and,  retiring  from  business,  devoted
himself  to  historical  writing.  He  published  "  Bio-
graphia  Americana"  (New York,  1825) ;  " Memoirs
of  Eminent  Female  Writers  "  (Philadelphia.  1827) ;
"  Beauties  of  Byron,  Scott,  and  Moore "  (New
York,  1828);  "Historical  Collections  of  Louisiana"
(1846-'58);  "History  and  Progress  of  the  Iron
Trade  of  the  United  States"  (1858);  and  "His-
torical Annals  of  North  America"  (1861).

FRENCH,  Daniel  Chester,  sculptor, b.  in  Exe-
ter, N.  II.,  20  April,  1850.  He  studied  under  Dr.  Will-
iam Rimmer  in  Boston,  and  in  the  studio  of  Thomas
Ball,  at  Florence,  Italy,  but  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1876  and  opened  a  studio  in  Washington.
He  was  a  member  of  the  art  club  of  that  city,  and
executed  a  number  of  small  groups  in  parian  and
plaster.  The  most  popular  of  these  works  are  two
groups  of  dogs,  "The  Owl  in  Love,"  and  " Dick
Swiveller  and  the  Marchioness."  In  1878  he  re-
turned to  Florence,  and  has  since  resided  in  that


city.  His  sculpture^  include  "The  Minute  Man
of  Concord,"  an  betofc  statue  in  bronze,  which
was  unveiled  in  Concord  in  is;;,;  -The  May
Queen  "  :  "  Elsie  Venner";  "  Peace  and  War.'
lossal  group,  which  is  now  in  the  eaatom-howe  in
St.  Louis;  "The  Waking  of  Endrmion":  and  a
life-size  statue  of  Gen.  Lewis  Cass,  for  the  NaOOOal
memorial  gallery  at  Washington.

FRENCH,  David,  scholar,  b.  in  Delaware  in
1700;  d.  at  New  Castle,  Pa.,  23  Aug.,  174*.  His
father,  Robert,  was  a  provincial  councillor  in  1 7tM>
and  1707,  and  became  a  justice  of  the  provincial
court  in  1701.  Between  1720  and  1730  he  wrote
poetical  translations,  which  were  printed  in  the
works  of  John  Parke,  an  early  poet  of  Pennsylva-
nia (1786).  Two  of  these  translations  are  from
the  elegies  of  Ovid  and  four  from  the  odes  of
Anacreon.  Parke  inserts  them  with  the  remark :
"  These  poems  were  consigned  to  oblivion,  through
the  obliterating  medium  of  rats  and  moths,  under
the  sequestered  canopy  of  an  antiquated  trunk."
In  the  records  of  his  death  and  burial  in  Chester
church  he  is  described  as  "  prothonotary  of  the
court  at  New  Castle."

FRENCH,  John  William,  clergvman,  b.  in
Connecticut  about  1810;  d.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,
8  July,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in
1832,  studied  theology  in  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal seminary  in  New  York  city,  and  was  admitted
to  holy  orders  in  1835.  In  1836  he  was  elected
professor  of  ethics  in  Bristol  college.  Pa.  This  in-
stitution soon  failed,  and  after  holding  pastorates
in  Portland,  Me.,  and  Washington,  D.  C.,  he  was
appointed  in  August,  1858,  chaplain  of  the  mili-
tary academy  at  West  Point,  and  professor  of
geography,  history,  and  ethics,  to  which  was  after-
ward added  the  department  of  constitutional  and
international  law.  In  1860  he  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Trinity  college.

FRENCH,  L.  Virginia,  poet,  b.  on  the  eastern
shore  of  Maryland  in  1830;  d.  at  McMinnville,
Tenn.,  31  March,  1881.  Her  maiden  name  was
Smith.  Her  maternal  grandfather,  Capt.  Thomas
Parker,  was  an  officer  in  the  Revolutionary  army.
She  was  educated  at  Washington  female  seminary,
Pa.  In  1848  she  removed  to  Memphis,  Tenn.,
established  a  school,  and  under  the  signature  of
"  lnconnue "  contributed  to  local  magazines  and
newspapers.  In  1852  she  became  an  associate  editor
of  the  "  Southern  Lady's  Book,"  a  fashion  magazine
published  in  New  Orleans,  and  in  January.  1853,
married  John  L.*  French,  of  McMinnville,  Tenn.
and  for  some  time  edited  the  "  Crusader,"  a  maga-
zine published  at  Atlanta,  Ga.  Her  collected
works  are  "  Wind  Whispers,"  poems  (New  Yorl
1856);  "Iztalilxo,"  a  tragedy  (1859);  and  "Legenc"
of  the  South"  (Atlanta,  1867).

FRENCH,  Mansfield,  clergyman,  b.  in  Man-
chester, Vt.,  21  Feb.,  1810;  d.  at  Pearsalls.  L.  L,
15  March,  1876.  In  his  youth  he  studied  at  the
Bennington  seminary,  and  at  twenty  began  the
logical  studies  at  the  divinity-school  of  Kenyoi
college,  Ohio.  He  was  the  founder  of  Marietta
college,  Granville  female  seminary,  and  principal
of  Circleville  female  college,  Ohio.  In  1845  he
united  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and
entered  the  itinerant  ministry  in  the  North  Ohio
conference.  During  the  next  three  years  he  was
president  of  the  Xenia,  Ohio,  female  college,  and
agent  for  Wesleyan  university.  He  was  afterward
agent  for  Wilberforce  university,  the  first  college
opened  to  the  negro  race  in  America.  In  1 6
removed  to  New  York  city  with  a  religious  monthly,
of  which  he  was  editor  and  proprietor,  called  "'1  'tie
Beauty  of  Holiness." There  he  became  a


Mil


040


iverv  agitator.  ""'1  aflef  1 1 »- -  capture  of  Port
•>t  solicitation  of  I-.«i-  Tappan

ht-r  abolitionists,  In-  went  t<>  Washington
■ml  laid  before  President  Lincoln  lii-  rlowi  "f  t h<
nation's  ilutv  toward  -contraband"  slaves.  In
June.  1862,  Ik-  visited  Port  lioynl,  inx|a»cUH]  the
Condition  of  the  negroes,  nnd  resolved  t<>  return  to

ih  and  induce  teachen  to  go  back  with  him.

on  in  Peb.,  1863,  be  organised  a  large  meeting  at

r  Institute.  New  York  city,  where  his  account

•  if  the  need  of  instruction  anions  tl lotad  ptO-

cited  such  Interest  and  sympathy  that  at
OOCe  the  "  National  frecdman's  relief  ISBOOiatkni"
wan  formed,  and  he  was  elected  general  agent.  In
Mareli,  IMS,  he  agate,  fllrtd  for  Port  Royal,  this
time  acconi|ianicd  by  a  large  corps  <>f  teachers.  He
t  temp  ted  to  have  the  negroes  placed  on  the
abandoned  plantations,  and  taught  methodical
farming  under  white  superintendents.  In  this
plan  he  nut  with  much  military  and  civil  opposi-
tion, but  finally  met  with  partial  success.  Mr.
French  was  the  personal  friend  of  President  Lin-
coln, of  Sec.  Stanton,  and  Salmon  P.  Chase.  At
one  period  during  the  civil  war  .Mr.  French  organ-
ized an  expedition  to  intercept  telegraphic  commu-
nications between  the  Confederate  forces,  and  de-
livered  their  messages  at  Washington.  He  was
pnpularlv  known  as  "Chaplain  French."

FRENCH,  William  Henry. soldier,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md..  19  .Ian.,  1815;  d.  there. 'JO  May.  1881.
lb-  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1887,  and  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of
artillery.  He  served  in  the  Seminole  war  in  Florida
and  <>n  the  Canada  border  in  1837-'8.  I  hiring
the  Mexican  war  he  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Franklin  Pierce,  and  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Patter-
son
Inttli

major  for  gallantry  at  the  capture  of  the  city  of
Mexico.  Between  1850  and  1852  he  again  served
against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  Florida,  and  was
on  garrison  and  frontier  duty  till  lMtil.  when  he
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and
served  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  during  the
peninsular  campaign.  He  was  engaged  at  the  bat-
tles of  Yorktown,  Fair  Oaks,  Oakgrove,  Gaines's
Mill,  Peach  Orchard,  Savage  Station,  Glendale,
and  Malvern  Hill.  In  the  Maryland  campaign  In-
commanded  a  division  of  Sumner's  corps  at  the
battles  of  Ami.  lam  and  Fredericksburg,  Septem-
ber. 1n«»2,  and  in  the  next  month  was  appointed
major-general  of  volunteers.  He  served  in  the
Rappahannock  campaign,  in  the  battles  of  Fred-
ericksburg and  Chancellorsville,  commanded  the
8d  armv  corps  in  its  operations  at  Mine  Run,  from
XoveniWr.  1MM,  till  May,  1864,  when  he  was  mus-
tered out  of  volunteer  service.  He  commanded
the  2d  artillery  <m  the  Pacific  coast  from  1865  till
1872, and  in  1m7.~).  having  passed  through  the  suc-
cessive military  grades,  was  appointed  lieutenant-
colonel,  in  command  at  Fort  McHenry,  Baltimore.
In  July,  1  mho,  at  his  own  request,  being  over  sixty-
.  he  was  retired.
I  RENEAU,  Philip,  poet,  I>.  in  New  York  city,
2  .Ian..  1752;  d.  near  Freehold,  N..I..  18  Dec.,  1882.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1771.  Some  of
his  published  poems  were  written  before  he  left
college.  He  made  a  voyage  to  the  Danish  West
hdJes  in  177H.  and  there  wrote  several  of  his  long-
est poema  In  177*  be  visited  Bermuda,  and  on
turn  liecame  a  contributor  to  "The  United

Magaziin-.-'  edited  by  Hugh II.  Bracken*1

<>n a  second  voyage'  in 17*0  to  the  Wi-t

he  was  captured  by  Ml  English  cruiser,  and

his  tXPerienOM  as  a  prisoner  are  recorded  in  liitter


:  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  in  the
lesof  Churubusco  and  Contreras.and  brevetted


terms  in  "The British Prison-Ship  .rain-

ing  his  liberty  the  I  M  wrote  fre.puntlv

wi pram  and rang for  tin-  "  Freeman's  Journal.*'
After  the  olOH  Of  tin-  war  he  was  variously  em-
ployed as  an  editor,  ami  master  of  a  vessel  in  voy-
ages to  the  West Indies  and  to  the  southern  states
until 17!H), when he Usanie editor  of the '
York  "Dally  Advertiser." Jefferson  beranH  in-
terested in  him.  and  ap|>ointad  him  translator  for
the  state  department,  and  at the MM  time  1
m-aii  assumed  the  editorship  of  the  '•  HationA]
zette." The  violenci-  of  this  pair's  attacks  on  the
Federalists  aroused Hamilton's  in-,  wh<
Freneau  of  being  the  |>ensioned  tool  of  Jefferson,
which  compelled  tin-  latter  to  write  an  explanatory
letter  to  Washington. Frenean'l  u«-\t newspaper
undertaking  WM  the  "  Jersey  Chronicle."  which  he

{nililished  for  a  short time  at  hi*  residence.  Mount
'leasant,  N.  J. In  17i»7  he  laned  in Now York
the  "Time-piece  and
Literary  Companion,"
but his connection

with  it  was  hrii-f.  Be-
tween this  time  and
his  death  in  1832  he
seems  to  have  done
little  of  public  inter-
est. He  lost  his  life
from  exf>osure,  having
got  astray  in  a  bog
meadow  on  returning
to  bit  home  from  the
village  near  which  he
lived.  His  first  liter-
ary publication,  "  A
Poem  on  the  Rising
Glory  of  America"
(Philadelphia,  1771),
was  written  for  the
college  commencement.

considered  the  joint  author  in  this  production,
on  the  strength  of  a  statement  on  the  title-page
to  Brackenridgc's  poem  on  "Divine  Revelation,"
which  reads:  ••  By  the  same  person  .  .  .  who.  S-pt.
25.  1771.  delivered  a  small  poem  on  'The  Ris-
ing Glory  of  America.'"  Freneau  undoubtedly
composed  the  poem,  as  he  included  it  in  his  cof-
lected  poems,  published  by  himself  at  Monmouth.
N.  .1.  Brackenridge  merely  recited  the  piece  at  the
commencement.  Freneau  published  "  Voyage  to
Boston."  a  poem  (New  York,  1774;  reprinted  in
Philadelphia,  1775):  "General  Gage  s Confession "
iN.-w  York,  1775):  "The  British  Prison-Ship."  a
poem  in  four  cantos  (17*1);  "The  Poems  of  Philip
Freneau,  written  chiefly  during  the  Late  War  '
(17w»i:  reprinted,  with  a  preface  by  J.  EL  Smith,  in
London,  lN»;i):  MA  Jonrney  from  Philadelphia  to
New  York,  by  Robed  Slender.  Stocking-weaver "
(17S7:  republished  in  1H<«».  under  the  title  "A
Laughable  Poem,  or  Robert  Slender's  Journey
from  Philadelphia  to  New  York"):  "The  Mfacsi-
laneous  Works  of  Mr.  Philip  Freneau "  (1788);
"The  Village  Merchant."  a  poem  (IT'.Mi :  ••  Poems
written  between  the  Years  17<kM  and  1794"  (17M :
new  ed..  Monmouth.  N.  J..  1799);  "Letters  on
Yarimis  Interest ing  and  Ini|>ortant  Subjects,  by
Robert  Slender"  (17W):  "  Poems  written  and  pub-
lished during  the  American  Revolutionary  War"
(1K09);  and  "A  Collection  of  Poems  on  American
AtTairs"  (New  York.  18151  F.vcrt  A.  Duyckinck
edited  an  edition  of  his  ••  POWM  of  the  American

Revolution"  (New  York. ihoT>). Franaan also

made  a  translation  of  A  bin'-  Robtne'l  ••  Yovages  and
Travels  "(Philadelphia,  1788).— His  brother,  Peter,

journalist,  b.  in  New  Jitney  in  17.">7;  d.  in  Charles


Brackenridge ha-


;>:><>


KRKY


FRIAS


tun.  S.  <'..  in  ini:{,  after  completing  his  education,
wi-nt  (0  South  (arolinii,  when-  lie  was  elected  sec-
ivtarv  oi  State. About  1996  he  became  pari  pro-

I)rietoruf  the  Charleston  "  Gazette,"  which  journal
u>  edited  with  singular  ability  and  fairness  till
1810,  when  heboid  out  his  interest.  He  then  leased
I  -aw -mill  and  cottage  at  Pinckney's  Fens,  and
died  of  malaria  contracted  there.

FBBT,  Joseph  Samuel  Christian  Frederick,
dergvinan.  I».  in  Mayn-Stockheiin,  Franconia,  Ger-
many, in  177:5 ;  d.  in  Pontiac,  Mich.,  5  June,  1850.
His  father,  Samuel  Levi,  was  a  Jewish  teacher, and
expounder  of  rabbinical  law.  His  mother  supported
the  family  by  keeping  a  small  shop.  At  six  years
of  age  he" read  the  five  books  of  Moses  in  the  origi-
nal, and  was  dailv  instructed  by  a  private  tutor  in
the  Jewish  lawand  Talmud,every  opportunity  being
used  to  inspire  him  with  a  hatred  of  Christianity.
At  the  age  of  nine  the  study  of  Mischna  and  Ge-
mara,  digests  of  Jewish  traditions,  were  added  to
his  theological  text-books.  On  attaining  early
manhood  he  removed  to  Hesse  and  taught  Hebrew
children,  as  private  tutor.  At  twenty-one  he  be-
came a  leader  in  the  synagogue,  read  the  prayers
and  law,  and  spent  a  whole  year  in  learning  the
Jewish  method  of  killing  fowls,  or  beasts.  About
this  period,  while  journeying  from  Hamburg  to
Schwerin,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  at  the  latter
town  a  more  lucrative  office,  he  met  a  Christian,
who  suggested  to  him  novel  ideas  regarding  the
Messiah.  He  was  impressed  with  the  doctrines  of
the  new  religion,  and,  after  three  or  four  years  of
mental  struggle,  adopted  them  as  his  own.  In
May,  1798,  he  was  baptized  and  received  into  the
Protestant  communion.  In  1799  he  entered  the
theological  seminary  established  in  Saxony  by
Baron  von  Sehiernding  for  the  education  of  mis-
sionaries, studied  there  for  one  year,  and  then  went
to  London,  with  the  intention  of  going  to  Africa
as  a  missionary.  He  afterward  changed  his  pur-
pose and  decided  to  remain  in  England  and  be-
come an  evangelist  to  his  own  people.  His  family,
on  learning  his  apostasy,  enacted  all  the  cere-
monies which  would  have  been  performed  at  his
death.  For  the  next  seven  years  he  labored  in
connection  with  the  London  missionary  society,
travelling  through  the  United  Kingdom,  preach-
ing to  whatever  Jewish  congregations  he  could
muster,  suffering  much  obloquy  and  privation  and
meeting  with  little  encouragement.  In  1816  he  re-
moved with  his  family  to  New  York,  established  the
Mulberry  street  Congregationalist  church,  and  was
ordained  its  pastor  in  1818.  In  1820  he  founded
the  American  society  for  meliorating  the  condition
of  the  Jews.  The  object  of  this  association  was  to
establish  an  asylum  for  Christian  Hebrews  from
all  parts  of  the  world.  The  enterprise  proved  a
failure,  and  occupied  several  years  of  fruitless  labor.
In  1827,  Mr.  Frey,  convinced  of  the  necessity  of
immersion,  left  the  Congregationalist  church  and
became  a  Baptist.  He  held  several  small  charges
as  a  member  of  that  denomination,  and  in  1837
resigned  his  pastorate  to  go  to  Europe  as  an  agent
for  the  American  society  for  the  conversion  of  the
Jews.  He  remained  abroad  three  years,  but  the
mission  was  not  favorably  received.  He  returned
to  New  York,  lectured  weekly  in  the  South  Baptist
church  to  such  Jews  as  he  could  induce  to  form
his  congregation,  went  on  missionary  journeys
through  the  southern  and  southwestern  states,  and
finally  settled  in  Pontiac,  Mich.,  where  he  taught
Hebrew  in  the  preparatory  department  of  the  State
university.  His  published  works  are  "  Narrative  of
my  Life"  (New  York,  1809) ; "  Hebrew  Bible  "  (1811);
"Hebrew  Grammar"  (1813-'23);  "Judah  and  Is-


rael "  (1887) :  "  Lectures  of  Scripture  Types  "  (1841);
and "  Report  of  the  Agency  in  Europe  "  ( !v

FRKZIKR.  Amedee  Francois  ( fray-zee-ay),
French  militarv  engineer,  b.  in  Chamhcrv.  France,
in  1082;  d.  in"  Brest.  M  Oct..  177:;.  He  vm  the
son  of  a  Scotch  refugee  who  had  fled  to  Savoy.
Amedee  was  educated  in  Paris,  and  served  as  lieu-
tenant of  infantry  from  17<rJ  till  1707,  when  be  en-
tered the  engineer  corps.  In  1712  the  government
sent  him  to  examine  the  condition  of  the  Spani-h
colonies  in  America.  After  visiting  the  principal
points  in  Peru.  Chili,  and  Brazil,  he  returned  to
Marseilles  on  17  Aug.  He  pointed  out  several  mis-
takes in  the  "Relation "of  Father  Feuillee,  and  this
led  to  a  bitter  controversy  between  the  two  travel-
lers. Frt'zier  introduced  the  large  Chili  strawlxrry
into  France.  In  1719  he  was  stationed  at  Santo  Do-
mingo as  engineer-in-chief,  and  made  a  map  of  the
island,  to  which  he  added  a  plan  of  the  city  of  San-
to Domingo.  On  his  return,  in  1728,  he  received  t  he
cross  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  appointed  director  of
the  fortifications  of  Brittany  in  1739,  and  engaged  •
in  this  work  until  1764,  when  he  was  retired  as  a
lieutenant-colonel.  In  1752  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  French  academy.  He  published
many  scientific  papers,  and  several  works,  including
"  Relation  du  voyage  de  la  Mer  du  Sud,  aux  cotes
du  Chili,  et  du  Perou,  fait  pendent  les  annees,  1712,
1713,  et  1714  "  (Paris,  1714 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1732 ;
Dutch  translation,  Amsterdam,  1718;  German
translation,  Hamburg,  1718;  English  translation,
with  a  supplement  by  Edmund  Halley,  London,
1718).  His  "  Reponse  au  P.  Feuillee  "was  added
to  the  Paris  edition  of  1832.  He  also  published  a
"  Lettre  concernant  l'histoire  des  tremolements  de
terre  de  Lima  "  (1755).

FRIAS,  Felix  (free'-as),  Argentine  publicist,  b.
in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1820;  d.  in  Paris  in  1881.
Early  in  life  he  became  an  opponent  of  the  dicta-
tor Rosas,  and  in  1838  was  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in
Montevideo.  There  he  became  acquainted  with
Gen.  Lavalle,  and  accompanied  him  in  1839,  as
secretary,  on  his  invasion  of  the  Argentine  Repub-
lic. When  Lavalle  was  assassinated  on  9  Oct-
young  Frias  rescued  his  remains  and  carried
them  to  Bolivia  at  great  risk.  He  then  engaged
in  literature  in  Chili,  continued  his  opposition
to  Rosas,  and  after  the  overthrow  of  the  dictator  in
the  battle  of  Monte  Caseros,  3  Feb.,  1852,  returned
to  his  native  country,  where  he  became  editor-in-
chief  of  "  El  Orden."  He  was  afterward  minis-
ter to  Chili,  during  the  protracted  discussion  of
the  boundary  question  between  the  two  countries,
served  several  times  as  deputy  to  the  National
congress,  and  once  as  its  president.  Frias  dreamed
of  an  intimate  alliance  between  the  church  and
liberty,  and  his  opinions  savored  of  asceticism.
During  the  serious  conflicts  at  Buenos  Ayres,
caused  by  the  presidential  elections  of  1880,  he
made  strenuous  exertions  to  avert  civil  war,  and
after  the  attainment  of  his  object  retired  to  Eu-
rope to  recruit  his  health.  Among  his  historical
works  a^e  "  La  gloria  del  Tirano  Rosas."

FRIAS,  Francisco,  Count  of  Pozos  Dul<
ban  author,  b.  in  Havana  in  September,  1809;  d.  in
Paris  in  1877. He  was  sent  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  to  be
educated,  and  in 1829  he  returned  to  Cuba  and

?ursued  agricultural  studies.  In  1842  he  went  to
aris  and  remained  there  several  years,  devoting
his  time  to  mechanics,  physics,  and  chemistry,  in
1848  he  returned  to  Cuba,  and  in  the  next  year  the
Havana  lyceum  awarded  him  a  first  prize  for  his
"  Memoria  sobre  la  Industria  Pecuaria."  The  gov-
ernor of  Havana  imprisoned  him  for  six  months  in
Morro  Castle  in  1853,  on  account  of  hisanti-slav


KIJlAs


FKIKZK


m


olition  of  slavery  in  ill.-  Spanish  colonies. Eh
turned  i«>  Cuba  In is<»7.  ami  went  t<>  Paris  in


idea*,  and  hmfchr4  him  m  1864  In  1861  he  re-
tunied  t «»  Cuba  ami  assumed  the  editorship  of  "  Kl

Siglo,"  tlir  organ  <>f  tin-  I.ilxTnl  |»Mrtv.  In  Mb*
rembcr,  1805.  tin-  Madrid  government  called  acoun-
fii  t"  dJlOQJi  political  inn!  linancial  reforms  to  !»•
established  in  Culwi.  and  Count  Pozos  Imlces  was
among  the  delegate!  sent  to  Snain.  There  he  ad-
tooated  tin'  introduction  of  white  lal*>rers  ami  tlu>
aln

In-  published  several  political,  economi-
cal, and itcientlflc memoirs. Mr  whs  tin*  author

entitled  M  Population  and  the  Cultiva-
tion of  I jam  1  "  (Paris),  and  "  Colcccion  do  Kseritos
icultura"(2  vols.,  ikim>).

FBI  V>.  Toman,  Bolivian  statesman,  l>.  in  Po-
Iom,  11  Jan..  1805;  d.  in  U  Paz,  10  Aug..  1864
.ran  in  early  1  i f«-  to  take  an  active  |»art  in
politico,  n~>i»t niiT  in  1888,  after  the  overthrow  of
Sucre"*  government  by  (iamarra,  to  re-establish  con-
stitutional authority.  In  1882  he  whs  ap|>ointcil
by  (on.  Santa  Cruz  secretary  of  ligation  in  Paris,
and  was  afterward  several  times  deputy  to  congress,
and  secretary  of  state  under  the  administrations  of
Velasco  in  "ls-40,  Jose  Ballivian  in  1841-'6,  and
Linares  in  1858-'60.  In  1801  he  was  sent  as  min-
ister |.leni|M)tentiarv  to  Chili,  and  in  1K71  was
again  called  to  be  secretary  of  state  by  Gen.  Mo-
rales, who  afterward  appointed  him  president  of
the  council  of  state,  lie  temporarily  assumed  the
executive  power  when  Morales  was  assassinated
on  25  Nov..  ls?-J,  and  when  Adolfb  Ballivian  WM
elected  constitutional  president,  Frias  delivered  the
executive  power  to  lum  in  May,  1H?;{,  and  was  by
him  appointed  vice-president.  When  Mailman,
toward  the  end  of  that  vear,  was  prevented  by  >\<k-
ness  from  attending  to  his  official  duties,  Knas  as-
sumed the  presidency,  and  on  the  death  of  the
former.  1  I  roth,  1*74,  occupied  the  executive  chair
for  the  remainder  of  his  term.  His  administration
was  one  of  the  most  progressive  that  Bolivia  ever
had.  In  February,  1879,  he  was  appointed  minis-
ter to  France,  and  as  such  signed  a  treaty  of  friend-
ship and  commerce  between  Spain  and  his  country.
On  his  return  he  retired  to  private  life.

Mill  k,  Charles,  phvsieian.  b.  in  Baltimore.
Md.,  8  Aug..  1866;  i  there,  90  March,  1860.  He
studied  at  Baltimore  college,  and  became  a  civil
engineer,  but  in  1843  he  began  the  study  of  medi-
cine, and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Mary-
land in  1845.  He  early  gave  his  attention  to  aus-
cultation, which  was  first  introduced  into  Baltimore
by  his  brother-in-law.  In  1847,  with  three  others,
he  organized  the  Maryland  medical  institute,  a
preparatory  school  of  medicine,  and  took  in  it  the
■apartment  of  practical  medicine.  In  1849-'56
Dr.  Prick  was  attending  phvsieian  to  the  Maryland
penitentiary.  In  1855-$  he  took  a  conspicuous
part  in  the  Baltimore  pathological  society,  ami  in
the  latter  year  was  selected  to  fill  the  chair  of  ma-
teria medioa  In  the  Maryland  college  of  pharmacy,
which  he  hail  aided  in  organizing.  In  1858.  after
his  return  from  an  extended  Kuropeau  tour,  he  ac-
cepted the  professorship  of  materia  inedica  and
thera|«utics  in  the  University  of  Maryland,  and  at
ue  time  took  charge  ox  the  i Uoal  depart-
ment of  the  Baltimore  infirmary  as  visiting  phy-
sician. He  published  "  Renal  Diseases"  (18501  and
contributed  papers  to  the  M Journal  <>f  Medical Sci-
etH  ■>■  "  and  other  scientific  periodicals.

I  I!  IKS,  John,  insurgent,  b.  in  Bucks  eoimtv.
Pk,  about  17»H;  (Lin  Philadelphia  about  1865,  li<*
was  of  German  descent,  ami  was  brought  up  on  a
farm,  though  hi*  taotea  seem  to  have  led  him  to
local  politics  or  a  military  life. Contemporaneous


desrnU'  him  M  a  tall,  handsome  jTMM
man.  who  rode  aU.ut  the  Milage  of  Lower  Milford
with  a  feather  in  hi*  hat  and  a  sword  at  his  Mile.
In  the  spring  "f  17!*1»  the  collection  of  what  was
known  as  the  "house-  <»r  window-tax"  was  forcibly
resisted  in  Northampton  and  the  adjoining  coun-
ties of  Bttok* Md  Montgomery.  Winn  government
rs  came  to  measure  the  douses,  armed  compa-
nies of  ein/.eiis  seized  and  Imprisoned  them.  I
was  the  captain  of  one  of  these  regiments,  and,  pistfll
in  hand,  rode  at  the  head  of  the  insurrectionists,
capturing  oflicials  and  subjecting  them  to  puiii-h-
ineiit  whenever  any  attempt  was  made  to  enforce
the  law.  In  February.  \~UH,  a  public  meeting
was  held  at  the  house  <>f  Johfl  Kline,  of  the  town-
ship of  Lower  Milford,  and  a  paper  drawn  up  and
signed  by  fifty-two  par* 'ii-,  in  which  each  signer
Uuiiid  himself  to  resist  the  "  window-tax  "  at  any
cost.  John  Fries  assisted  in  drawing  up  the  pftpss*
ami  pledged  him-elf  to  raise  700  men  to  support
the  cause.  At  the  head  of  this  company  of  armed
men  he  went  to  (juakertowu.  arrested  t he  assessors,
and  Ululated  several  prisoners  whom  the  sheriff
had  in  charge.  The  mxt  day  he  >et  out  for  North-
ampton, and  was  on  his  way  to  Bethlehem  with  his
troop  when  he  was  met  by  a  deputation  from  the
l".  S.  marshal,  urging  him  to  return.  This  he  re-
fused to  do  till  the  marshal  should  consent  to  re-
lease what  prisoners  he  hod  in  charge,  and  urged
his  men  to  fire  on  the  deputation  if  the  marshal
should  refuse.  The  prisoners  were  finally  given
up  when  resistance  seemed  futile,  and  Priori  troop
dispersed  amid  the  huzzas  of  the  insurgents  and
their  sympathizers.  After  this,  the  militia  was
called  out,  and  Fries  was  arrested  and  put  on  trial
for  high  treason,  in  May.  17!»i».  He  was  pronounced
guilty,  and  a  new  trial  was  held  in  April,  1800,
with  the  same  result.  Fries  was  resentenced  to  be
hanged,  but,  against  the  advice  of  every  member  of
his  cabinet,  President  Adams  jmrdoned  him.  and
issued  a  general  am  nest  v  for  all  the  offenders.
Fries  subsequently  opened  a  tin-ware  shop  in  Phila-
delphia, aim  became  rich  and  respectable.

FRIEZE,  Henry  Simmons,  educator,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  \r,  Sept..  1S1?;  d.  in  Ann  Arbor,
Mi.h..  7  Dec.  lKNii.  He  was  clerk  in  a  store  in
Pawtucket,  It.  1.,  and  organist  in  various  churches.
He  afterward  entered  Brown,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated at  the  head  of  his  class  in  1841.  From  his
graduation  till  1845  he  was  instructor  in  the  uni-
versity, and  then,  for  nine  years,  Latin  principal
in  the  university  grammar-school.  In  1854  he  re-
signed to  accept  the  chair  of  the  Latin  language
and  literature  in  the  University  of  Michigan,  00*
copying  it  till  his  death.  On  the  resignation  of
President  Haven  in  1869,  Prof.  Frieze  acted  as
president  of  the  university  until  1871.  In  that
year,  owing  largely  to  his  influence,  most  of  the
privileges  of  the  university  were  opened  to  women,
and  in  1MK»;  they  were  received  into  all  its  depart-
ments. Prof.  Frieze  was  the  author  of  the  system
of  insjMition  by  which  an  oflicial  connection  has
Im'cii  established  bltweon  the  university  ami  the
high  schools  of  the  state.  In  1880-'l,  in  the  ab-
sence of  President  Angel]  OB  a  diplomatic  Bsjssjoi
to  China,  Prof.  Frieze  again  acteu  as  president  of
the  university.  He  exhibited  much  interest  in
musical  matters  there,  acting  for  twenty  years  as
organist,  and  organizing  the  University  musical
sim  ietv.  He  was  also  very  active  in  art  matters.
Tin-  degree  of  LL.  I>.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Chicago  university  and  Kalamazoo  college  in  1870,
bv  Brown  university  in  1888,  and  by  the  Cniver-
sity of  Michigan  in  1885,  Dr.  Frieze  contributed
to  various  educational  and  philological  magazines.


659


PRINK


FRITZ


and  published  oonsslonsl  addnsses,  including"  An-
cient and  Modern  Education,"  one  mi  "  Art  Mu-
seiims,"  and  a  memorial  address  on  the  "  Life  and
Works  of  Henry  Philip  Tappan.  First  President
of  the  University  of  Michigan."  lie  is  the  author
of  valnahle  annual  reports  to  the  hoard  of  regents.
and  has  published  editions  of  Virgil's  •■  JEneid  "
iisti(i)  and  Quintilian  (1867),  and  "The  Story  of
Giovanni  Dupre,"  a  19th  century  Florentine  sculp-
tor (London.  1886).

FRINK,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Rutland.  Mass.,
7  Sept.,  1731 ;  d.  there  in  1807.  He  studied  medi-
cine with  Dr.  Goffe,  of  Marlborough.  Mass..  and  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society.  He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
formed  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  and  the
first  president  of  the  Worcester  county  medical
society.  He  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  when  that
was  considered  a  mark  of  distinction,  and  as  a
phvsician  and  a  citizen  was  highly  esteemed.

FRISRIK,  Levi,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rranford,
Conn.,  6  July,  1748;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  in  1806.
He  was  graduated  with  the  first  class  at  Dart-
mouth in  1771,  studied  theology  under  the  Rev.
Eleazar  Wheelock  at  Hanover,  and  was  ordained
there  in  1772.  He  at  once  engaged  in  missionary
service  among  the  Delaware  Indians,  and  after-
ward labored  with  the  Canadian  tribes,  and  among
those  in  Maine.  The  mission  was  ended  bv  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  in  1776  he  was  installed  pas-
tor of  the  1st  Congregationalist  church  at  Ipswich,
Mass.  He  published  "Sermons  and  Orations"
(1783-1804;. — His  son,  Levi,  scholar,  b.  in  Ipswich,
Mass.,  15  Sept.,  1783;  d.  in  Cambridge,  9  July,
1822,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1802,  and  in
1803  began  the  study  of  law,  which  he  was  com-
pelled to  abandon  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his
eyesight.  Mr.  Frisbie  was  appointed  Latin  tutor
at  Harvard  in  1805,  and  in  1817  became  professor
of  natural  religion,  moral  philosophy,  and  civil
polity.  His  writings  were  collected  and  published
by  his  friend  and  fellow-professor,  Andrews  Norton
(Boston,  1823).  They  contain  classical  and  literary
papers,  previously  published  in  various  reviews,  a
version  of  Horace's  epistle,  "  Ad  Julium  Florum,"
and  a  popnlarpoem  called  "Castle  in  the  Air."

FRISBY,  Edgar,  astronomer,  b.  in  Great  Eas-
ton,  Leicestershire,  England,  22  May,  1837.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Toronto  in
1863,  and  until  1867  was  engaged  in  teaching  in
Canada.  Subsequently  he  was  acting  professor  of
mathematics  in  the  Northwestern  university,  and
later  assistant  astronomer  at  the  U.  S.  naval  ob-
servatory in  Washington.  In  1878  he  became  full
professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  with
the  relative  rank  of  lieutenant.  He  was  sent  to
California  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  observe  the
total  solar  eclipse  on  11  Jan.,  1880.  Prof.  Frisby
is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  to  whose  pro-
ceedings he  contributes  occasional  papers.  His
principal  work  is  the  computation  of  tne  orbit  of
the  great  comet  of  1882,  with  observations  extend-
ing over  a  period  of  six  or  seven  months.

FRISTOE,  Edward  TM  educator,  b.  in  Rappa-
hannock county,  Va.,  16  Dec.,  1830.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Virginia  military  institute  in  1849,  and,
after  spending  three  years  in  teaching,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1855  with  the
degree  of  A.  M.  While  yet  an  undergraduate  he  was
elected  to  the  chair  of  mathematics  in  Columbian
university  in  Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  re-
mained until  1860,  when  he  was  called  to  the  pro-
fessorship of  mathematics  and  astronomy  in  the
State  university  of  Missouri.  Two  years  later  he
entered  the  Confederate  army  as  assistant  adjutant-


general,  ranking  as  captain,  and  subsequently  be-
came  colonel in  the  cavalry,  serving  imd<
Sterling  Price. In  1865  he  returned  to  Columbian
university  as  professor  of  chemistry,  becoming
in  1*71,  occupant  of  a  similar  chair  in  the  Nation-
al medical  college,  and  in  1844  dean  of  the  I
ran  scientific  school  of  the  Columbian  universilv  in
Washington,  I).  C. From 1872  till 1884  he  was
professor  of  chemistry  of  the  National  col
pharmacy  in  Washington. In  1868  he  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  William  Jewell  coll.  _
in  1872  the  degree  of  doctor  of  pharmacy  from  the
National  college  of  pharmacy. Prof.  Fristoe  has
published  scientific  addresses.

FRITSCHEL,  Conrad  Sigmiind.  clergyman,
b.  in  Nuremberg,  Bavaria,  2  Dec,  1833.  lie  was
educated  in  the  gymnasium  and  mission  institute
of  his  native  place,  and  graduated  at  the  mission
institute  of  Neuendettelsau,  Bavaria,  in  1854.  He
was  ordained  to  the  ministry.  23  April,  1854,  and
in  the  same  year  emigrated  to  the  United  States.
In  1879  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Muhlenberg  college,  Allentown,  Pa.  He  was  pro-
fessor in  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  theological
seminary,  Dubuque,  Iowa,  in  1854-'5,  pastor  of  a
Lutheran  congregation  in  Wisconsin  in  1855-'6,
and  of  one  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1856-'8,  and  pro-
fessor of  theology  at  Wartburg  seminarv.  St.  Se-
bald.  Iowa,  in  1858-74.  In  1860, 1866,  and  1870  he
travelled  extensively  in  Germany  and  Russia.  He
has  published  (in  German)  "Iowa  and  Missouri,'
a  controversial  pamphlet  (Mendota,  111.,  1878).  and
a  number  of  essays,  sermons,  etc.  With  his  brother,
he  has  edited,  since  1876, "  Kirchliche  Zeitschrift."  a
theological  bimonthly  magazine  published  at  Men-
dota, Iowa. — His  brother,  Gottfried  Leonhard
Wilhelm,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nuremberg,  Bavaria.
19  Dec.,  1836,  was  graduated  at  the  university  at
Erlangen  in  1856,  and  came  to  the  United  States
in  1857.  Since  that  date  he  has  been  professor  of
theology  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the  Iowa
svnod  at  Mendota,  111.  In  1879  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Muhlenberg  college,  Allen-
town,  Pa.  He  has  published  (in  German)  "  Medi-
tations on  the  Passion  of  Christ"  (Nuremberg,
1868);  "History  of  Protestant  Missionary  Opera-
tions among  the  North  American  Indians  in  the
17th  and  18th  Centuries"  (1870);  "The  Teach-
ings of  Missouri  Synod  on  the  Doctrine  of  Pre-
destination" (1883),  and  other  pamphlets.  These
two  brothers,  working  together  in  the  same  insti-
tution and  synod,  have  done  much  to  advance  Lu-
theran interests  in  Illinois,  Iowa,  and  adjacent
states.  Their  institution,  from  small  beginnings,
has  attained  large  dimensions,  as  also  has  the  synod
of  Iowa,  which  they  organized.

FRITZ,  Samuel,  missionary,  b.  in  Bohemia  in
1653;  d.  in  the  mission  of  Xeberos,  near  Laguna,
Peru,  20  March,  1728.  He  became  a  member  of
the  Jesuit  order,  and  went  as  missionary  to  Peru
in  1685.  His  constitution  was  not  able  to
the  unhealthfulness  of  the  climate,  and  his  weak-
ness became  so  great  that  he  had  to  be  transported
to  Para,  a  Portuguese  colony  at  the  mouth  of  the
river,  where  he  arrived  on  11  Sept.,  1689.  The  gov-
ernor of  this  city  took  him  for  a  spy  and  impris-
oned him  until  July,  1691.  After  repeated  orders
from  the  court  of  Lisbon  he  was  liberated,  and  final-
ly arrived  in  Lima,  where  he  laid  before  the  vice-
roy of  Peru  the  observations  that  he  had  made  on
his  journey.  In  1693  he  returned  to  his  missionary
labors  on  the  Amazon.  He  afterward  took  -
laborious  journeys  to  Quito  and  other  places  in  the
interest  of  his  converts,  and  became  superi.  •:
eral  of  the  mission. He  had  great  aptitude  for  the


FROBISHER


FRONTI  ■


688


-rxu^r,


i^-^cf^/Jr>


arts,  and  in  a  comparatively  short  period  had  be-
come a  skilful  architect,  Oarpenter,  egnlntOt,  and
painter.  Several  churches  of  tin-  m
■domed  with  pictures  by  his  hand.  He  named
forty-two  years  among  the  tribes  that  he  had  con-
verted. Hi-  greet  map  of  the  Amazon  was  en-
!  on  a  small  scale  at  C^uito  in  1707,  and  ap-
peared for  tin-  fir^t  time  in  Prance  in  foL  xii.  of
etliflantes"  (1st  ed.,  1 7 1  T>.  It  is  also
fiiim.l  In  vol.  viii.  of  tin-  second  edition,  with  an
abridgment  of  his  "Memoirs"  on  t !•«•  river  whose
course  be  trace*.

I  ROB1SHKR.  Sir  Martin.  English  navigator,
h.  in  Doncaster,  Yorkshire,  England,  aboot  1886;
d.  in  Plymouth,  England,  7  Nov.,  1504  He  was
bred  to  the  sea. In  search  of  a  northwest  passage

to  India,  and  under
the  patronage  of
the  Karl  ef  War-
wick and  other  no-
lilemell. he sailed

with  a  fleet  of  three
veeacls  from  the
|M>rt  of  Deptford  in
1576.  After  ex-
ploring different
parts  of  the  Arctic
coast,  and  enter-
ing the  strait  that
bears  his  name,  he
returned  to  Eng-
land, carrying  with
him  some  black  ore
which  is  said  to  have
contained  gold.  In
oooootraonee  of  this

discovery,  he  was  en-
couraged to  make  two  more  voyages,  which  proved
fruitless.  In  1585  he  accompanied  Drake  to  the
West  Indies.  On  board  the  ••  Triumph  "  he  took
iwrt  in  the  destruction  of  the  Spanish  armada  in
1588,  and  was  honored  with  knighthood  for  his
bravery.  In  1594  he  lent  a  helping  hand  to  Henry
IV.  of  France  against  the  Leaguers  and  Philip  II.
of  Spain,  and  while  attacking  a  fort  near  Brest
•da  mortal  wound.
FR4EBEL,  Julius,  author,  b.  in  Griesheim,
(iermany.  in  1806.  He  was  a  nephew  of  the  founder
of  the  kindergarten  system.  Friediich  Frcebel.
Julius  was  educated  at"  the  universities  of  Jena,
Munich,  and  Merlin,  and  in  1883  became  a  natural-
ized citizen  of  Switzerland.  He  joined  the  extreme
radical  party,  edited  the  "Swiss  Republican,"  and
issued  several  scientific  works  and  political  pam-

rhlet-..  many  of  which  were  suppressed  in  Germany.
n 1848  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  German
parliament  that  met  at  Frankfort,  and  afterward
accompanied  the  radical  RoU'rt  Blum  to  Vienna.
where  lie  was  arrested  and  condemned  to  death  l»y
irt-martial that  convicted Blum,  hut was
pardoned  before  the  date  fixed  for  the  execution.
On  the  dissolution  of  the  parliament  he  visited  the
United  States,  where  he  became  editor  of
man  newspaper,  lectured  in  New  York  city. and  in
nt  to  Nicaragua,  Santa  Pe,  and  Chihuahua
as  correspondent  of  the  New York "Tribune."
He  returned  to  (iermany  in  1H.">7,  and  efforts  were
•  expel  him from Frankfort,  but  he  was
1  on  the  ground  of  his  naturalization  as  a
of  the  United  States, In 1882  he  went  to
Vienna,  and  became  ■  Federalist  leader. In  i*7:t
he  was  appointed  consul  of  the  German  empire  at
Smyrna.  Asia  .Minor,  and  in 1878  was  transferred
IS, Mis works include ••  Svstem of  Bo-

Poiitics"  (London,  1847);  u The'Reonbliean,"


an  historical  drams  n  Years' Travel

iitral  America,  Northern  .Mexico,  and  tic
of  the United  States"  I'heorv  of

Politics"  (1881);  and  "Political  Address*

ll.'iillll.ll.  Solomon,  clergyman,  b,  at  Bad
Hook,  I>u;

Jersey,  8  Oct.,  I*-,'?.  He  was  early  impressed  with
the  religious  teaching  of  ths  psatOT  of  the  Outch
Reformed  church  that  In-  attended,  and  indued
his  father,  who  was  a  farmer,  to  give  him  an  edu-
cation that  he  might  fit  himself  to  be  a  clergyman.
Mis  patriotism  was  ardent, and  during  the  Revolu-
tion, when  the  British  OOCOpied  Long  Hand  in
177">.  h<'  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.  He  re-
ceived his  education  under  Oirck  BoflMJfl  and
Johannes  M.  Qootachius,  and  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  general  meeting  of  ministers  and
Bsderi  in  1774.  In  17N'i  he  settled  in  Mackcn-ack.
N.  J.,  and  attempted  to  bring  together  the  conser-
vative and  independent  hranches  nf  the  church
there,  hut  the  members  were  divided  DY  the  po-
litical controversies  arising  from  the  Revolution,
and  his  efforts  were  fruitless.  For  a  time  he  suc-
ceeded in  uniting  the  two  congregations,  hut  dis-
sensions soon  broke  out  afresh  in  their  midst,  the
church  was  struck  by  lightning,  ami  the  stone
over  the  entrance  on  which  were  inscribed  the
words  "Union  makes  Strength"  was  broken  in
two.  So  great  an  effect  did  this  occurrence  have
on  the  superstitious  congregation  that  the  church.--,
disunited,  and  not  even  the  effort*  of  the  iynod
could  bring  then  together.  From  1786101  1800
Mr.  Froeligh  passed  nis  life  in  ecclesiastical  dis-
cussion, and  in  1822,  with  that  portion  of  the
church  that  favored  indejx'ndent  American  organi-
zation, effected  a  schism  under  the  name  of  the
"True  Reformed  Dutch  Church."  Dr.  Froeligh
was  arraigned  before  his  synod,  and  wSSSMpSMM
in  1822  for  secession  and  contempt  of  ecclesiastical
authority.  He  printed  various  sermons,  most  of
them  in  the  "Banner  of  Truth,"  including  "Ser-
mon on  Occasion  of  the  Lightning  rending  the
Church  Steeple"  (1795),  and  published  "The  Trial
of  Universal  Charity  bv  a  Jurv  "  (New  York.  1 B
and  "  Reasons  assigned  bva  Number  of  Ministers,
Elders,  and  Deacons  for  declaring  themselves  the
True  Reformed  Dutch  Church  in  the  United
States"  (Mackensack.  16

FROMENTIN.  Eligiiis.  jurist,  b.  in  France;
d.  in  New  Orleans,  Lav,  0  Oct,  ls^.  He  was  a
Roman  Catholic  priest  and  a  member  of  the  Jesuit
order,  but.  after  removing  to  the  United  States,
married  and  settled  in  New  Orleans.  Me  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  there.
Mr.  Froinentin  was  elected  to  the  L.  S.  senate,  ami
served  from  1813  till  1H19.  He  was  annotated
judge  of  the  criminal  court  in  New  Orleans  in
1881,  and  presided  over  the  Same  court  in  the  west-
ern district  of  Florida  in  January,  1888,  while
Jackson  was  governor,  for  a  short  time  only,  after-
ward resuming  the  nracticeof  law  in  New  Orleans.
Mis  wife  died  of  yellow  fever  in  October,  1888,  and
he  followed  her  within  twentv-four  hours.  He
published  "<  mscrvationsona  Bill  NSpSOting  Lsad-
Titles  in  Orleans  and  Doininii|uc"

FRONTENAC,  Louis dc  Buade.Oomtede.gov-
ernor  of  New  France.  h>  in  France  in  1880;  <L  in
QnSDSe.88  Nov..  Hills'.  RJ,  father  held  a  high  pOSl
in  the  household  of  Louis  .MIL.  who  bsOMM  the
child's  godfather.  At  fifteen,  young  Louis,  who
had  shown  an  uncontrollable  psssiOB  for  military
life,  was  sent  to  serve  in  Holland,  under  the  Prince
Of  Orange.  Me  distinguished  himself  in  various
bsttlH  and  sieges,  an. 1  at  twenty-three  was  made
colonel  of  the  regiment  of  Normandy. Time  years


;>:>4


FROXTEXAC


FROXTEXAC


later,  after  being  several  timet  wounded,  he  was
laised  '"  the  'auk  ol  brigadier.  He  v""n  after-
ward  became  enamored  of Mademoiselle dc 1*

Grange-Trianon,  and  married  ber  ei  Peril  in  spite

<>f  the  opposition  <>f  her  relatives.  Madame  <le
Frontenar  oonoeived  an  aversion  for  her  husband,
who  was  self-willed  and  violent,  and  she  presently
left  him  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  I  he  famous  Made-
moiselle de  Montpensier.  Being,  however,  almost
as  wilful  as  Froiitenae  himself,  she  at  last  quarrelled
with  the  princess,  and  was  dismissed  from  her  ser-
vice. A  partial  reconciliation  followed  between  her
husband  and  her  self.

In  1672,  having  gained  a  high  military  reputa-
tion, Frontenac  was  made  governor  of  Canada,
with  all  the  other  countries  thus  included  under
the  name  of  Xew  France.  Some  say  that  he
sought  the  appointment  because  he  could  not  en-
dure his  wife ;  others,  that  his  wife,  unable  to  tol-
erate him,  used  her  influence  at  court  to  send  him
into  an  honorable  banishment;  others,  again,  that
the  king,  jealous  of  his  attentions  to  Madame  de
Montespan,  who  is  said  to  have  smiled  upon  him,
sent  him  to  Canada  to  get  rid  of  a  rival.  On  ar-
riving at  Quebec  he  proceeded  to  model  his  gov-
ernment after  the  old  feudal  pattern.  This  revival
of  by-gone  liberties  excited  the  ire  of  Louis  XIV.,
and  Frontenac  was  sharply  rebuked.  He  next
quarrelled  with  the  Jesuits,  then  all-powerful  in
Canada,  and  soon  afterward  fell  into  a  dispute
with  Perrot,  the  governor  of  Montreal,  whom  he
charged  with  insubordination,  rebellion,  and  un-
lawful trade  in  furs.  This  brought  him  into  colli-
sion with  the  priests  of  St.  Sulpice,  feudal  proprie-
tors of  Montreal,  and  scenes  ensued  that  were  more
lively  than  edifying.  He  had  thus  far  ruled  alone,
but  the  court  now  sent  him  a  colleague  in  the
person  of  Duchesneau.  The  government  of  Cana-
da was  of  a  dual  nature;  the  governor  held  the
place  of  honor  and  the  military  command,  while
the  civil  administration  was  the  proper  function
of  the  intendant,  who  was  designed  as  a  check,
and  even  as  a  spy,  upon  his  military  partner.
Hence  their  relations  were  always  critical,  and  on
this  occasion  they  quarrelled  bitterly.  Duchesneau
sought  support  from  the  bishop  and  the  priests.
Frontenac  set  at  defiance  intendant,  bishop,  and
ecclesiastics  alike.  Sometimes  the  contest  was
for  precedence  at  church  and  in  public  ceremonies ;
sometimes  it  took  the  form  of  charges  of  malad-
ministration and  mutual  accusations  of  illegal
trade  in  furs,  accusations  well  founded  on  both
sides.  Rebukes  and  warnings  proving  useless,  the
king  in  1682  recalled  both  contestants.  In  spite
of  his  outrageous  temper,  Frontenac  had  shown
great  abilities  and  gained  the  confidence  of  the
Canadian  people ;  for,  while  quarrelling  with  those
in  power,  he  was  considerate  and  friendly  toward
the  humbler  classes  of  the  colonists.  In  his  dealings
with  the  Indians  he  mingled  haughtiness  with  con-
ciliation, and  showed  an  extraordinary  power  of
commanding  both  their  respect  and  their  affec-
tion. Never,  probably,  was  any  white  man  at  once
so  much  feared  and  loved  by  them.

He  was  succeeded  by  Le  Febvre  de  la  Barre,
followed  by  the  Marquis  de  Denonville.  The  gov-
ernment of  the  former  was  disastrous  to  the  colo-
nv,  and  that  of  the  latter  brought  it  to  the  brink
of  ruin.  Denonville  waged  against  the  Iroquois  a
war  meant  to  humble,  but  which  served  only  to
enrage  them.  In  1689  they  descended  in  force  on
the  colony,  burned  and  ravaged  all  the  upper  part
of  the  island  of  Montreal,  threatened  the  town
itself,  and  spread  blood  and  havoc  everywhere.
Canada  seemed  paralyzed,  and  terror  turned  almost


to  despair  when  it  became  known  that  war  with
England  had  begun,  and  that  both  white  men
and  red  men  were  arming  for  her  destruction.
Since  his  recall  Frontenac  had  lived  in  France,
poor  and  half  forgotten.  The  crisis  drew  him
from  his  obscurity.  It  was  plain  that  be,  and  he
■lone,  was  the  man  for  the  hour.  He  was  sum-
moned before  the  king  and  charged  once  more
with  the  government  of  Xew  France.  In  spite  of
bis  sixty-nine  years,  he  did  not  hesitate,  accepted
the  burden  and  the  peril,  sailed  for  the  St.  Law-
rence, and,  reaching  Quebec,  found  the  whole  colo-
ny plunged  in  dejection  and  distress.  The  first
necessity  was  to  revive  the  courage  of  the  colo-
nists and  impose  respect  on  the  haughty  and  tri-
umphant Iroquois.  To  these  ends  he  sent  three
war  parties  of  French  and  Indians  against  the
English  borders.  The  first  advanced  on  snow-
shoes,  in  the  dead  of  winter,  against  Schenectady,
approached  it  toward  midnight  during  a  snow-
storm, entered  it  undiscovered,  roused  the  sleeping
villagers  with  the  war-whoop,  killed  sixty  on  the
spot,  captured  ninety,  and  burned  the  place  to  the
ground.  The  second  party,  after  toiling  for  three
months  in  the  snow-clogged  forests,  fell  by  night
on  the  hamlet  of  Salmon  Falls,  and  surprised,  cap-
tured, and  destroyed  it.  The  third  attacked  a
small  wooden  fort  that  stood  within  the  limits
of  what  is  now  the  city  of  Portland,  Me.,  and,
after  an  obstinate  defence,  captured  and  burned
it.  These  successes  compelled  the  respect  of  the
Iroquois,  but  were  far  from  daunting  tne  English.
On  the  contrary,  they  roused  them  to  reprisals
which  placed  Canada  in  imminent  danger.  Sir
William  Phips  sailed  up  the  St.  Lawrence  with
thirty-two  vessels  and  twenty-two  hundred  men,
anchored  before  Quebec,  and  sent  an  officer  with
a  summons  to  surrender.  Frontenac  received  him
in  the  hall  of  the  Chateau  St.  Louis,  and,  enraged
by  his  peremptory  tone,  the  fiery  old  man  bade
him  return  whence  he  came,  and  tell  those  who
sent  him  that  his  cannon  should  give  them  his
answer.  Phips  opened  fire,  but,  as  his  guns  were
light,  his  ammunition  scanty,  and  the  fortifica-
tions of  Quebec,  from  their  lofty  position,  impreg-
nable to  artillery  from  the  river,  tne  bombardment
did  little  harm.  At  the  same  time  he  landed  fif-
teen hundred  men  below  the  town,  but,  after  spir-
ited efforts,  they  were  unable  to  cross  the  river  St.
Charles,  and  were  forced  to  re-embark.  Frontenac
triumphed,  and  Phips  retired  discomfited.

Meanwhile  the  governor  did  not  neglect  his
Indian  allies,  and,  at  a  grand  council  of  the  friend-
ly tribes,  took  up  a  hatchet,  brandished  it  in  the
air,  and  sang  the  war  song,  his  officers  following
his  example.  The  Christian  Indians  of  the  neigh-
boring missions  rose  and  joined  them,  and  so  also
did  the  Hurons  and  the  Algonquins  of  Lake  Ni-
pissing,  stamping  and  screeching  like  a  troop  of
mad  men,  while  Frontenac  led  the  dance,  whoop-
ing like  the  rest.  The  delighted  savages,  roused
to  martial  frenzy,  promised  war  to  the  death,  and
several  years  of  conflict  followed.  The  suffer-
ings of  the  colony,  infested  by  Iroquois  war  par-
ties, were  extreme.  The  fur-trade,  which  formed
its  only  resource  for  subsistence,  was  completely
cut  off,  and  a  great  accumulation  of  furs  remained
in  the  trading  posts  of  the  upper  lakes,  prevented
from  descending  by  the  watchful  enemy
length,  after  three  years  of  destitution  and  misery,
Frontenac  broke  the  blockade  of  the  Ottawa  ;  the
coveted  treasure  came  safely  to  Montreal,  and  the
colonists  hailed  him  as  their  father  and  deliverer.
In  1696,  when  seventy-six  years  old,  he  led  in
person  an  invasion  of  the  Iroquois  country. At


BBS


the  warriors  burned  their  chief  town,

iidipi,  mi'l  Bad  into  tin'  fur.  r  de-

tin-  town  nf  Oneida  tho expedition re-
lied. Tin-  I r« M|ii< >i-  WMV  mwr  again  a  |>cril  t<i
the  colony  which,  during  the \n%*l  half  century,
they  hmi  repeatedly  threatened  irith  destruction.
lenac  wee  near  his  end Overcome  at  IbjI
and  passions,  he  closed  hi-  stormy
in  Hitis,  beloved  by  the  Canadian  peaenntry
ami  hated  by  tlu>  eoclesiastii  dwaye.  dm

rites  and  proteges,  the  RfftHliK  friars, with
all  his  faults,  he  hail  done  priceless  lOrviM  to  the
i iy.  ami  his  name  stands  in  its  annals  as  thai
of  the  iii"M  remarkable  man  wlnicvor  represented
the  crown  nf  France  in  America.

FROM.  <  liarles,  soldier,  l>.  in  Tiverton.  Eng-

land,  in 1638;  «1.  14  July,  Hi'.»7. About  1680  he

omijanied  his  father,  Nicholas,  to  the  Piscata-

<|iia river,  ami settled at the  head  of  Sturgeon

k. He  was  a  neaabar  of  the  ganand  ooul

from  Hi."ix  till  1 1 iti'.l,  ami  assistant  in  KM),  and  in
I  -'?  a  councillor.  He  was  also  a  colonel  of  the
.Maine  regiment,  and  participated  in  the  Indian
wars.  He  was  ambushed  and  killed  by  Indians  in
sequence  of  his  having  treacherously  seized
some  of  them,  who  were  either  hanged  or  sold  into
slavery  in  a  time  of  peace.

FROST,  Charles  Christopher,  botanist,  1».  in
BrattleU.ro,  Vt.,  in  180U:  d.  in  1W0.  Ho  received
his  early  instruction  at  a  common  school  of  his
native  Tillage, excelled  in  mathematics,  and  studied
it  several  years  after  he  had  left  school  and  be-

Ein  to  work  at  his  trade  as  a  shoemaker,  making
sjsjatt  familiar  with  algebra,  geometry,  the  cal-
culus, and  kindred  branches.  Later  be  devoted
his  leisure  hours  to  astronomy,  geology,  miner-
alogy, meteorology,  and  botany, especially  the  la-t-
muned  study,  to  which  he  gave  the  last  naif  of  his
life.  He  contributed  to  periodicals  and  was  a
member  of  scientific  societies  in  the  United  States
and  Europe.  During  all  these  years  he  continued
his  business  in  his  native  town."  He  was  joint  au-
thor with  Edward  Tuckerman  of  a  "Catalogue  of
Plants  growing  without  Cultivation  within  Thirty
Miles  of  Amherst  College"  (Amherst,  1876).

FROST,  Oeorge,  jurist.  I>.  in  New  Castle, N. IL,
26  April.  1720;  d.  in  Durham.  N.  II.,  21  June,
He  was  a  son  of  John  Frost,  a  commander
in  the  British  nary,  who  died  in  lT-i'2.  The  son
received  a  public-school  education,  and  was  brought
Dp  in  the  counting-house  of  his  uncle.  Sir  Will-
iam Pepperell,  at  Kittery  Point,  near  Portsmouth,
N.  II.  About  1740  he  entered  one  of  his  uncle's
vessels  as  supercargo  and  captain,  and  was  a  sea-
man for  about  twenty  years,  becoming  a  partner
with  George  Richards, of  London.  About  17(50  he
returned  to  his  old  home  in  New  Castle,  and  re-
!  there  until  his  marriage  in  17<>4  in  Durham.
X.  H..  where  he  removed  in  1769.  He  was  judge
niinon  pleas  of  Stafford  county  from  1 77:*  till
1791,  and  for  many  years  chief  justice. He  was  a

.rate to the Continental  congress  in 17;:
and  was  executive  councillor  in  l?Hl-*4.

FROST,  James Hear] Paine,  physician,  1».
m  Bethel,  Me.,  in 182"> ; d. in Danville,  Pa.,  in
lie  was  educated  at  llowdoin  and  Amherst,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1846  and  took  his  med-
• at the I louio'oj.at hie  college  at Phila-
delphia in  1K4JI. He  practised  for  several  wars  at
nington,  N.  ('..  but  in  l853-'5  he  studied  the-
I'.angor  seminary.  Me.,  and  preached
summer in Richmond,  Me. The  failure  of his

forced  him  to  leave  the  ministry,  and  hi
turned  to  medicine,  which  he  practised  f>
years  in  Bangor,  Me, He  was  a  prof<


Philadelphia  Homoeopathic  rollon  in  ISSfMB,  and

daring  this  period  was  one  of  the  founder-  ami
editors  of  ihe  '•  Hahiiemaiiian  Monthly."  After
living  for  some  time  at  Bethlehem,  Pa*  he  rami
to  Danville,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  and  continued
residence  till  his  death.  He  contributed  largely
to  current  medical  literature.

FROST,  John, soldier,  b,  in Kitterv. M.  . |

8;  d.  th.re  in  July,  1810. He  served  as

captain  in  the  Canadian  OattUMjgn  of 1718,  nml in

1776 wat a  Bwtanant-oolooel  at  kheejegeof  I

ton.  When  the  caiu|iaigu  of  1770  began,  ho  was
promoted  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  he  won  dis-
tinction  in  the  severe  engagements  that  pre<-cded
the  retreat  of  Washington  to  Philadelphia.  Whan
DwgUJM  invaded  New  York,  Col.  Fr
incut  Ueainean  adjunct  to  the  army  under  Cn.
-.  and,  after  Ilurgoyne's  surrender.  Col.  Frost
joined  Washington's  central  division,  and  partici-
pated in  the  action  Of  Monmouth  and  other  en-
gagements. I'ntil  the  dose  of  the  war  he  served
in  the  middle  and  .southern  states,  and  left  the
army  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  then
returned  to  Kitterv,  was  appointed  judge  of  the
court  of  sessions  fbr  York  county.  Me.,  and  was
subsequently  a  aaainberof  the  governors  council
in  Massachusetts,  of  which  Maine  was  then  part.

FROST,  John,  compiler,  b.  in  Keuucbunk,  Me..
M  .Ian..  1*00;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  2*  I >..-..
1859.  After  one  year  in  Bowdohl  be  entered  Har-
vard, where  he  was  graduated  in 1822. lie  was

principal  of  Mayhem  school,  Boston,  in  1828r7,  and

conducted  ■  school  for  young  ladies  in  Philadel-

Ehia  till  1888,  when  he  was  appointed  professor  of
Inglish  literature  in  the  central  high-school  of
that  city.  He  resigned  this  post  in  1*4."),  and  de-
voted himself  to  the  compilation  of  histories  and
biographies,  of  which,  assisted  by  a  corps  of  writ-
ers, he  published  over  300.  Marietta  college,  Ohio,
f[ave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1843.  Dis  puh-
ications  include  ••  History  of  the  World "(3  vols.);
"Pictorial  History  of  the  United  States"  ffl  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1844);  "Beauties  of  English  His-
tory"; "Wild  Scenes  of  a  Hunter's  Life":  "Illus-
trious Mechanics";  "Book  of  Heroes";  "Book  of
the  Armv  " ;  and  "  Book  of  the  Navy."

FROST,  Ruins  Smith,  philanthropist.  t>.  in
Marlborough,  N.  IL,  18  July,  1826.  He  removed
in  1833  to  Boston,  was  educated  in  the  public
schools  there  and  in  Newton  academy,  and  oegan
mercantile  life  as  a  clerk.  He  afterward  engaged
in  business  on  his  own  account,  and  also  U-came  a
manufacturer.  He  was  elected  mayor  of  Chelsea
in  1NII7  and  1868,  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate
in  1871-'~.  and  of  the  governor's  council  in  lN73-'4.
Ho  built  a  fire-proof  building  in  his  native  town
in  1H«;7.  placed  in  it  a  valuable  library,  and  pre-
sented it  to  the  town  on  condition  that  it  should
be  for  the  free  use  <>f  the  people.  He  claimed  to
have  been  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in
1874,  but  the  house  gave  the  scat  on  a  technicality
to  .1.  (i.  Abbott,  Democrat,  who  had  contested  the
election.  During  the  contest  Mr.  Frost  retained
his  seat,  serving  from  I  Dec,  1878,  till  "Js  July,
1876.  Mr.  Frost  was  president  of  the  Boston  board
of  trade  in  1879-'81,  has  bean  a  trustee  of  Welles-
ley  college  since  1N7H,  and  president  of  the  New
England  coheervatory  of  music  since  1882.

FROST.  Thomas  clergyman,  b.  in  Pulham.
near  Norwich.  England,  in  1759;  d.  in  Charleston,
S.  ('.,  18  July,  1804  M  was  graduated  at  Cam-
bridge university  in  17SK),  and  was  ordained  deacon,
11  March.  17ML  and  priest,  g  .|lu,e.  17*4.  by  the
Uahop  of  Norwich.  Putting  aside  prospects  of
anceinent in  the  established  church.  Mr.  Frost


S56


frothingiiam


fky


accepted  an  invitation  to  labor  in  tin-  Protectant
Episcopal  church  in  South  Carolina.  II.-  WM
elected  anrilrtanl  minister  of  St.  Philip's  church.
Charleston,  •*>  -bin..  W88,  and,  on  the  death  of  the
re-tor.  Bishop  Robert  Smith,  in  1801,  he  was
ehosen  to  fill  the  vacancy.  He  served  for  eighteen
rears,  and  was  noted  as  being  an  able  pntohef  and
a  faithful  pastor.— His  son.  Thomas  Downs,  b,  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  24  Feb.,  1794;  d.  in  the  West
I  in  lies,  16  May,  1819,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
isi;{.  His  theological  studies  were  pursued  under
Bishop  Dehon's  direction,  and  he  was  ordained.  21
Feb.,  1815.  He  was  immediately  elected  assistant
minister  of  St.  Philip's  church.  Charleston.  In
1S17  he  was  compelled  to  suspend  his  labors  on
account  of  failing  health.  He  was  benefited  by  a
visit  to  Cuba,  and  resumed  his  parochial  duties  in
May,  1818;  but  a  renewal  of  the  attack  next  year
proved  fatal,  and  he  died  suddenly.  Mr.  Frost
was  esteemed  for  many  noble  qualities,  and  was
regarded  as  a  highly  attractive  preacher.

FROTHING  HAH,  James,  painter,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  in  1781 ;  d.  6  Jan.,  1864.  He
began  life  as  a  painter  in  his  father's  chaise  manu-
factory. With  meagre  instruction  in  colors,  he
finally  began  a  career  as  a  portrait-painter,  and  ob-
tained recognition  as  a  truthful  and  painstaking
artist.  His  works  had  sale  chiefly  in  New  York
and  Salem.  His  copy  of  Stuart's  "  Washington  "
was  much  admired,  and  his  original  portraits  were
praised  for  fidelity  of  coloring.

FROTHINGHAM,  Nathaniel  Langdon,  cler-

fman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  July,  1793 ;  d.  there,
April,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1811,  and,  after  teaching  in  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  became  in  1812  instructor  in  rhetoric  and
oratory  at  Harvard,  which  office  he  was  the  first
to  hold.  He  also  studied  theology,  and  on  15
March,  1815,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Con-
gregational church  (Unitarian)  in  Boston.  He  re-
signed his  charge,  on  account  of  feeble  health,  in
1850.  He  contributed  largely  to  religious  periodi-
cals, chiefly  to  the  "  Christian  Examiner,"  and  pub-
lished, besides  nearly  fifty  occasional  sermons,
"  Deism  or  Christianity,"  in  four  discourses  (Bos-
ton, 1845);  "Sermons  in  the  Order  of  a  Twelve-
month "  (1852) ;  and  "  Metrical  Pieces,  Translated
and  Original,"  a  collection  of  verses  contributed  to
magazines  (1855).  These  are  distinguished,  like
his  prose  writings,  for  refinement  and  grace.  His
first  notable  poem  was  delivered  at  the  installation
of  President  Kirkland,  of  Harvard,  while  its  author
was  a  student  there ;  his  principal  one  is  a  version
of  the  "  Phenomena  of  the  Stars,"  from  the  Greek
of  Aratus. — His  son.  Oct  a  v  ins  Brooks,  author,
b.  in  Boston,  26  Nov.,  1822,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1843,  and,  after  three  years  in  the  divinity
school,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  North  church
(Unitarian)  at  Salem,  Mass.,  10  March,  1847.  He
preached  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  in  1855-'9,  then  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  became  pastor  of  a  con-
gregation that  in  I860  was  organized  as  the  "  Third
Unitarian  Congregational  church,"  and  represented
the  most  radical  branch  of  his  denomination.  He
dissolved  this  society  in  1879  and  went  to  Europe,
and  on  his  return  in  1881  formally  withdrew  from
specific  connection  with  any  church,  and  devoted
himself  to  literature  in  Boston.  He  has  been  a
leader  in  the  movement  that  has  for  its  object  the

Eromotion  of  rationalist  ideas  in  theology,  and
as  contributed  largely  to  various  journals  and  re-
views. In  1867  he  became  first  president  of  the
Free  religious  association.  He  was  for  a  time  art-
critic  of  the  "  New  York  Tribune."  Mr.  Frothing-
ham  has  published  more  than  150  sermons,  and  is


the  author  of  the  following  works :  "Stories  from
the  Ljps  of  the  Teacher  "•  1 1'.. -ton.  1863);  "Stories
from  the  old  Testament"  (1864);  "Child's  Hook  of
Religion"  (1866);  "The  Religion  of  Humanity"
( New  Fork,  1878) ;  "  Life  of  Theodore  Parker  "  |  les-
ion. 1874);  "Transcendentalism  in  New  Knglanjl"
(New  York.  1878);  "The  Cradle  of  the  Christ"
(1877);  "Life  of  Gerrit  Smith"  (1878);  "Life  of
George  Ripley "  (Boston,  1882) ;  and  "  Memoir  of
William  Henry  Channing"  (1886).  —  Nathaniel
Langdon's  daughter,  Ellen,  b.  in  Boston.  25
March,  1835,  has  devoted  herself  to  German  lit-
erature, and  has  translated  Lessing's  "  Nathan  der
Weise"  (1868);  Goethe's  "Hermann  and  Doro-
thea" (1870);  Lessing's  "Laokoon"  (1874);  and
Grillparzer's  "Sappho"  (1876).

FROTHINGHAM,  Richard,  historian,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  there,  29  Jan.,
1880.  He  was  for  many  years  a  proprietor  ol  the
Boston  "  Post,"  and  in  1852-'65  served  as  its  man-
aging editor.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1839,  1840,  1842,  1849,  and  1850,  and  a  delegate
to  the  Democratic  national  convention  of  1852,  and
in  1853  to  the  State  constitutional  convention.  He
served  as  mayor  of  Charlestown  in  1851-'3,  and
was  for  several  years  treasurer  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society.  He  published  a  "  History  of
Charlestown"  (1848);  "History  of  the  Siege  of
Boston"  (Boston,  1849);  "The  Command  in  the
Battle  of  Bunker  Hill"  (1850);  "Life  of  Gen.
Joseph  Warren  "  (1865) ;  "  Tribute  to  Thomas  Starr*
King  "  (1865) ;  "  Rise  of  the  Republic  "  (1871) ;  and
many  pamphlets  and  addresses  including  "The
Centennial :  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill "  (1875).

FROTHINGHAM,  Washington,  clergyman,  b.
in  Fonda,  N.  Y.,  28  Feb.,  1822.  He  received  an
academic  education,  became  a  clerk  for  Edwin  D.
Morgan  in  New  York,  afterward  established  him-
self in  wholesale  trade,  and  met  with  a  moderate
success.  He  then  studied  theology  at  Princeton,
and  entered  the  Presbyterian  ministry  in  1855.  1 1  is
most  important  work  as  a  clergyman  has  been  the
establishment  of  the  West  Side  Presbyterian  church
in  Albany,  N.  Y.  Beginning  in  1862,  he  has  built
up  a  system  of  New  York  correspondence,  which
now  forms  a  prominent  and  popular  feature  of
journals  in  Hartford,  Rochester,  Scranton,  Troy,
Utica,  and  other  inland  cities.  His  pen-names
"  Martel,"  "  Macaulay,"  "  Rosicrucian,"  and  "  Her-
mit of  New  York  "  are  familiar  to  the  reading  pub-
lic, because  under  them  he  deals  with  topics  that
are  seldom  treated  by  other  correspondents.  He
has  published  in  book-form  "  Atheos,  or  Tragedies
of  Unbelief"  (New  York,  1863);  "  The  Martel  Pa-
pers: Life-Scenes  in  the  Reign  of  Terror"  (1865);
and  other  works,  all  anonymous.

FRUITS,  George,  soldier,  b.  near  Baltimore,
Md.,  in  1762 ;  d.  near  Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  6  Aug.,
1876.  He  served  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Revolu-
tionary war,  went  to  Virginia  in  1787,  and  was
afterward  with  Daniel  Boone  in  Kentucky.  He
served  against  the  Indians  in  1791-'6,  and  also  in
the  war  of  1812.  Four  generations  of  his  d<
ants  followed  him  to  the  grave.

FRY,  Benjamin  St.  James,  journalist,  b.  in
Rutledge,  Granger  co.,  Tenn.,  16  June.  lv.24.  He
was  educated  at  Woodward  college,  Cincinnati,
began  to  contribute  to  the  Cincinnati  "Time- "  in
1840,  and  in  1844  was  joint  editor  and  publislu  r  of
the  "Western  Rambler."  He  became  a  clergyman
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  18 -1 1
president  of  Worthington  college  for  young  w<  'men
in  1856-'60,  and  in  1861-4  was  chaplain  of  the
68d  Ohio  regiment.  In  1872  he  was  elected  editor
of  the  St.  Louis  "  Central  Christian  Advocat  e,


PRY


tm


re-elected  in  1678;  1^>.  and  1km-|.  In  the  la*t-
nairn-d  year  ba  was  ■  immUr  <>f  I fn-  MethodM
ecumenical  conference  in  London,  England,  and
<>f  the  Baltimore  Centennial  oonfarenee,  baton
which  he  read  an  essay  on  the  "  IftihftiWii  Prees."
Qui nc)  collide.  111.,  (fare  him  the  degree  of  D.  D
I>r.  Fry  has  contributed  t..  various  |«Ti-
odical*.  am)  published  several  Sunday-school  l><>oks,
including  lives  .if  Biabopa Wbateoal  (Not

M K.  mil  . KnUTt-

i  perty <  'onseeratcd,"  a

l  V<«rk.  Is-
PR Y,  Can Harrison,  soldier,  b. in  Garrard
Vug,  lNi:t;il.  in Sun  Francisco,
CaL,  5  March,  l*7:t. He  wax  graduated  at  the
lilitarv  academy  In  ls:w.  end  served  in  the
3d  infantry  at Port  Towsou,  Indian  Territory,  but
resigned  on  31  <>ct..  1886, studied  medicine, and
■•d in Iiouisvillo. Ky..  in 1845-'6. In  the
in  war  ■■  served  as  major  in  tin-  2d  Ken-
tucky volunteers,  commanding  the  regiment  after
the  fall  of  its  colonel  ami  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
battle  of  Buena  Vista,  where  he  distinguished  him-
self. He  practised  medicine  in  Danville  and  Louis-
ville. Ky.,  in  l*17-'.">3,  and  on  7  Feb.  of  the  latter
year re-entered the regular  army  as  paymaster,
with the  staff  rank  of  major. During  the  civil
war  be  served  at  Washington,  being  acting  pay-
general  in  1862.  and  becoming  deputy  pay-
master-general in  1866. He  was  brevettcd  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  army,  on  15  Oct.,  1867,  and  from
1889  till  his  death  was  chief  paymaster  of  various
military divisions. — His  cousin. Speed Smith,
soldier,  b.  in Mercer  (now  Bovle)  county,  Kv.,  !)
S'pt.,  1817,  after  studying  at  Centre  college,  Dan-
ville. Ky.,  completed  his  education  at  Wabash  col-
rawfonlsville.  Ind. He  organized a  com-
pany of the  2d Kentucky  volunteer  infantry  in
.mmanded  it  during  the  Mexican  war.  and
after  his  return  was  county  judge  of  Boyle  county,
It. At the  lieginning  of  the  civil  war  he
organized  the  4th  Kentucky  regiment  in  the  Na-
tional army,  and  served  as  its  colonel  till  21  March,
B66,  when  he  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general
of  volunteers. He  was  mustered  out  of  service  on
24  Am;.,  1865,  and  in  1869-'72  was  a  supervisor  of
internal  revenue  in  his  native  state.

FRY.  James  Barnet,  soldier,  b.  in  Carrollton,
<Jreene  00,  111..  88  Feb..  1*27.  Il.ua-  graduated
at  the  l*.  S.  military  academy  in  1647,  and  aligned
to  the  3d  artillery.  After  serving  for  a  short  time
ae  assistant  instructor  of  artillery  at  West  Point,
be  joined  his  regiment  at  the  city  of  Mexico,
where  be  remained  in  1847-'8.  After  doing  fron-
tier and  garrison  dutv  at  various  posts,  ne  was
again  instructor  at  West  Point  in  lM.>3-'4,  and
adjutant  of  the  academy  in  1HT>4-*1».  He  was  made
nit  adjutant-general  on  1<!  March,  1*61,  was
chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Irwin  McDowell  in  thai  year.
and  to  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell  in  1*61 -'2.  taking
part  in  the  bat  ties  of  Bull  Hun.  Shiloh.  and  Cor-
mth.  the  movement  to  Louisville,  Ky..  and  the
pursuit  of  (Sen.  Bragg  through  the  southeastern  part
of  that  state.  He  was  made  provost -marshal-gen-
«>ral  of  the  1'nited  States,  with  headquarters  at
Washington,  on  17  March,  1868,  and  given  the
staff  rank  of  brigadier-general,  21  April,  1S<!|.
these  commissions  expired  on  the  aboBUoB
ie  office  of  provost-marslial-geueral  on  -M  Aug,
1866;  during  that  time  Gen.  Fry  put  in  the  army

Mien,  arrested 7tl.."»<i2  deserters,  collected

and  made  an  exa«t  enrolment  of
the  National  forces. <»n  13  March.  1865,  he

major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  "  faithful,
torious,  and  distinguished  He  was  j


adjutant  -general,  with  the  rank  of  colom-l.  of  the
dlriaioni  --f  the  Paciflo  in  isukv-i*.  the  Booth  in

1860-'71.  tin  Miasonii  in  1*71 -'3,  and  the  Atlantic
from  1*73  till  I  June.  1861,  when  he  wan  retired
from  active  service  at  his  own  request.  H.  i-  n>.w
(1HH7)  H resident  of

"Final  Report  of  the  Operations  of  the  Bureau  of
the  Provoj*t-MarshaMieiicral  in  lW3-"6"  was  is-
sued as  a  congressional  document  (2  parts,  Wash-
tagton.  1866)>  He  has  aNo  published  •* Sketch  of
the  Adjutant-GeneraTi  Department.  V.  s.  Arm  v.
fr.-in  1778  to  1*75"  (New  York,  1878);  "  History
and  I*'gal  Kffects  of  Brevets  in  the  Ann t-
Great  Britain  and  the  1'nited  States,  from  their
Origin,  in  1692.  to  the  Present  Time"  (181
••Army  Sacrifices,"  illustrating  army  life  on  tin-
frontier  (1879) ;  "  McDowell  and  Tyle'r  in  the  Cam-
paign <>f  Bull  Ban"  (1664);  "Operationi  of  the
Army  under  Buell "  (1884);  and  "  New  York  ami
Conscription  "  (1885).

FRY,  Joseph,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Louisiana
aliout  1686;  d.  in  Santiago  de  Cuba,  7  Nov.,  l
He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1841,  and
became  | Missed  midshipman,  10  Aug.,  1847.  In
that  year  he  fought  a  duel  with  Midshipman
Brown,  of  Mississippi,  near  Washington,  in  which.
after  drawing  his  antagonists  fire,  he  refused  to
return  it.  He  was  promoted  t..  master,  14  Sept..
1855,  to  lieutenant  on  the  following  dav,  and  re-
signed, 1  Feb.,  1861,  after  the  secession  of  This  native
state.  He  was  unable  to  secure  a  commission  in
the  Confederate  navy  owing  to  its  limited  size,  and
was  given  a  command  in  the  army.  After  serving
in  the  southwest  through  the  war,  he  removed  to
Albany,  N.  Y.  He  accepted  the  command  of  the
filibustering  steamer  "  Virginius"  in  1873,  and
with  thirty-six  of  his  crew  was  shot  as  a  pirate  by
the  authorities  in  CuImi,  after  the  capture  of  his
vessel  by  a  Spanish  man-of-war.

FRY,  Joshua,  soldier,  b.  in  Somersetshire,  Eng-
land; d.  at  the  mouth  of  Wills'  creek,  Md..  31
May,  1764  He  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and,  after
coming  to  this  country,  was  made  professor  of
mat  hematics  in  William  and  Mary  college.  Vir-
ginia. He  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  house
of  burgesses,  and  served  on  the  commission  ap-
pointed to  determine  the  Virginia  and  North  Caro-
lina boundary-line.  He  was  a  colonel  of  militia
and  a  member  of  the  governor's  council  in  1750,
and  in  1752  was  a  commissioner  to  treat  with
the  Indians  at  Logtown.  In  company  with  Peter
Jefferson,  he  had  made  a  map  of  \  irginia.  and  his
acipiaintam N  of  the  frontier  gained  in  this  em-
ployment, with  his  knowledge  of  the  Indians,  se-
cured his  appointment  to  command  the  expedition
against  the  French  in  1754.  Col.  Fry  died  while
•  -oielucting  his  troops  to  the  Ohio,  and  was  suc-
ceeded bv  George  Washington.  See  his  life  by
Philip  Slaughter  (Now  York,  1880).

FRY,  William  Henry,  musi<  ian,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa..  10  Aug.  1616;  d.  in  Santa  Cruz.
W.st  Indies,  21  Dec.,  1*64.  He  was  educated  in
the  schools  of  his  native  place  and  at  Kminetts-
bug,  Md.  In  1886  he  became  editorially  con-
nected with  his  father's  MWapapar,  the  Philadel-
phia "(Jazette."  Soon  afterward,  in  1835,  he  went
through  a  course  of  musical  study  and  wrote
four  orchestral  overtures,  which  wen'  publicly  jht-
formed.  While  he  was  partly  occupied  as  a  writer
for  several  DOWapnpOHt  and  M  aonanpoodottl  for
eastern  journals,  he  produced  in  164B  an  Knirlish
open,  entitled  "Leonora."  This  was  given  in
Philadelphia,  ami  later  in  New  York  city,  and
much  discussed.  The  general  public  commended
the coinjioser  for  his  ambition  and energy, but


506


FRYE


FUENSAUDA


musical  people  were  chary  of  approbation  and
withheld  their  patronage.  '  In  18M  Fry  went  to
Borope  tor  study  and  ubm  uthjn,  being  engaged

us  h  regular  correspondent  of  the  New  York
14 TribaD*"  MM  other  uewspaj>ers. He  remained

■broad  -i\  years  and  on  hi*  return  to  New  York
city,  in  1888,  beoaflM  musical  editor  of  the  "Trib-
une." Soon  afterward  he  wrote  the  music  to  an
ode  for  the  opening  of  the  New  York  industrial
exhibition  of  1888,  and  delivered  a  course  of  ten
lectures  on  t In-  history  of  music,  with  illustrations
on  a  gigantic  scale,  which  were  pecuniarily  un-
nooeeefaL  <>n  this  occasion  Fry  brought  for-
ward two  of  his  own  trmphoniea,  "The  Breaking
Heart"  and  "A  Day  in  the  Country.''  In  1864
ami  1868  were  also  written  other  symphonies,  a
"Stabat  Mater,  and  "Eleven  Violin  Quartets.''  In
1858  the  Italian  opera  company  in  New  York  city
unsuccessfully  produced  a  reconstructed  Italian
version  of  his  "  Leonora."  Another  opera,  "  No-
ii.  Dame,''  brought  out  in  1864,  won  no  atten-
tion. Fry  was  an  occasional  political  speaker,  a
lecturer  on  topics  of  the  day,  and  altogether  an
accomplished  man.  For  several  years  he  suffered
from  lingering  consumption  and  unsuccessfully
sought  relief  in  a  milder  climate.  When  he  was
lying  bedridden  in  a  house  near  the  New  York
Academy  of  Music  he  asked  permission  to  have
a  "  lover's  telephone  "  placed  so  that  he  could  hear
something  of  the  music.  During  the  last  two
years  of  his  life  he  was  accustomed  to  sit  propped
up  in  bed  while  opera  was  going  on  at  the  Acade-
my, his  telephone  in  one  hand  and  the  libretto  of
the  opera  in  the  other.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed,
standing  against  the  foot-board,  were  the  photo-
graphs of  the  chief  singers  engaged  in  the  per-
formance. He  was  one  who  thoroughly  believed
in  himself,  but  he  had  not  the  divine  faculty  in
music;  his  compositions  neither  charmed  the  many
nor  satisfied  the  demands  of  a  iust  criticism.  As
a  musical  reviewer  he  was  a  determined,  honest
partisan,  an  acute  analyst,  and  trenchant  writer.
1  le  held  the  theory  that  all  true  melody  was  evolved
only  in  the  minds  of  Italians,  that  the  voice  should
always  be  paramount  in  operatic  representations,
and  the  orchestra  serve  as  an  accompaniment  to
the  singers.  These  convictions,  ably  presented
and  partly  justified,  were  caused  by  the  reaction
against  the  poverty  of  melodic  invention  and  over-
loaded orchestral  devices  of  Halevy,  Meyerbeer,
Spohr,  and  Spontini.  Frv  published  a  volume  en-
titled "  Artificial  Fish  Breeding  "  (New  York,  1854).
— His  brother,  Joseph  Reese,  banker,  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  June,  1865,  wrote  the  words  of  his
brother's  opera,  "  Leonora,"  and  translated  others.
He  was  largely  instrumental  in  organizing  the
Union  League  brigade  of  Philadelphia  during  the
civil  war.  Jointly  with  Robert  T.  Conrad  he  wrote
a  ••  Life  of  Zachary  Taylor"  (Philadelphia.  1848).

FRYE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  in
1709 ;  d.  8  Jan.,  1776.  He  filled  several  local  offices,
served  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg  in  1745,  and
commanded  the  Essex  regiment  at  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution,  taking  an  active  part  in  the
battle  of  Bunker  Hill.  He  afterward  commanded
the  6th  brigade  of  the  army  investing  Boston.

FRYE,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass..
80  March,  1712;  d.  in  Fryeburg,  Me.,  in  1794.  He
was  a  second  cousin  of  James  Frye,  noticed  above.
He  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  and  a  member  of  the
general  court  of  Massachusetts,  and  was  an  ensign
in  Hale's  regiment  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg  in
1745.  He  was  a  colonel  when  Montcalm  captured
Fort  William  Henry  in  1757,  and  escaped  by  kill-
ing the  Indian  that  had  charge  of  him. He  was


appointed  major-general  by  the  Massachusetts  pro-
vincial congress  on  21  June.  1775.  and  wai  0OBV
mi»ioiied  brigadier-general  by  the  Continental
congress  on  10  Jan..  I7?ii,  bn1  resigned  on  account
of  infirmity  on  23  April.  He  was  an  early  settler
of  Fryeburg,  Me.— I  lis  great  grandson.  William
Plant,  senator,  b.  in  Lewiston,  M--..  8  Sept..  ixm,
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1850,  studied  law
with  William  P.  Fcssendcn,  and,  after  practising
for  a  few  years  in  Rockland.  Me.,  removed  to  Lew-
iston, Me.,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1861-2  and  1m'>7.  a
presidential  elector  on  the  Lincoln  ticket  in  1864,
mayor  of  Lewiston  in  1866-'7,  and  attorney-gen-
eral of  Maine  in  1867-9.  He  was  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican  six  times  in  succession,
serving  from  1871  till  1881,  when  he  took  1
as  U.  S.  senator,  having  been  chosen  to  fill  the
vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  James  G.
Blaine.  He  was  re-elected  in  1883  for  a  full  term.
Mr.  Frye  has  interested  himself  especially  in  the
distribution  of  the  Geneva  award,  in  commercial
legislation,  and  in  the  fishery  question.  He  has
been  a  member  of  the  Republican  national  com-
mittee since  1872,  and  earnestly  supported  James
G.  Blaine  for  the  presidency  in  1884.  He  was
made  a  trustee  of  Bowdoin  in  1880,  and  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Bates  in  1881.

FUENLEAL,  Sebastian  Ramirez  (fwen-lay'-
al),  Spanish  R  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Villaescusa.  Spain.
in  the  last  quarter  of  the  15th  century;  d.  in  "\  alla-
dolid,  22  Jan.,  1547.  He  studied  at  the  college  of
Santa  Cruz  de  Valladolid,  and  in  1525  became
bishop  ot  Santo  Domingo,  and  president  of  the
royal  audiencia  of  that  island.  When  the  first
audiencia  of  Mexico  began  to  quarrel  with  Cortes,
the  empress,  during  the  absence  of  Charles  V.  in
Germany  in  1529,  appointed  Fuenleal  president  of
the  new  audiencia,  and  by  his  tact  and  prudence  he
soon  restored  order  and  public  confidence.  Fuen-
leal was  an  admirer  of  Cortes,  and  assisted  him  in
all  his  enterprises  and  new  conquests,  at  the  same
time  protecting  the  Indians.  He  prohibited  slavery,
established  mining  laws,  founded  many  churches,
convents,  and  public  buildings,  and  in  fact  organ-
ized New  Spain  in  every  branch  of  administration.
He  also  divided  the  country  into  four  dioceses  and
had  bishops  appointed  over  them.  In  1534  Fuen-
leal returned  to  Spain,  where  he  became  succes-
sively bishop  of  Tuy,  Leon,  and  Cuenca,  and  presi-
dent of  the  chancery  of  Valladolid.  According  to
Herrera  and  Pinelo,  Fuenleal  wrote  a  "  Relaci6n
de  la  Nueva  Espafia."

FUENSALIHA,  Luis  (foo-en-sal-e'-da),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Estremadura,  Spain,  about
1490;  d.  in  Puerto  Rico  in  1545.  He  entered  the
order  of  St.  Francis  in  early  life,  and  about  1528
went  to  Mexico  to  preach  the  gospel  and  convert
the  Indians.  He  was  the  first  missionary  to  preach
in  the  Aztec  language,  and,  according  to  his  con-
temporaries, was  the  one  who  spoke  it  best.  In  1535
he  became  provincial  of  his  order  in  Mexico,  and
returned  in  1538  to  Spain  to  inform  Charles  V.
about  the  condition  of  the  Indians.  He  was  offered
the  bishopric  of  Michoacan  by  Charles,  but  declined
it  and  retired  to  the  convent  of  San  Gabriel  du
Estremadura.  He  afterward  asked  to  be  sent  to
Africa,  but  was  refused,  and  when  his  brethren
tried  to  make  him  abandon  his  peaceful  retreat  bv
electing  him  provincial,  he  fled  from  thi>  honor  and
returned  to  the  New  World.  In  the  National  li-
brary in  Mexico  are  preserved  the  manuscripts  of
two  curious  works  of  Fuensalida,  "Serraones  en
Lengua  Mexicana,"  and  "Coloquios  en  Mexican*
entre  el  Arcangel  San  Gabriel  y  la  Virgen  Maria."


609


IMMIv MiM  I. Hart.. Ion, . I

Portiuram  navigator,  ■nppoaad to  have
i  turjr. II:-  n  al  "r  [mag
■•II  tin'  subject  «.f  in  nt  -ii  oontron
even  In*  existenoa  has  been  eallad  in  question.
of  the  voyage*  <>f  Fuentes,  who  is  said  t<>
I  btafl  an  H<!mirtil in  tin-  MTTiM  of  Spain,  is
tained  in  a  letter  of  seven  pages,  which  was
published  in  a  work  entitled  "  The  Monthly
•  llanv.  <>r  Memoirs  «>f  the  Various"  (Ixmdon,
18). It  i-  no(  known  how  the  letter  fell  into  1 1  * «-
band*  <>f  the  editors  of  this  work. According  to
the  narrative,  he  aailed  from  the  port  of  Lima, ::
April,  1640,  t«H.k  a  northwesterly  course,  ami,  after
hing  hit.  58 N.,  discovered  an  archipelago,
which  lie  called  the  archipelago  of  St.  Lwna
II- entered  a  river  in  one  of  the  ialanda  of  the
arohipelago,  flowing  from  the  east,  and  sailed  east-
ward  through  other  rivers  and lakes  of  vast ex-
tent, until  he  fell  in  with  the  sliijiof  ("apt.  Sha|M'lv.
who  was  coming  from  Boston,  and  consequently
from  tln>  east,  all of  which  showed clearly that
there  was  a  communication  U-tweenthe  two  oceans
north  of  America. The  letter  of  Fuentes  was  re-

{mbUahed  by  Sir  Arthur  Dobbs  in  his  account  of
he  countries  that  border  on  Hudson  bay  (London,
Klli.  Sir  Arthur  Dobhs  says  that,  from  informa-
tion that  he  had  gatharad  in  America,  there  was  a
("apt.  Shapely  living  in  Boston  at  the  date  of  the
voyage  of  Admiral  Fuentes.  Another  narrative  of
the  same  event  was  published  in  a  "Voyage  to
Hudson's  Bay"  (London,  1749).  The  letter  of
Fueiites  was  translated  into  French  by  the  dis-
tinguished geographer,  Joseph  Nicholas  Delislc.
who  read  two  learned  dissertations  on  the  subject
in  presence  of  the  Academy  of  sciences  in  1750.
He  attaches  considerable  importance  to  the  letter  of
Fuentes,  and  endeavors  to  reconcile  his  statements
with  what  lie  had  learned  of  the  discoveries  of  the
Russians.  Spanish  authors  have  generally  kept
silent  on  the  voyage  of  Fuentes.  Theauthorof  the
"Noticia  de  California."  however  (Madrid,  17~>7).
formally  denies that such  a person  existed. Dr.

rter,  also,  in  his  work  on  the  discoveries  in  the
north,  considers  Fuentes  a  mythical  personage.  On
the  other  hand.  Fleurieu,  in"  his  "  Introduction  au
voyage  de  Man-hand."  leans  to  the  opinion  that
he  was  a  real  person,  and  this  opinion  acquires  still
more  probability  sine,,  the  publication  of  the  voy-
ages of  Maldonado,  although  in  the  "  Quarterly

ew"  of  February,  1817,  strong  objections  are
urged  against  the  reality  of  either  voyage. The

of  the  existence  at  least  of  a  navigator  of  the
name  of  Fonte,  or  Fuentes,  would  seem  to  receive
confirmation  from  the  work  of  the  Hollander,
ii.  on  Tartan-,  entitled  "Nord  en  oost  Tar-
tarye"  (1705),  quoted  in  Burney's  "Chronological
ry  of  the  Discoveries  of  South  Sea."  Van
coin
incut
them  positively.

KI  KNTF.S.  La  urea  no.  Cuban  musician,  b.  in
Santiago  de  Cuba  in  1825.  From  his  youth  he
gave  himself  to  musical  studies,  and  obtained  a
reputation  for  skill  with  the  violin.  He  founded
in  his  native  city  a  conservatory  <>f  music,  and  is
the  author  of  many  musical  compositions,  iiulud-
La  Sombra  de  Bellini,"  a  fantasia  (1857);
ilea."  a  svniphonv  (lx.">S):  an  "Ave  Maria."

•d.at  Mater,"  and  "Maria"  (Paris,  1872). He

com|Kised  also  the  music  for  the  several  zar-
melas  (a  kind  of  comic  opera),  including  "  F.l  * !•'■

'  cho  "and  "  Me  lo  ha  ilicho  la  Fort  era  "  1 1"

an.l  ••  Lai  dos  Mascara-  His  last  musical

work  is  the  opera  "  La  fllle  de  Jeftd  "  1 1875).


icr.  although frequently  opposing the  state-
its  of  Fuentes,  declares  that  lie  could  not  deny


II  I  \  i  I  s  M.iini.  I  kUnaalo.  Peruvian  au-
thor. i».  in  Lima  in  IN20.  He  studied  law  at  the
rjidranity  of  Ban  Karoos  in  his  native  eltjr,  and

was  graduated in  1K-| | .  hut he  s.m.ii  left  the"  |

li< f  law  to  Ucoinea  journalist. He  contributed

to  the  "  lleraldo"  of  Lima,  and  afterward  succee-

|j  aatabllahed  M  KI  Monitor  da  la  M-«la,"
Cronica."  and  "Semanario  de  Um  Niftos."
most  successful  pa|>crwas  "  KI  Murcielago,"  which
he  founded  in  1h.V>.  and  called  bv  a  name  under
which  he  had  bSM  writing.  Tin's  |,a|«  r.  b]
trenchant  wit  and  its  fearlessness,  soon  became
known  throughout  IVru.  As  Fuentes  n.ur  tem-
porized, the  journal  was  often  MppnaMd  and  its
editor  exiled.  Of  his  numerous  works  on  law.  sta-
tistics, and  literature,  the  most  noteworthy  are  "Es-
tadisticade  Lima  "  ;  "Klementosde  lligi.-iie  Priva-
da":  "  lligienedc  la  Iufancia  ":  "  Mcdiciiia  Legal  ";
"Tratado  de  Higiene  Pilhlica  y  Aplicada  "  ;  "  Man-
ual ile  Autopsias  v  Kxhuinaciones";  ••  Formulario
de  Jueces  de  I'az";  "  Dereeho  Constitooioiwl  Cni-
versal";  "  Iteglas  parlaincntarias  "  ;  "Cuiadel  Via-
jero  en  Lima";  and  "  Aletazos  del  Murcielago."

FIKRO,  Francisco  Fabian  (foo-ay  -ro),  Sjwn-
ish  K.  ('.  hishop,  b.  in  Terzaga,  Aragon,  7  Aug.,
171!t;  d.  in  Torre  Hermosa,  I  Aug..  1.h<)1.  He
studied  in  Calatayud  and  Alcala,  and  was  at  dif-
ferent  times  rector  of  the  colleges  of  San  Antonio
de  Siguenza  and  Santa  Cruz,  in  Valladolid.  He
was  appointed  bishop  of  Puebla,  Mexico,  in  1764,
was  present  at  the  fourth  Mexican  council  in  1771,
and  resigned  his  bishopric  in  1773.  On  his  return
to  Spain  he  was  promoted  archbishop  of  Valencia,
and  retired  in  1795  to  the  place  of  his  birth.
At  Puebla  he  introduced  many  improvements;
founded  in  the  seminary  of  that  city  several  chairs
of  learning,  organized  an  academy  of  literature.
and  founded  a  fine  library,  which  he  enriched  with
select  works  and  a  printing-press.  He  reorganized
the  discipline  of  the  convents,  and  established  a
college  to  educate  Indian  youths.  Fuero  left  many
interesting  manuscripts,  and  published  a  volume

OU  scientific  subjects  ( 1  7 TV? ).

Fl'ERO,  Joaquin.  Mexican  soldier.  1>.  in  Guada-
lupe Hidalgo,  21  Aug.,  1*14:  d.  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  21  April,  1861.  His  father  was  a  lieuten-
ant-colonel in  the  Spanish  army.  The  son  was
sent  to  the  city  of  Mexico  for  his  primary  educa-
tion, but  the  family  had  to  leave  the  country  to-
ward the  close  of  1821,  as  his  father  refused  to
serve  the  cause  of  Mexican  indcjH-nilcnce.  Young
Fuero  entered  the  military  college  of  Segovia,  ana
on  leaving  it  entered  the  annv  M  ensign,  lie  was
promoted  to  captain  for  gallantry  in  1*3(1.  and  in
accompanied  his  father  to  the  island  of  Cuba,
where  the  latter  s>. on  died.  Fuero  then  returned
to  Mexico,  where  he  entered  the  army,  with  tin-
rank  of  captain,  in  1839,  was  appointed  professor
in  the  military  college  in  1840,  and  soon  estab-
lished a  regular  course  of  practical  line-drill,  mili-
tary tactics,  and  topographical  design.  When  (Jen.
I'rn'a  pronounced  against  the  government,  on  15
July,  1*40,  Fuero  attacked  him  in  the  citadel  at
tin-  head  of  a  column  of  his  scholars,  and  drove
him  back.  He  was  then  given  command  of  sev-
eral Ofpiinii  i  of  regular  troops,  with  which  ho
aided  in  suppressing  the  insurrection,  after  a  fort-
night of  street -fighting.  In  1841  Fuero  was  pro-
moted major  and  resigned  the  vice-presidency  of
the  military  college.  In  1843  he  was  appointed
chief  of  staff  of  the  army  of  operations  in  Tamau-
lipas.  and  as  such  designed  all  the  plana  of  the
ampaign.  During  the  war  with  the  I  nit ed  States
Fuero  took  jwirt  in  all  the  battles,  till  the  defeat
at  Padierna,  after  which  he  protected  the  retreat


060


FULFORD


■LER


<>f  the  army  at  the  head  of  a  small  force,  and  re-
eeivcd  a  wound  that  ultimately  caiw-d  his  death.
After  the  peaoeof  Guadalupe  Hidalgo  he  waa  iv-
tind  M  «"  invalid  on  full  pay,  with  the  rank  of

col I.  and  opened  a  private  college,  Imt  during

the  latter  years  of  his  life  ht  had  to  abandon  this
pursuit,  as  his  wound  caused  a  gradual  softening
ot  the  brain.  Fuero  published  "  Manual  del  Mili-
tar,  6  T rat  ado  eompleto  de  Instruction  en  la  Or-
denanza  "  (8  vols.,  1842),  and  a  translation  of  Gen.
Makenna's  "Treatise  on  Military  Tactics"  (1844).

FULFOEH,  Francis,  Canadian  Anglican  bish-
op, b.  in  Sidmouth,  England,  in  1803;  d.  in  Mon-
treal. 9  Sept.,  18<J8.  He  was  educated  at  Teverton
grammar-  school  and  at  Exeter  college,  Oxford,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1824.  He  was  elected
a  fellow  in  June,  1825,  and  received  the  degree  of
I).  I),  in  1850.  He  was  rector  of  Trowbridge.  Wilts,
from  1832  till  1842,  of  Croydon  from  1842  till
1845.  and  was  minister  of  Curzon  chapel,  Hanover
square,  London,  from  1845  till  his  consecration  as
Anglican  bishop  of  Montreal  in  1850.  In  1859  he
was  appointed  by  royal  letters-patent  metropolitan
bishop  of  Canada.  Bishop  Fulford  was  at  onetime
chaplain  to  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester.  In  admin-
istrative power  he  had  few  equals.  He  was  noted
for  his  learning,  took  an  active  part  in  the  promo-
tion of  education  throughout  his  diocese,  and  was
popular  with  all  classes  in  Canada.  He  published
a  work  on  "  The  Progress  of  the  Reformation."

FULLER,  (*eorge,  artist,  b.  inDeerfield,  Mass.,
in  1822 ;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  21  March,  1884.
He  went  to  Illinois  in  1836,  and,  having  developed
a  taste  for  painting,  studied  in  1842  under  Henry
Kirke  Brown,  at  Albany,  N.  Y.  After  working  in
Boston  for  a  few  years,  he  went  to  New  York,
where  in  1857  his  portrait  of  his  former  teacher,
Mr.  Brown,  the  first  of  his  works  to  attract  notice,
gained  him  an  election  as  associate  of  the  National
academy.  He  spent  eight  months  in  European
study  and  travel  in  1859,  and  then  retired  to  his
farm  at  Deerfield,  using  his  art  only  for  recreation,
till  financial  reverses  in  1873  forced  him  to  take  it
up  again  as  a  profession.  About  1876  his  pictures
began  to  be  noticed  for  peculiar  handling,  rich-
ness of  tone,  and  a  dreaminess  of  conception  which,
when  admired  at  all,  was  admired  very  thoroughly.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Boston  art  club,  the  St.
Botolph,  and  the  Paint  and  clay  club.  A  memorial
exhibition  of  his  works  was  held  at  the  Boston
museum  of  the  fine  arts  in  1884.  His  contributions
to  the  National  academy  exhibitions  include  "  The
Turkey- Pasture,  Kentucky"  (1878),  "The  Dande-
lion Girl,"  "The  Romany  Girl"  (1879),  and  "The
Quadroon  "  (1880).  He  sent  to  the  exhibitions  of
the  Society  of  American  artists  "  Priscilla  Faunt-
leroy  "  (1882)  and  "  Nydia  "  (1883).  Other  pictures
from  his  hand  are  "  Cupid  "  (1854) ;  "  Negro  Nurse,
with  a  Child"  (1861);  "At  the  Bars"  (1865);
"  Shearing  the  Donkey  "  (1877-9) :  "  And  She  was  a
Witch  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Gatherer  of  Simples  "  (1880) ;
••  Winifred  Dysart"  (1881);  "Psyche"  (1882);  " No-
vember "(1882-'4);  "Fedalma"  (1883-'4);  "Arethu-
sa"  (1884);  and  numerous  portraits.  He  left  an
unfinished  picture  representing  a  trial  for  witch-
craft in  the  early  days  of  New  England.

FULLER,  Hiram,  journalist,  b.  in  Halifax,
Plymouth  co.,  Mass.,  about  1815 ;  d.  in  1880.  After
teaching  in  Plympton,  he  was  principal  of  the
Green  street  seminary  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  where
he  had  Margaret  Fuller  for  his  assistant.  He
afterward  became  a  bookseller  in  Providence,  and
in  1843  associated  himself  with  N.  P.  Willis  and
George  P.  Morris  in  the  publication  of  the  "New
Mirror." The  three afterward established  the


"  Daily  Mirror,"  of  which  Fuller  lx?came  sole  pro-
prietor, and  editeel  it  for  fourteen  years.  Hi
wrote  for  it  a  series  of  clever  society  letters  from
Newport,  under  the  pen-name  of  "Belle  Brittan."
Under  Taylor's  administration  Fuller  had  a  plafli
in  the  nary  department  He  went  abroad  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  espoused  the  Confeder-
ate cause,  and  established  the  "Cosmopolitan"
newspaper  in  London.  After  being  twice  a  bank-
rupt,  he  became  a  journalist  and  adventurer  in
Paris.  He  published  "  The  Groton  Lett
-Belle  Brittan  on  a  Tour"  (New  York.
"Sparks  from  a  Locomotive,  by  Belle  Brittan"
(1859);  and  "Grand  Transformation  Scenes  in  the
United  States,  or  Glimpses  of  Home  after  Thirteen
Years  Abroad"  (1875).

FULLER,  John  Wallace,  soldier,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge. England,  28  July,  1827;  d.  in  Toledo.  ( ihio,
12  March,  1891.  He  came  to  New  York  in  1838,
and  became  a  bookseller,  first  in  Utiea,  N.  Y..  and
then  in  Toledo,  Ohio.  He  was  treasurer  of  the
former  city  in  1852-'4,  and  in  Mav,  1861,  was  ar
pointed  assistant  adjutant-general"  of  Ohio.  He
became  colonel  of  the  27th  Ohio  regiment  in
August  of  that  year,  served  under  Pope  at  X.  w
Madrid  and  Island  Number  Ten,  and  commanded
the  "Ohio  brigade"  at  Iuka  and  at  Corinth  in  Oc-
tober, 1862,  where  he  distinguished  himself.  He
was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  5  Jan.,  1864,  captured  Decatur,  Ala.,  in  March,
and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  Atlanta  campaign,
doing  brilliant  service  at  the  Chattahoochee  river
on  21  July.  His  division  opened  the  battle  of  At-
lanta, and  won  the  approbation  of  Gen.  McPher-
son.  He  fought  Hood  at  Snake  Creek  Gap  in
October,  commanded  the  1st  division  of  the  17th
corps  in  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea,  and  was  pres-
ent at  Johnston's  surrender.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,  and
resigned  on  15  Aug.  Gen.  Fuller  was  appointed
collector  of  the  port  of  Toledo,  Ohio,  by  President
Grant  in  1874,  and  reappointed  in  1878.

FULLER,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Beaufort,
S.  C,  22  April,  1804;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md..  20  <  >ct.,
1876.  He  entered  Harvard  in  1820,  and  achieved
a  high  standing  in  his  class,  but  was  obliged,  on
account  of  feeble  health,  to  leave  during  his  junior
year.  He  then  studied  law  in  Beaufort,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  soon  rose  to  eminence  in  his
profession.  During  a  period  of  great  religious  in-
terest in  Beaufort  he  felt  it  his  dutv  to  abandon
the  law  and  devote  himself  to  the  Christian  min-
istry. At  the  same  time  he  was  constrained  to
leave  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  in  which  he
had  tieen  brought  up.  He  was  at  once  ordained,
and  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  Baptist  church
in  Beaufort.  His  reputation  as  a  preacher  soon
became  national,  and  his  services  were  widely
sought  in  promoting  religious  revivals.  During  his
residence  in  Beaufort  he  was  engaged  in  two  mem-
orable controversies — one  with  Bishop  England,  of
Charleston,  on  the  claims  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and  the  other  with  President  Wayland,  of
Brown  university,  Providence,  R.  I.,  on  the  subject
of  slavery.  In  both  he  displayed  abilities  of  the
highest  order,  united  with  a  spirit  of  Christian
courtesy  and  manliness.  In  the  year  1836  he  trav-
elled in  Europe  for  the  benefit  of  his  health.  In
1846  he  accepted  a  call  to  the  pastorate  of  a  Bap-
tist church  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he  spent  the
remainder  of  his  life.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Columbian  university,  Washington,  in
1844,  and  from  Harvard  in  1853.  Dr.  Full'
one  of  the  most  effective  pulpit  orators  of  his  day.
His sermons,  both in style  and delivery,


FULLER


PULLER


501


framed upon the model* of the great French
I of their kind have  seldom In-cii

died, Hi-  was more limn once president <>f

southern  Baptist (invention. In  addition  to

iphlcts  containing  hi-  debutes  with  Bishop  Eng-
land (Baltimore,  1840).  and  Dr.  Wayland  (1845),  and
various  Mrmonj  published  sc|wratcly,  M  in  the
author  of  volumes  of  ".Sermons"  (New  Fork),  nti'1

utters,"  an  "Argument  on Baptist ami  Close

immion  "  <  Richmond,  1849),  and  a  "  Psalmist,"
whit  h  DM  been  mtli'h  us«>d in  his  denomination.

temoir  of  I>r.  Fuller  waa  written  by  his  neph-
>r.  James  II.  futhhert  (New  York.'ltl
I  I  I  IKK.  Richard  Henry,  artist,  I.,  in  Brad-
ford,  N.  II.,  1'.'  Oct.,  1822;  d.  in  Chelsea.  Mass.,  24

.  1M?1.  He  wits  left  an  orphan  when  seven
yean  of  age,  and  in  1840  went  to Boston,  and  after-
wan  1  to  Chelsea,  working  at  the  trade  of  a  cigar-
maker,  Imt  soon  U'gan  to  teach  himself  to  draw
and  paint. His  health  failing  from  overwork  in

>.  he  sjH'nt  two  years  in  Minnesota,  and  on  his
return  obtained  a  place  on  the  Chelsea  |mlice  force.
where  he  was  on  duty  at  night,  and  painted  during
the  day.  He  had  excellent  natural  gifts,  and  such
a  retentive  memory  that  he  is  said  to  ha\e  made  a
clever  copy  of  a  Ijambinet,  w  hi<h  he  had  seen  only
for  a  few  moments.  He  painted  landscapes  ex-
clusively. His  works  are  represented  in  some  of
the  lineal  collections  in  Boston.

PULLER,  Timothy,  congressman,  b.  in  Chil-
mark.  Martha's  Vineyard.  Mass..  11  Jul  v.  1778;  d.
in  Groton,  Mass.,  1  Oct,  1835.  His  father.  Timothy.
the  first  settled  minister  of  Princeton,  Mass.,  was
thinl  in  descent  from  Thomas,  who  emigrated  from
England  in  1638.  The  younger  Timothy  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1801  with  the  second  honors.
After  teaching  in  Leicester  academv,  he  studied
law  with  Levi  Lincoln,  and  practised  successfully
in  Boston.  He  was  a  state  senator  in  1813-'6,  and
was  then  elected  to  congress  as  an  antifederalist.
;  nerving  from  2  Jan.,  1818,  till  3  March,  1825.  He
was  speaker  of  the  state  house  of  representatives
in  1825.  a  member  of  the  executive  council  in  1828,
and  in  1831  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  from
Groton,  whither  he  had  removed  about  1826.  While
in  congress,  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on
naval  affairs,  and  was  distinguished  as  an  orator,
making  effective  speeches  in  behalf  of  the  Seminole
Indians,  and  against  the  Missouri  compromise.  He
was  an  anient  supporter  of  John  (juincy  Adams,
and  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "The  Election
for  the  Presidency  Considered,'1  which  was  widely
circulated.  Mr.  Fuller  was  a  hard-working  lawyer,
and  an  active  and  public-spirited  man.  He  died
suddenly  of  cholera,  intestate  and  insolvent. Be-

-  the  works  mentioned  above,  he  published  an
oration  delivered  at  Watertowu.  4  July.  1K<K».  and
an  address  lN-fore  the  Massachusetts  peace  society
^H)6). — His  daughter,  Sarah  Margaret,  March i-
^Has  Ossoli,  author,  b.  in  Cambridgeport.  Mass..
'May.  1810;  d.  off  Fire  Island  beach,  16  July.  1850,
was  the  eldest  of  eight  children. She  derived  her
first  teaching  from  her  father,  studied  Latin  at  the
■Mof  six.  and  injured  her  health  by  over-applica-
tion. At  thirteen  she  was  a  pupil  at  the  mnflUt

ol  of  Hr.  Park,  in  Boston,  where  she  began  the

ly  of  Greek.  Thence  she  went  to  a  school  in
Oroton,  kept  by  the  Misses  Prescott. On  the  sud-

death  of  her  father.  Margaret  vowed  that  she
Would  do  her  whole  duty  toward her  brothers  and

rs.  and  she faithfully  kept the  vow.  teaching

■I in Boston and  Providence,  and  afterward

rivate  pupils,  for  whom  she  was  paid  at

the  rate  of  two  dollars  an  hour. During  the  tran-

aoendental  period  she  knew  intimately  the  leading

vol. ii.— 88


minds  of  the  tiiin — Bmenon,  Hawthorne.  Hipl.-y.
<  'banning,  Clarke.  Hedge — and  in  the  company  of
mi<  h  waa  verv  brilliant,  meeting  them  as  equal*.

first  met  Emerson  in  Cvi"».  and  the  next
vWtod  him  at  Concord.  Sin-  went  occasional
Brook  Farm,  though  never  tally  believing  in  the

•  >s  of  that  cX|M-rimcut,  and  never  tiring  U
She  In-ld  con\ <-r-atii m- in BottOB,  conducted the

1."  translated  from  the  (ieruian.  pmj.
works,  and  wrote  the  ••  Summer  oil  the  L-ik.-s,"  the
record  of  a  leason  spent  in  travelling  from  June
to  September,  \*4'-i.  In  December,  1844,  -he  wmd
to  New  York  as  literary  critic  of  the  "  Tribune."
then  under  the  management  of  Horace  Greeley,  in
vhoat  bonoahold  she  at  first  lived.  While  in  S'ew
York,  she  visited  the  prisons,  penitentiaries,  asy-
lums, theatres,  oj »era- houses,  music-halls,  picture-
galleries,  and  led iire-rooms,  writing  about  e\ery-
thing  in  the  •'Tribune,"  ami  doing  much  to  move
the  level  of  thought  on  philanthropic,  literary, and
artistic  matters.  Her  intimacies  here  were  mainly
with  practical,  honest,  striving  people,  Kven  Will-
iam It.  ('banning  was  a  minister  at  large.  C.  P.
Cranch  received  ooanlers,  and  Lvdia  Maria  Child
was  connected  with  the  press.  This  she  called  her
"business  life,"  and  she  pursued  it  unremittingly
for  about  twenty  months,  after  which,  having  saved
a  little  money,  she  went  to  Europe  on  the  invi-
tation of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Francis  Spring.  This
was  in  1846.  In
Kunjpe  she  saw
the  foremost  peo-
ple in  the  liter-
ary, social,  politi-
cal, and  reforma-
tory world,  s|M-nt
the  late  summer
and  autumn  in
travelling,  estab-
lished herself  for
a  time  at  Rome
in  the  spring
of  1847,  paased
that  summer  in
Switzerland  and
the  more  northern
Italian  cities,  and

returned  to  Home  in  Octolier.  She  was  married  in
Deceml>er  to  Giovanni  Angelo,  Marquis  Oaaoli,  was
a  mother  in  1848.  and  entered  with  zeal  into  the  Ital-
ian struggle  for  independence  in  1849.  Beroondnd
during  the  siege  of  the  city  by  the  French  was  of
the  most  heroic,  disinterested,  humane,  and  ten-
der kind.  Her  service  in  the  hospitals  won  the
heartiest  praise.  She  was  a  friend  of  Mazzini.
Though  racked  with  anxiety  for  her  husband  and
child,  she  appeared  entirely  oblivious  of  herself.
On  the  capture  of  Rome  by  the  French  in  June,

1849,  and  the  consequent  dispersal  of  the  leaders
in  the  defence,  she  and  her  husband  t>mk  refuge  in
Kieti.a  village  in  the  mountains  of  Abruzzi.  where
the  child  had  been  left  in  charge  of  a  confidential
nurse,  and  after  some  months  removed  to  Florence,
which,  after  a  delightful  sojourn,  they  left  for  Lag*
horn,  whence  passage  for  America  was  taken  on  the
"  Klizalwth."  a  merchant  vessel  that  sailed  17  May.

1850.  Horace  Sumner,  a  younger  brother  of  Charles
Sumner,  and  Celeste  Paolini.  a  young  Italian  girl,
were  the  only  other  passengers.  The  vovage  began
disastrously.  The  captain  died  of  small-jMix.  and
was  buried  at  s,-a  in  the  waters  off  Gibraltar.  Head
winds  kept  them  there  a  week.  The  lx>y  was  dan-
gerously seized  with  small-pox  soon  aftefwanl.  As
the  rcjage  naared  its  ending,  a  violent  southeast
wind  U'came  in  the  evening  a  gale,  by  midnight  a


^r^?.  <?«s6C^,


569


FULLER


FULT<>N


hurricane,  and  the  iwd  was  driven  on  the  shore
at  Fire  I>]nn<l  in  the  early  morning  at  four  o'clock.
The  wreck  was  complete.  A  great  wave  swept
the  deck,  and  carried  all  before  it.  The  boy  was
drowned  in  the  arms  of  the  steward  while  the  lat-
ter was  trying  to  rM08  the  land,  and  the  lifeless
body  was  "carried  on  the  hoafih  Neither  mother
nor  father  was  heard  of  more.  Of  Ossoli  little  is
known.  It  is  not  strange  that  to  most  people  he
should  be  a  name  only,  for  he  was  married  but
a  short  time,  he  was  not  seen  out  of  his  native
count  rv,  and  there  was  known  but  slightly  save  to
a  small  number  of  friends,  while  his  inability  to
speak  any  language  except  his  own  naturally  pre-
vented his  mingling  with  Americans.  But  he  was
a  gentleman,  sincere,  true,  and  self-respecting.  All
we  know  of  him  is  to  his  credit  He  was  sufficient-
ly educated  for  his  rank  in  society.  That  he  was
a  devoted  husband  is  certain,  ready  to  share  his
wife's  fortune  whatever  it  might  be,  and  in  all  re-
spects thoughtful  of  her  happiness,  believing  in
her  entirely.  His  future  in  this  country  would
have  been  "melancholy.  He  must  have  been  de-
pendent on  the  efforts  "of  his  wife,  and  those  efforts,
even  though  incessant  and  reasonably  successful,
might  not  have  availed  to  support  a  family.  It
will  be  seen  that  her  career  naturally  fell  into  three
divisions.  The  first  period  lasted  till  her  life  in
New  York  in  1844.  The  second  included  her  ex-
perience there.  The  third  embraced  her  activity
in  Rome.  The  first,  which  may  be  called  the  tran-
scendental epoch,  could  not  be  repeated.  It  was
extremely  interesting,  exciting,  stimulating  to  the
mind.  She  was  under  stimulating  influences.  Self-
culture  was  then  the  key-note  of  her  endeavor.  The
third  could  not  be  reproduced.  That  extraordinary
episode,  with  its  raptures  of  self-devotion,  was
as  exceptional,  in  its  way,  as  the  first.  The  second
epoch — that  of  literary  production — was  still  open
to  her,  enlarged  and  simplified.  She  was  essential-
ly a  critic.  She  was  not  a  reformer,  and  could  not
have  been,  had  her  means  been  ever  so  ample.  She
lived  by  her  pen,  and  her  livelihood  must  have
been  precarious — so  much  so  that  some  of  her  ad-
mirers looked  on  the  final  catastrophe  as  a  deliver-
ance for  her.  What  she  might  have  become  if  she
had  lived,  it  is  useless  to  conjecture.  She  possessed
brilliant  gifts  of  many  kinds.  She  had  a  warm
heart,  but  her  natural  talent  was  for  literature.
She  wrote  a  great  deal  for  magazines,  various
papers,  a  complete  account  of  which  may  be  found
in  Higginson  s  "  Life."  Her  collected  works,  in-
cluding "  Summer  on  the  Lakes  "  (1843),  "  Woman
in  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (1844),  and  "  Papers
on  Literature  and  Art "  (1846),  were  edited  by  her
brother,  Rev.  Arthur  B.  Fuller  (Boston,  1855).
Her  book  on  the  Roman  republic  was  lost  with
her.  The  life  of  Margaret  Fuller  has  been  writ-
ten by  Emerson,  Clarke,  and  Channing,  edited
for  the  most  part  by  William  Henry  Channing
(1852).  This  is  strongest  on  the  transcendental
side.  There  is  also  a  memoir  of  her  by  Julia  Ward
Howe,  in  the  "Eminent  Women"  series  (Boston,
1883),  and  one  by  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson
in  the  "American  Men  of  Letters"  series  (Bos-
ton, 1884).  The  last  is  the  most  complete,  though
somewhat  warped  by  the  author's  idea  that  Mar-
garet Fuller's  career  culminated  in  philanthropy.
—Her  brother,  Richard  Frederick,  author,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  15  May,  1821;  d.  in  Wayland,
Mass.,  30  May,  18(59,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1844,  and  became  a  lawyer  in  Boston.  Besides  the
life  of  his  brother,  mentioned  below,  he  published
"Visions  in  Verse"  (Boston,  1804).  —  Another
brother,  Arthur  Buck  minster,  clergyman,  b.  in


Cambridgeport,  Mass.,  10  Aug.,  IRSfi .  d.  in  Fred-
eriekaborg,  Ya..  n  Deo,  i*<u*.  vaa  fitted  for  college
by  his  sister  Margaret,  and  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1M43. He  then  studied  theology  at  Cambrid|
divinity-school,  and  was  for  some  years  a  teadM
and  missionary  in  Illinois. He  was  pastor  of
Unitarian  church  in  Manchester.  N.  H.,  in  1848-'ff
of  the  new  North  church  in  Boston  in  1853-'9,  anc
of  a  church  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  till  1  Aug,
when  he  became  chaplain  of  the  10th  Massachu-
setts  regiment. He  was  honorably  discharged  on
10  Dec.,  1803,  on  account  of  failing  health:  but
being  present  at  the  battle  of  Fredericksbun;  or
the  following  day,  he  volunteered  to  join  a  detach-
ment in crossing the Rappahannock,  and fell
while  attempting  to  drive  the  Confederate  ihl
shooters  out  of  the  city. His  courage,  enthuaiaai
and  sympathy  for  the  men  of  his  regiment
greatly  endeared  him  to  them. He  edited
of  his  sister's  works  (1855),  and  published  "Sat
bath-School  Manual  of  Christian  Doctrine  and  In-
stitutions" (Boston.  1850);  "Historical  Discour
delivered  in  the  New  North  Church,  Boston,  1  Oct
1854."  and  "Liberty  versus  Romanism,"  two  di
courses  (1859). His life  was published by  *
brother,  Richard  F.  Fuller  (Boston,  1863). See  i
a  sketch  by  T.  W.  Higginson  in  "Harvard  Memc
rial  Biographies,"  vol.  i.

FILLER,  Thomas  Brock,  Canadian  Anglic
bishop,  b.  in  Kingston,  Canada,  10  July,  1810. ]
was  educated  at  Hamilton,  Canada,  and  at  Cha
bly  theological  seminary,  and  in  1835  was  ordaine
in  the  Anglican  church  at  Toronto. After  holdir
pastorates in Chatham,  Thorold,  and Toront
where  he  was  rector  of  St.  George's  church  for
fourteen  years,  he  was  appointed  archdeacon  of  J
Toronto  in  1807,  and  in  1875  became  bishop  of  the
newly  created  diocese  of  Niagara.

FULTON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Glasgow
Scotland,  2  April,  1834.  He  studied  in  the  Chan-
nel Islands  and  at  Aberdeen,  removed  in  1853  to  I
the  United  States,  and  took  priest's  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  at  New  Orleans  in
1858.  He  has  devoted  much  time  to  researches  re-  J
garding  the  canon  law,  and  is  considered  one  of  I
the  ablest  canonists  in  his  denomination.  He  has
received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  and  LL.  D.,  and  at
present  (1887)  resides  in  St.  Louis.  His  principal
works  are  "Letters  on  Christian  Unity  (1868);
"  Index  Canonum,"  including  those  of  the  general
and  provincial  councils  in  Greek  and  English  (New
York,  1872) ;  "  Laws  of  Marriage  "  (1883) ;  and
"  Documentary  History  of  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal Church  in  the  Confederate  States."

FULTON,  Justin  Dewey,  clergyman,  b.  in
Earlville,  N.  Y.,  1  March,  1828.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Rochester  in  1851,  spent  one
year  at  the  Rochester  theological  seminary,  and  in
1853  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.  In  1855  he  removed  to  Sandusky,  Ohio,  and
in  1859  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  the  Tabernacle
Baptist  church  was  established  under  his  ministry.
In  1863  he  was  called  to  the  'Fremont  Temple  in
Boston,  where  he  labored  for  nine  vears.  In  1*7:*
he  became  a  pastor  in  Brooklyn.  X.  V.,  but  r>
in  1887,  and  announced  his  intention  of  endeavoring
to  convert  Roman  Catholics  to  Protestantism.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
University  of  Rochester  in  1871.  Dr.  Fulton  is  a
voluminous  author.  Among  his  works  are  "  The
Roman  Catholic  Element  in  American  History"
(1859);  "Life  of  Timothy  Gilbert"  (1864);  "Wo-
man as  God  Made  Her"  (1867);  "The  Wav  Oul  "
(1870);  "Show  Your  Colors"  (1881) ;  and  "
in  America  "  (1884).


D  Awl'ton fr  C


IT1


HI


m


II I  I  UN.  Ilnlnit.  inventor,  b. in Little Urn

ain  t « •  w  1 1  - 1 1 1 1  >  (now Fulton),  I  ancestor  <•".,  Ph..  in

w  York,  24  F.l>..  1^1".. His  father

from Kilkenny,  Ireland,  early  in  tin- l*th

tury, and settled at Little Britain. At the

f  thirteen  Boberl  constructed paddle-wheels.

Ii Ik-  ■prjVH wkh  success  to  n  fishing-lxiat.
•  re  >|M-tit  in  painting  miniature

raits  and landscajies,  mechanical and archi-

iral  drawing,  mm)  whatever  BUM  in  his  way
in the line  ><( artistic work, at Philadelphia,

re  In'  numbered  Benjamin  Franklin  among  bis
Mends. Iii  1786  Pulton  went  to  London,  ana  wai

ived  into  tlio  family  <>f  Benjamin  West,  under
whose instruction  he  studied  for  several years.

rward  he  practised  hi*  art  in  Devonshire,
under  the  patronage  of  wealthy  jhtsoiis,  among
whom  were  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater  and  Karl
Stanhope. With  his  acquaintanceship  with  these

ii*  logins  his  ex|K'hments  in  mechanics.
Kgerton  Bridgewater  (last  duke  of  that
name)  had  become  famous  by  the  construction  of
a  navigable  canal  from  Worsley  to  Manchester,
and  Charles,  Karl  Stanhope  (third  of  that  title).
was  the  inventor  of  the  Stanhope  printing-press,
and  a  student  of  mechanics  and  engineering.  In
I  Fulton  actively  engaged  in  a  project  for  the
improvement  of  canal  navigation,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing  year  obtained  from  the  British  government
a  [talent  for  a  double-inclined  plane  for  raising
or  lowering  boats  from  one  level  to  another  on  a

in  >>(  small  canaN.  An  account  of  this  pat-
ent is  in  the  "Repertory  of  Arts."  vol.  xvii.  In
\'.'.i\  he  patented  a  mill  for  sawing  marble.  Some
time  in  1796"  he  made  plans  for  the  construction
of  cast-iron  aqueducts,  and  a  great  work  of  this
kind  was  built  for  crossing  the  river  Dee.  A
bridge  built  upon  his  plans  was  erected  at  Wands-
worth, and  others  at  several  points  on  the  Surrey
railway.  He  also  patented  in  Kngland  a  machine
for  spinning  flax,  a  dredging-machine,  a  market
or  passage-boat,  a  despatch-boat,  and  a  trader  or
amphibious  boat  to  lie  used  on  canals.  In  1796  he
published  his  "Treatise  on  the  Improvement  of
Canal  Navigation,"  having  previously  published
some  articles  on  the  subject  in  the  London  "  Morn-
ing Star."  advocating  small  canals.  Copies  were
sent  by  the  author  to  the  president  of  the  United
States  and  other  officials,  each  accompanied  by
a  letter  emphasizing  the  advantages  to  be  derived
by  the  1'nited  States  from  canal  navigation.  In
-  he  addressed  letters,  or  rather  essays,  to  Lord
Stanhope,  which  were  apparently  intended  tor  pub-
lication— one  aiming  to  arouse  English  interest  in
internal  improvements,  and  the  other  to  promote
the  interests  of  education  in  France.  Among  his
manuscripts  was  found  a  work,  probably  written
about the  same  time  with  the  above,  advocating

trade.  In  1794  he  liecame  a  member  of  the
family  of  Joel  Barlow,  author  of  the  "  Columbiad,"

uis. Here  he painted  a  panorama,  the  first

shown  in  the  French  capital. In  December,

". Fulton made  an experiment  on the Seine

with  a  boat  for  submarine  navigation,  to  be  used

in  torpedo  warfare. In  1H01 he  conducted  some

nmeuts  at  Brest  with  his  submarine  or  plung-

">at.  under  the  auspices  of  the  French  govern-

.  which,  however,  on  Fulton's  failure  to  blow
up  the  British  ships  that sailed  along  the  coast,

me  disaffected  with  the  undertaking. The  gov-

•  nt  of  Kngland.  at the  Instigation  of Lord

io|m-,  determined  to  secure Fulton's  services
1  accordingly  he  went  to  Lon-

iii May,  1S<M,  after  a  short sojourn  in  Hol-
inarine  boat  was  finally  reported  by


the  British  commission  to  bt  impracticable;  but
the  tOtptdo  they  thought  of  some  value,  and  Ful-
ton  was  taken  out with an expedition to  try it

against  the  French  Sett  at  Boulogne,  where  the
torpedoes burst harmlessly beside the I

ships. An  experiment  in  October.  1806,  with  en

improved  apparatus,  on  a  brig  of  2<H)  tons,  provided
for  the  pvpotl  by  the  government,  resulted  in  the

destruction  of  the  ship.  In  lsw  Pulton  had  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  ami  renewed  hi-
|MTiments  witli  tOfptdoejb  Hi"  system  was  n.
adopted,  though  in  INK)  congress  appropriated  #3,-
IXM)  for  testing  the  torpedoes  and  submarine  explo-
sions. AbOOl  this  period  Fulton  invented  a  ma-
chine to  cut  the  (ables  <>f  ships  at  anchor.  In
18K1  he  took  out  a  initcnt  for"S'\eral  Improve-
ments in  Maritime  Warfare,  and  Means  for  injur-
ing and  destroying  Ships  and  Vessels  of  War  by
igniting  Gunpowder  under  Water."  A  letter  from
him  to  Jefferson,  describing  his  submarine  gun-
nery, was  printed  from  his  manuscript  in  "  Scrib-
iii  r!s  Monthly,"  vol.  xxii,  with  the  reproduction  of
his  rough  sketches.  Fulton  began  to  turn  his  at-
tention to  the  subject  of  steam  navigation  as  early
as  1798,  as  is  shown  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Stanhope,
dated  30  Sept.  of  that  year.  In  1808,  having  the
financial  assistance  of  Chancellor  Livingston,
Fulton  launched  a  steamboat  on  the  Sine,  which,
owing  to  faulty  construction  of  the  frame,  imme-


diately sank.  Another  boat  was  soon  built,  with
the  old  machinery,  and  a  trial-trip  was  made,  but
no  great  speed  was  attained.  Km-on  raged  with
this  iiartial  success.  Fulton  shortly  afterward  or-
dered an  engine  of  Watt  &  Boultoii,  to  be  sent  to
the  United  States.  Early  in  the  spring  of  1807
the  boat  that  was  to  navigate  the  Hudson  and  es-
tablish the  svstem  of  steam  navigation  was  com-
pleted at  a  ship-yard  on  the  Kast  river.  (See  ac-
companying illustration.)  The  engine  was  put  in
later,  and  on  11  Aug.,  1N07,  the  "Clermont"
steamed  up  the  Hudson  to  Albany,  the  voyage  oc-
cupying thirty-two  hours.  During  the  autumn  of
1807  the  "  Clermont  "  was  run  as  a  packet  be-
tween New  York  and  AUwny.  The  success  of
Fulton's  enterprise  excited  much  jealousy  and
rivalry,  and  a  number  of  jxrsons  disputed  his
claim  to  originality.  Litigation  and  oonnttftion
threatened  to  rob  him  of  all  profit  from  his  in-
vention. Fulton's  first  patent  for  improvements
in  navigation  by  steam  was  taken  out  on  11  Feb.,
1809,  ami  another,  with  fuller  provisions,  ,,n  !»  Feb.
1811.  The  first  attempt  to  connect  a  .steam-engine
with  the  screw-pro|>cller  was  made  by  Joseph
Bramah.  of  Piccadilly,  who  on  9  May,  1786,  pat-
ented the  application  of  a  paddle-wheel*  to  thestem
of  a  vessel,  driven  by  a  steam-engine.  A  brief  list
of  those  who  used  steam  OB  Ixiats  of  any  descrip-
tion includes  Rnmeey,  on  the  Potomac,  in  i:
John  Fitch,  first  in  September,  tin  in  Au-

gust, 1787;  Patrick  Millar,  in  17N7;  Nathan  Read,


564


FULTON


FUR MAN


at D.uiv.rs in ITS!). John Fikih.  in  1788,  built
another  boat,  propelled by  steam  from Philadcl-

fihia  to  Burlington,  twenty  miles,  bring  the  longest
rip  ever  made  by  ■  l»>at  under  steam  at  that  time.
In  October,  1788",  Miliar,  Taylor,  and  Symington

fnt  a  steamboat  on  Lake  Palwinston,  Scotland,
n  1?H!>  a  steamboat  built  under  Fiteh's  directions
attained  a  speed  of  eight  miles  an  hour  on  the
river  at  Philadelphia.  In  1790,  William  Long-
street  hail  a  small  boat  on  Savannah  river:  the
same  year  Lord  Stanhope  patented  an  ambi-navi-
gator  with  a  propeller  in  the  form  of  a  duck's
foot.  John  Stevens,  of  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  construct-
ed steamboats  with  a  speed  of  five  or  six  miles
an  hour.  In  1794,  Samuel  Morey  took  a  boat  by
steam  from  Hartford  to  New  York  city.  Robert
L.  Stevens  sailed  a  paddle-wheel  steamer  on  the
Hudson  only  a  few  days  later  than  Fulton's  "  Cler-
mont." This  l>oat  was  afterward  taken  by  sea  to
Philadelphia,  thus  making  the  first  steamship  voy-
age on  the  ocean.  Fitch  and  Stevens  are  Fulton's
most  formidable  competitors  for  the  honor  of  de-
monstrating the  feasibility  of  steam  navigation,  al-
though many  other  claimants  have  had  partisans.
So  late  as  1871,  John  II.  B.  Latrobe,  in  an  address
before  the  Maryland  historical  society,  entitled
"  A  Lost  Chapter  in  the  History  of  the  Steamboat,"
urged  the  claims  of  Nicholas  J.  Roosevelt  as  the
inventor  of  vertical  wheels  over  the  sides  of  the
boat,  which  produced,  in  Fulton's  hands,  when  pro-
pelled by  steam,  the  first  practical  result.  Fitch's
boat  was  propelled  by  vertical  paddles,  and  Rum-
sey's  by  the  expulsion,  at  the  stern,  of  water  that
had  been  drawn  in  at  the  bow ;  Fulton,  in  his  Paris
experiments,  as  set  forth  by  Colden,  his  biographer,
preferred  endless  chains  with  resisting  boards  or
floats.  Whatever  may  have  been  Fulton's  honors  as
to  the  invention,  he  undoubtedly  deserves  the  credit
of  first  bringing  into  practical  use  the  steamboat  as
a  conveyance  for  passengers  and  freight,  all  earlier
undertakings  having  been  inefficient  practically.
The  success  of  the  "  Clermont "  was  followed  by
the  rapid  multiplication  of  steamboats.  A  list  of
those  built  under  Fulton's  superintendence  com-
prises the  "  Car  of  Neptune,"  the  "  Paragon,"  the
"  Fire-flv,"  the  "  Richmond,"  the  "  Washington,"
the  "  Vesuvius,"  the  "  Olive  Branch,"  the  "  Em-
peror of  Russia,"  and  the  "  Chancellor  Living-
ston," as  well  as  several  ferry-boats.  He  described
his  first  ferry-boat  in  an  article  published  in  the
"  American  Medical  and  Philosophical  Register  "
for  October,  1812.  In  1814,  Fulton  submitted  to
the  coast  and  harbor  defence  committee  plans  for
a  steam  war-ship  to  carry  44  guns,  and  in  October
of  that  year  a  boat  of  this  description,  called  the
"  Demologos  "  (subsequently  named  "  Fulton  the
First "),  was  successfully  launched.  The  war  of
1812  terminated  before  the  effectiveness  of  the
"  Fulton  "  as  a  war-vessel  could  be  tested,  and  she
afterward  became  a  receiving-ship.  The  last  sub-
ject to  which  Fulton's  energies  were  devoted  was
a  modification  of  his  submarine  boat  the  "Nau-
tilus," but  only  the  hull  of  the  projected  craft  was
completed  before  his  death.  Exposure  in  crossing
the  Hudson,  after  testifying  in  New  Jersey  in  a
steamboat  case,  laid  the  foundation  of  Fulton's  last
illness.  He  left  a  widow  (daughter  of  Walter  Liv-
ingston) and  one  son  and  three  daughters.  The
literature  of  the  steamboat  controversy  is  exten-
sive. The  fullest  list  on  the  subject  is  afforded
by  Preble's  "  History  of  Steam  Navigation."
Fulton's  published  works  are  "  A  Treatise  on  the
Improvement  of  Canal  Navigation"  (London,
1790;  French  translation,  Paris,  1799);  the  New
York  historical  society  has  a  unique  copy  contain-


ing the  original  drawings  from  which  the  engrav-
ings were  made:  "Letters  on  Submarine  Naviga-
tion" (London,  lsott;  French  translation,  Paris,
1811);  "Torpedo  War  "(New  York.  1810);  "Letter
to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  on  the  Practical  use
of  the  Torpedo'1  (Washington,  1811):  "  Report  oa
the  Practicability  of  Navigating  with  Steamboats
on  the  Southern  Waters  of  the  United  States  "
York,  1813);  "Memorial  of  Robert  Fulton  and
Edward  P.Livingston  in  regard  to  Steamboats "
(Albany,  1814) ;  "  Advantages  of  the  Proposed
Canal  from  Lake  Erie  to  the  Hudson  River  "  (New
York,  1814).  Copies  of  Fulton's  original  draw-
ings, including  the  illustrations  to  the  u  Coitus*
biad,"  which  he  designed  or  superintended,  are
contained  in  Reigarvs  "Life  of  Fulton  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1856).  Fulton's  paintings  seem  to  have
gone  out  of  existence.  Smith,  in  his  catalogue  of
portraits,  catalogues  a  fancy  picture  of  Lady  Jane
Grey,  painted  by  Fulton  about  1793.  Fulton's  life
has  been  written  by  Cadwallader  D.  Colden  (New
York,  1817),  and  by  James  Renwick  in  Sparks's
"American  Biography."

FULTON,  William  S.,  senator,  b.  in  Cecil
county,  Md.,  2  June,  1795;  d.  in  Rosewood,  ne
Little  Rock,  Ark.,  15  Aug.,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Baltimore  college  in  1813,  and  began
study  law  with  William  Pinckney.  Before  com-
ing of  age  he  served  with  credit  as  a  volunteer  for
the  defence  of  Fort  McHenrv  in  the  war  of  1812.
At  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  removed,  with  hi
father's  family,  to  Tennessee,  where  he  resumed
the  study  of  law  with  Felix  Grundy.  In  1818  he
volunteered  with  the  Nashville  guards,  and  subse-

auently  acted  as  military  secretary  to  Gen.  Jackson
uring  the  Florida  campaign.  At  its  close  he
settled  in  Alabama  for  the  practice  of  the  law,  hav-
ing been  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  appointed,
in  1829,  by  Gen.  Jackson,  secretary  of  the  territory
of  Arkansas,  and  in  1835  its  governor,  which  office
he  held  until  the  territory  became  a  state.  He  was
then  chosen  as  one  of  its  .first  U.  S.  senators,  serv-
ing from  5  Dee.,  1836,  until  his  death.

FUNES,  Gregorio,  South  American  author,  b.
in  Cordova  de  Tucuman,  Buenos  Ayres,  about  the
middle  of  the  18th  century;  d.  about  1820.  He
studied  under  the  Jesuits  in  the  university  of  his
native  city,  and,  after  the  expulsion  of  that  order,
under  the  Franciscans. He  was  afterward  ordained

Eriest,  received  the  title  of  doctor  of  theology,  and
ecame  dean  of  the  church  of  Cordova.  When  the
colonies  of  Spain  revolted  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  cause  of  independence.  He  was  named  deputy
to  the  congress  which  assembled  in  the  city  of
Tucuman  in  1816  to  elect  a  president  of  the  united
provinces  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata,  but  declined  on
account  of  his  infirmities.  The  work  which  has
gained  him  a  high  reputation  in  Spanish  America
is  entitled  "Ensayo  de  la  historia  civil  del  Para-
guay, Buenos  Ayres  y  Tucuman  "  (3  vols.,  Buenos
Ayres,  1816-'17).  His  work,  which  comprises  the
period  of  the  revolution  in  Peru  by  Tupac- Amaru,
ends  with  a  "  Sketch  of  the  Revolution,  from  25
May,  1810,  to  the  Opening  of  the  National  Con-
gress on  the  25th  of  March,  1816."

FURMAN,  Charles  M.,  financier,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  in  1797;  d.  there,  3  July,  1872.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  South  Carolina  in  1*1!',
and  practised  until  1832,  when  he  was  elec
the  legislature  treasurer  of  the  lower  division  of
the  state.  In  this  office  he  gave  evidence  of  that
financial  ability  for  which  in  after  years  he  1
distinguished,  and  was  subsequently  chosen  to  be
the  comptroller-general  of  the  state.  Later  he  was
elected  one  of  the  masters  in  equity  for  the  Charles-


ii  i;m  w


I  ucSESS


.-,♦;,-,


•ri<-t. Hi-  wii-  i!  years  cash  i-r  of

the  state  Iwink.  and  in  !*•*><»  was  ohosen  it*  presi-
dent, irhich  office  In-  retained  nniil  tin-  olowof  the

civil  war.  Mr.  Furman  had  previously  bOM  calh-d
to  111!  other  places  of  honor  and  trust.  In  1H24  ho
was  elected  a  member  of  the  lower  l»rain-h  of  tin-
lagislstnrri  and  afterward  represented  his  native
city  in  all  the  municipal  Imam-.  He  was  tor  many
years  a  director  of  tin-  South  Carolina  rail  rond,  and
visit.  <1  Kngland  mi  an  itn|M>rtant  mission  in  In-half
of  that  cor|M»ration.  lie  sat  in  the  secession  coii-
rention  "f  island  was  a  member  of  the  National
iHDOcrmtic  convention  that  Dominated  Mr.  .Sey-
mour for  president  in

FIRMAN,  Gabriel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y..  28  .Ian..  1  si K » :  .1.  then-.  11  Nov.,  1*54.  He
studii-d  law  and  early  showed  a  taste  for  literature,
lly  in  antiquarian  lines.  In  1827  he  was
appoiuti-d  a  justice  of  the  Brooklyn  municipal
court,  which  office  he  held  for  three  years,  lie
served  as  stale  senator  in  1839-'42,  and  in  the  lat-
ter year  became  the  Whig  nominee  for  lieutcnant-
■overnor,  but  was  not  elected.  In  cither  politics
or  law  he  might  have  attained  eminence,  but  the
fascination  of  books  and  study,  and  the  opium-
habit,  quenched  all  ambition,  withdrew  him  gradu-
ally from  the  activities  of  political  and  profes-jonal
life,  and  finally  brought  him  to  a  clouded  end  in
the  Hr.H>klyn  city  hospital.  He  was  a  man  of  pure
character  and  genial  nature,  an  acceptable  lecturer,
and  j>ossessed  a  cultivated  taste  and  a  wide  range
of  information.  loiter  historians  of  Long  Island
and  of  Brooklyn  have  profited  largely  by  his  minute
and  extensive  antiquarian  researches,  contained  in
numerous  manuscript  volumes.  His  only  published
work  was  "Notes,  Geographical  and  Historical,
relative  to  the  Town  of  Brooklyn  " (1824).

FIRMAN,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  ^Esopus,
X.  V..  in  1756;  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('.,  in  August,
1889.  While  he  was  an  infant  his  father  removed
to  Sumter  district,  S.  C.  His  education,  though
obtained  in  an  irregular  way,  became  considerable,
including  a  knowledge  of  the  Latin.  Greek,  and
Hebrew  languages.  He  was  converted  at  an  early
age,  and  soon  began  to  preach,  and  when  nineteen
rears  old  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  High  Hills
Baptist  church.  On  one  occasion  he  was  not  al-
lowed by  the  sheriff  to  preach  in  the  court-house
at  Camden  lieeause  he  was  not  a  member  of  the
established  ( Hpis<-opal)  church.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution  he  actively  promoted  measures
for  removing  the  disabilities  under  which  dissenters
■fcored.  I  hiring  that  struggle  he  became  so  con-
spicuous as  a  patriot  that  Lord  Cornwallis  offered
a  reward  for  his  apprehension,  and  for  a  while  he
retired  to  Virginia,  where  Patrick  Henry  was  a
regular  attendant  on  his  ministry.  In  ITS?  he
became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Charles-
ton. S.C.,  in  which  relation  lie  continued  for  thirty-
seven  years.  He  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  first  constitution  of  South  Carolina,
and  rigorously  opposed  in  that  body  the  provision
which  excluded  ministers  from  certain  office*  He
was  unanimously  elected  in  1814  the  first  president
of  the  triennial  convention,  a  representative  organi-
zation of  all  the  Baptists  of  the  country.  For
several  years  he  was  president  of  the  South  Carolina
Baptist  convention.  In  various  ways  he  promoted
the  establishment  of  schools  and  colleges  for  min-
isterial and  general  education  among  the  Baptists.
Furman  university,  of  South  Carolina,  wits  named
in  his  honor.  In  1*00  he  received  the  d.  _
I).  I),  from  Brown  university.  He  published  sev-
eral sermons  and  discourses,  including  one  ooaa*
riiemorative  of  Qeorgc  Washington,  delivered  by


appointment  of  the  -  I  incinnati.

Jauies  (  |. mi  nt. dooator,  i>.  in  Chariest  oa,  6

Inflated  at  Charleston oolli
but  was  not  graduated,  owing  to  a  severe  illte
Me.  Mnior  year. He  entered  the  Baptist  ministry

in  1*28,  serving  as  pastor  of  churches  in  Camden
and  Fairfield  till  1*14,  and  in  Society  Hill,  with
an interval  of  fifteen months  at Charleston, till

1848.  In  that  rearheaoeapted  a  professorship  in  the

Furman  tlu-ofogical  institution,  and  has  aTOV  since
Im-cii  connected  with  its  faculty,  teaching  mental
ami  moral  philosophy,  rhetoric,  and  logie.  When
the  institution  was  expanded  into  Furman  uni-
versity at  (ireenville.  is.  ('..  he  wa>  made  its  presi-
dent, and  still  (1XN7)  remains  in  that  office.  Ib-
has  published  various  sermons  and  addresses,  and
has  for  several  years  bOM  one  of  tin-  editors  of
tin-  •'  Baptist  I  ourier,"  of  Greenville.

Fl'RNKSS,  \}  illium  Henry  (fur-ncss).  clergy-
man, 1 1.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  April,  1802.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1880,  and  completed  his
theological  studies  at  Cambridge  in  1823.  In
January,  1825,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st
Congregational  Unitarian  drama  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  remained  until  he  retired  from  the  min-
istry, in  1918.  He  received  the  dense  "f  D.  D.
from  Harvard  in  1847,  and  that  of  Doctor  of  Let-
ters from  Columbia  at  its  centennial  anniversary
in  1887.  The  theological  position  of  Dr.  Furness
is  peculiar,  belonging  as  tie  does  to  the  extreme
humanitarian  school,  as  distinguished  from  that  of
Canning.  Peabody,  and  Norton.  lie  accepts,  for
the  most  part,  the  miraculous  facts  of  the  New
Testament,  yet  accounts  for  them  by  the  moral  and
spiritual  forces  resulting  from  the  pre-eminent
character  of  the  Saviour,  who,  in  his  view,  is  an
exalted  form  of  humanity.  One  of  his  constant
labors  as  a  preacher  and  an  author  has  been  to
ascertain  the  historical  truth  and  develop  the
spiritual  ideas  of  the  records  of  the  life  of  Christ.
His  book-  reveal  a  highly  cultivated  intellect,  im-
pelled by  enthusiastic  ardor,  and  enriched  by  a
glowing  fancy.  "  Esthetic  considerations,"  re-
marks a  writer  of  his  own  denomination,  "weigh
more  with  him  than  historical  proofs,  and  vivid-
MM  of  conception  than  demonstration."  In  the
anti-slavery  movement  Dr.  Furness  took  an  intense
interest,  preaching  frequently  <>n  the  subject.
From  1845  till  1847  he  edited  an  annual  entitled
"The  Diadem."  Besides  miny oftnojional  01111011
he  is  the  author  of  "  Remarks  on  the  Four  Gos-
pels "' (Philadelphia,  1835  ;  London.  1*17);  "Jam
and  His  Biographers'*  (Philadelphi  Do-

mestic Worship,"  a  volume  of  prayers  (1848;  2d
ed.,  Boston,  1850);  "A  History  of  Jesus"  (Phila-
delphia and  London,  1850;  new  ed..  Boston.  Is..">;{):
•  Dnmmraw"  (Philadelphia,  1855);  "Thoughts  on
the  Life  and  Character  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth"
(Boston,  1859);  "The  Veil  partly  Lifted  and  .lesus
becoming  Visible"  (Boston,  lsiili;  "The  I'ncon-
scioiis  Truth  of  the  Four  Qoopoll  "  (Philadelphia.
lMiN);  "Jesus"  (1871):  "The  Power  of  Spirit
Manifest  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth"  (1877):  "The
Story  of  the  Resurrection  Told  Once  Hon  "  (1885);
and  "Verses;  Translations  and  Hymns"  (Boston.
1886). He has  also  translated from  the  Ci-rman

Bohnberfa M Mirror  <>f  Nature "(1848);  "(bins  of

Sermon  Verse"  (lKol) ;  ••  Julius  and  Other  Tales"
i6;  enlarged  ed..  1*">!»);  and  translated  and
edited  Dr.  Daniel  Schenkcl's  "Characterbild  Jesii."
an  elaliorate  essay  written  as  a  reply  to  Kenan's
work,  under  the  title  of  "Character  of  Jam  Por-
trayed" (|  roe*,  Bo-ton.  1868).  His  version  of
.Schiller's  "  Song  of  the  Boll"  is  considered  the
best  that  has  Ikiii made. Mrs.  Annis  Lee  \\  i-ter.


066


1TWTAD0


FUTHEY


tin-  translator,  is  his  daughter.— His  son,  William
Henry,  artist,  1>.  in  Philadelphia.  I'a.,  21  .May,  1888;
<1.  in  Cambridge,  Will  i  March,  1887,  left  school  at
the  age  of  sixteen,  and  entered  a  counting-house,
but  a  year  later  devoted  himself  to  art  After  spend-
ing two  years  studying  in  Dllsseldorf,  Munich,  Dres-
den, Venice,  and  Pans,  he  settled  at  first  in  Phila-
delphia, but  afterward  removed  his  studio  to  Bos-
ton, residing  in  Cambridge.  His  improvement  as
an  artist  was  rapid,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
he  held  high  rank  as  a  painter  of  portraits,  his
Itcst  work  being  marked  by  firmness  of  drawing,
truth  of  color,  fidelity  to  characteristic  traits,  and
a  fine  feeling  for  expression.  He  was  fortunate  in
his  subjects — Charles  Sumner,  Lucretia  Mott,  his
father,  l)r.  Furness,  and  other  well-known  persons
having  sat  to  him.  His  most  successful  achieve-
ments, however,  but  gave  promise  of  what  he
might  have  accomplished  had  he  lived. — Another
son,  Horace  Howard,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
2  Nov.,  1833,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1854.
He  spent  three  years  in  Europe,  returned  to  his
native  city,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1859.  He  has  been  a  diligent  student  of
Shakespeare,  and  undertook  the  editing  of  a  new
variorum  edition,  the  first  volume  of  which  ap-
peared in  1871,  and  six  volumes  have  been  issued
up  to  this  date  (1887).— Helen  Kate,  author,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  July,  1837 ;  d.  30  Oct.,
1883,  was  the  wife  of  Horace  Howard.  Her  maiden
name  was  Rogers.  Mrs.  Furness  published  a
"  Concordance  to  Shakespeare's  Poems,"  intended
as  a  supplement  to  Mrs.  Clarke's  concordance  to
the  plays  (Philadelphia,  1873),  and  also  compiled
an  index  to  William  Sidney  Walker's  "Text  of
Shakespeare,"  which  was  printed  privately.

FURTADO,  Francisco  Jose"  (foor-tah'-do),  Bra-
zilian statesman,  b.  in  Oeiras,  13  Aug.,  1818;  d.  in
Rio  Janeiro,  23  June,  1870.  He  was  graduated
at  the  academy  of  law  of  Caxias  in  1838,  and  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  the  following  year.  He  was
appointed  city  judge  of  Caxias  in  1840,  elected
president  of  the  municipality  in  1841,  and  in  1844
member  of  the  provincial  assembly  of  Piauhi.  In
1847  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  imperial  legis-
lature that  convened  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1848,  but
the  legislature  was  dissolved,  19  Feb.,  1849,  and
in  December  Furtado  returned  to  Caxias,  and  was
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Para  till  1856.
In  that  year  the  government  appointed  Furtado
president  of  Amazonas.  In  a  few  years  the  prov-
ince, owing  to  his  efforts,  became  flourishing  and
productive,  and  in  1859  he  resigned.  He  was  elect-,
ed  deputy  to  the  national  legislature  in  1861,  soon
became  known  as  an  orator,  and  on  24  May,
1862,  was  given  the  portfolio  of  justice  by  the
president  of  the  new  liberal  ministry,  but  the  lat-
ter was  overthrown  after  a  few  days  by  the  Con-
servative party.  In  1863  Furtado  was  re-elected,
chosen  life-senator  by  the  emperor  on  24  July,
1864,  and  on  31  Aug.  was  called  upon  to  form  a
new  cabinet.  He  assumed  the  government  under
difficult  circumstances,  principally  through  a  gen-
eral commercial  crisis.  His  energetic  and  some-
what arbitrary  measures,  although  criticised  by
many,  saved  the  situation,  and,  the  public  confi-
dence restored,  all  government  obligations  were
soon  paid  and  a  new  loan  floated.  After  the  sur-
render of  Montevideo  in  February,  1865,  Furtado
applied  himself  to  interior  improvements,  and  took
the  first  energetic  steps  toward  the  emancipation
of  the  slaves,  but  the  questions  stirred  up  by  the
triple  alliance  in  May,  1865,  occasioned  the  resig-
nation of  the  cabinet.  In 'the  senate  Furtado,
in  1870,  proposed  and  carried  through  a  law  taking


the  first  steps  for  the  abolition  of  slavery.  In
April  of  that  year,  as  counsel  of  the  city  of  Big
Janeiro,  he  was  making  argument  in  court,  when
he  was  seized  with  an  illness  which  terminated  in
his  death.  He  died  poor,  but  the  provinces  of  the
empire  subscribed  $24,000  to  enable  his  widow  to
educate  their  children.

H  KTADO  HE  KBNDONCA,  Hipolitn  J.  da
Costa  (foor-tah'-do),  Brazilian  journalist.  1>.  in  (r>-
lonia  de  Sacramento  (now  Uruguay)  in  177:5;  d.  in
London,  England,  11  Sept.,  1828.  ||,.  wmrmdm
ated  in  philosophy  and  law  at  the  Unirerntj  of
Coimbra,  Portugal,  in  1795,  and  began  practice  at
the  bar  in  Lisbon.  He  was  first  Portuguese  minis-
ter to  the  United  States  in  1798-1800,  and  in  1808
was  sent  to  London  on  a  secret  mission.  But  his
liberal  ideas,  confirmed  during  his  stay  in  the  United
States,  had  made  him  enemies  at  court,  and  on  his
return  to  Portugal  in  1804  he  was  thrown  into  the
dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  where  he  remained
for  nearly  three  years.  Early  in  1807,  assisted  l>y
Freemasons,  he  managed  to  escape,  and  sailed
for  London.  As  all  his  property  had  been  con-
fiscated by  the  Inquisition,  he  was  reduced  to  pov-
erty, and  gained  a  living  by  his  pen.  He  began
in  London  the  publication  of  the  "  Correio  Brazili-
ense,"  and  notwithstanding  that  the  circulation  of
the  paper  was  repeatedly  prohibited  under  severe
penalties,  in  1815  and  1817,  it  continued  to  be
clandestinely  introduced  and  read  in  Portugal  as
well  as  Brazil.  In  1821  and  1822  the  "  Correio  "
became  the  open  champion  of  Brazil,  first  advo-
cating a  constitution  ana  afterward  independence,
and  Furtado  was  at  the  same  time  secret  agent  of
the  liberal  committee  with  the  British  government.
After  the  independence  of  Brazil  had  been  e>tal>-
lished  in  1822,  Furtado  was  appointed  early  in
1823  minister  to  the  English,  Prussian,  and  Aus-
trian governments,  with  residence  in  London.
Among  other  works,  Furtado  published  "  Memoria
da  America  Septentrional " ;  "  Historia  de  Portu-
gal " ;  "  Nova  gramatica  Portugueza  e  Ingleza  " ;
"  Descripcao  da  arvore  assucarina  " ;  and  "  Descrip-
c&o  de  una  machina  para  tocar  a  bomba  a  bordo
dos  navios  sem  o  trabalho  de  horaeus."

FUTHEY,  John  Smith,  author,  b.  in  Chester
county,  Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1820.  His  ancestors  lived  in
Arbroath,  Forfar  co..  Scotland.  Members  of  the
family  went  to  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  and  about
1720  Henry  Futhey  came  thence  to  Chester  county,
Pa.  The  subject  of  this  sketch  is  the  fifth  in
descent  from  him.  He  was  educated  at  local
academies,  and  at  the  law-school  of  Dickinson
college,  Pa.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Chester
county  in  1843,  and  was  district  attorney  for  five
years.  In  1879  he  was  appointed  president  judge
of  the  district,  and  the  same  year  was  elected  for  the
full  term  of  ten  years.  Judge  Futhey  is  an  excel-
lent historical  scholar,  is  a  member  of  many  his-
torical societies,  and  has  published  much  valuable
historical  and  antiquarian  matter.  His  principal
publications  are  "Historical  Collections  of  (ln>ter
County,"  a  series  of  160  papers  contributed  to  a
local  journal ;  "  History  of  Upper  Octorara  Pres-
byterian Church " (1870) ;  "History  of  Educational
Institutions  of  Chester  County"  (1877) :  "  Histori-
cal Address  on  the  One  Hundredth  Anniversary  of
the  Paoli  Massacre  "  (1877) ;  "  History  of  Chester
County,"  in  Egle's  "History  of  Pennsylvania"
(1876) ;  "  History  of  Chester  County,"  in  connect  ion
with  Gilbert  Cope  (1881).  He  also  published,  in
connection  with  Dr.  Win,  Darlington,  "  Not*
Cestrienses,"  a  series  of  papers  contributed  to  a
local  journal  (1&58-'61).  He  is  now  (1887)  prepar-
ing a  genealogy  of  the  Futhey  family.


(I  Alt  A  ki  :t


UAlfcl'LN


501


<;


i.  \  BARET.  Jean  de  (gab-bel)  nor  of

Martinique,  Ii.  in  the  Island  of  K<  in  1090;  <l.  in
i. f.»rt.  31 March,  H>!»7. lit*  entered  the  navy
■t  the  age  of  sixteen  years,  and  in  1008  had  already
iird the rank of  commodore. In 1077 he
iiaiiiltil  tli> vanguard  of  d'EsttcVs  fleet  in  the
ntcred ili"  |»>rt <>f Tobago at it-
head,  amid  t  lie  cross-fire  <>f  tin-  fort-  ami  tin-  Dutch
I >..  and  in H>?M  captured tin-  same
island,  and,  after  destroying  Granada, returned
Europe  and  participated  in the Imttle  <>f  La
lie.  21»  May, 10112. |n 1093  he  was  appoint-
ed governor-general  <>f  Martinique. Although  be
found  the  island in a defenceless  sUite,  he  -« »< -n
uized  troops  and  armed  the  forts. An  English
of  twenty-eight men-of-war  and  eight  trans-
ports, with  4,200  landing  troops  under  Sir  Francis
Wheeler.  anehore<l  in Port  Royal  on 1  April,  and
landed 1,000  men  under  Col.  Foulke,  which  were
defeated  and  forced  to  re-embark,  while  Sir  Fran-
cis landed  with  X?.fMK>  men  at Diamond  bay. On
1*>  April  he  received  a  re-enforcement  from  Anti-
gua  under  Gen.  Codrington. and concentrating
all  his  force-,  over  5,(MH),  at Front  Cananville,  be
marched  on  the  capital,  Saint  Pierre. Gabaret  had
only  400 disciplined  troops  and  1,000  arme«l  slaves,
hut  met  the  invaders  on  31  May.  1098,  at  Precheum,
defeated,  and  forced  them  to  re-eml)ark. He  even
attacked,  in 1094,  the  |M>rt  of  Kingston,  Jamaica,
and  sunk  some English  ships. After  his return

I rganized  the  administration,  introduced  many

useful  reforms,  embellished  the  capital,  built  the
city-hall,  and  made improvements  in  the  port  in
1  ♦»;#-■>— *0. Out  of  gratitude  to  the  negroes  wno  had
helped him  to  defeat  the Knglish,  he  reformed
the  so-called  "  black  code,"  and  presented,  in  1090,
to  Louis  XIV,  a  project  for  gradual  emancipation,
which  was  printed  under  the title  of  "  Memoire
■  rit*§  a  Sa Majeste par  le  comte  de  Gabaret,
gouverneiir  de  la  Martinique sur ('emancipation
graduelle  des  esclaves." In  this  he  suggeste<l  the
colonization  of  the  slaves  in  Cavenne  and  Patago-
nia, which  would  encourage  the immigration  of
white  settlers  to Martinique,  and  form  new  and
useful French colonies in South  America. The
minister  of  war,  marquis  of  Chamillard.  favored
the project, and reported  it to  the king, who
called  Gabaret  to  France. He  -ailed  in  .January.
lii'.i?.  but  shortly  after  his  arrival  died  of  exposure
to  the  cold,  to  which  he  had  not  been  accustomed.
G  A  It  It.  William More, paleontologist,  l>. in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  1(5  Jan..  1*1!);  d.  there.  80  May,
ls>. He  was  educated  in  Philadelphia,  and  ac-
quired his  knowledge  of  geology  in  the  Academy
of  natural  sciences  of  thai  city. In  1862  he  was
appointed  paleontologist  to  the  geological  survey
of  California,  under  Prof.  Josiah  D.  Whitney,  and
nucd actively engaged in that work until
The cretaceous ami tertiary fossils  were
classified  by  him,  and  the  portion  devoted  to  that
ect  in  the  lir>t  volume  on  paleontology  of  the
•logical  Survey  of  California  "  (1804),  and  the
re  second volume, were written by him. In
-  he  undertook  a  surrey  in  Santo  Domingo  fur
the  Santo  Domingo  land  and  mining  company,  re-
nainingon  the  island  from  1809  till  1872. Subse-
quently lie  published  an  extended  memoir  "On  the
Topography  and  Geology  of  Santo Domingo,"  in
usactions  of the American  Philosophical

vol.  xiv.  (Philadelphia,  i*?:b. Be  then
t to  Costa Uica  under  an  appointment  from


the  government,  and  engaged  in  a  biographical
and  geological  surveyor  that  country,  vfaei
also  made  extensive  ethnological  and natural

tory  collections  lot  the  Smithsonian  institution.
Mr.  Gahh  published  a  memoir** On  the  Top

pliy  of  Costa  Una."  with  a  map,  in  "  Petcrmaun  »
Mittheilungeii."and  also  one  on  the"  BthnologJ  of
Costa  Kica,"  in  the  "Transaction-  of  the  American
Philosophical  Society.*'  His  reiM.rt  on  thcMOlogJ
and  |ialeontologv  he  left  unpublished  at  the  time
of  his  death.  Besides  the  foregoing  iiublicati'ii-
he  oontliboted  frequent  |>a|>ers  to  the  scientific
journals  and  proceedings  of  SOfiotiee  He  received
an  election  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences,
was  also  a  uieml>er  of  other  scientific  societies,
and  ultimately  gained  a  reputation  for  greater
knowledge  of  American  invertebrate  paleontology
of  the  cretaceous  and  tertiary  age  than  any  other
-cieiiti-t  of  his  time.

I.  \  Bit  I  AC.  Paul  Joseph  de  Cadoine,  Marquis
de,  French  diplomatist,  b.  in  Heidelberg.  Baden,  1
March,  17!>2:  d.  in  Paris,  12  June.  1805.  He  en-
tered the  diplomatic  corps  in  inii  pj  secretary  of
the  embassy  at  Naples,  and  in  1812-*14  was  consul-
general  at  New  \  ork,  and  temporarily  in  charge
M  minister  in  Washington.  I  ndcr  the  restora-
tion he  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  at
Turin  in  1815,  chief  secretary  at  St.  Petersburg  in
1820,  and  minister  |>leni|H>tcntiary  at  Stockholm
in  1823.  in  1820  he  was  appointed  by  the  prime
minister.  Count  Villele.  to  the  Brazilian  mission,
which  had  been  refused  by  different  diplomatists
on  account  of  the  difficult  situation  of  affairs,  a-
the  emperor,  Pedro  I.,  refused  to  accede  to  the  de-
sires of  the  European  governments  to  establish  an
independent  government  in  Portugal.  Gahriac
seconded  the  demands  of  England  and  Austria  so
effectually  that  at  last  the  emperor  appointed,  in
1827,  his  brother  Miguel  regent  of  Portugal  in  the
name  of  his  daughter.  Dona  Maria  da  Gloria.  Be
also  renewed  the  commercial  treaty  with  the  em-

Eire,  signed  10  Aug.,  1828,  a  convention  by  which
Brazil  adopted  the  French  maritime  law.  and  in
the  -ame  year  had  the  same  law  adopted  by  all  the
South  American  republics.  In  1N2!»  he  was  sent  as
minister  to  Switzerland,  but  returned  when  the
July  revolution  of  1830  made  his  special  mission
superfluous.  In  1837  he  was  sent  on  a  sj>ecial  mis-
sion to  Mexico,  and  in  1839  to  Washington ;  he
was  in  1K41  made  a  peer  of  France,  and  in  1858
life  senator  by  Napoleon  III.  He  is  the  author  of
"  La  question  Brcsilienne  "  (Paris,  1898);  "  Les  r6-

[mbliqiies  de  rAineriipic  do  Sud  con-iderces  dans
etir  avenir"  (1851);  and  "  Dom  Pedro  I.,  notes
et  souvenirs  personnel-  "  (1854).

GADSDKN,  Christopher,  patriot, b,  in  Charles-
ton, S.  {'.,  in  1724 :  d.  there,  2*  Aug.,  1800.  Ib-
was  sent  at  an  early  age  to  Kngland.  where  he
received  his  education.  He  returned  to  Charles-
ton in  1741,  and  shortly  afterward  l>ecame  a  clerk
in  a  counting-house  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  re-
mained till  he  was  twenty-one  vears  of  age.
After  a  second  vi-it  to  Kngland  he  began  business
on  his  own  account  in  Philadelphia,  ami  such  was
his  success  that  he  was  soon  able  to  buy  liack  the
estate  which  his  father,  in  1788,  had  lost  at  play
with  Admiral  Lord  Ainui,  lb-  was  one  of  the
first  to  appreciate  the  full  measure  of  the  difficulty
with  Ores!  Britain,  and  from  the  outset  he  was
Sympathetic  and  resolute  on  the  popular  side.  He
was the friend and correspondent of Samuel


968


GADSDEN


gagk


Adams,  ami  was  a  delegate  to  the  first  Colonial
oongraM,  which  met  in  New  York  in  October,  lTti.").
and  at  which  was  adopted  a  "  Declarat  ion  of  the
Kightsaud  Grievances  of  the  Colonics.'*  He  was  a
member  also  ol  the  first  Continental  congress,  which

met  in  Philadelphia  in  September,  1774.  When
the  Revolutionary  war  broke  out  he  took  the  field
with  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  was  actively  engaged
in  the  defence  of  Charleston  in  1776.  In  Septem-
ber of  the  same  year  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank
of  brigadier-general.  He  was  one  of  the  framers
<>f  the  state  constitution  in  1778.  As  lieutenant-
governor  of  South  Carolina,  he  signed  the  capitu-
lation when  Charleston  was  taken  by  Sir  Henry
Clinton  in  May,  1780.  He  was  arrested  somewhat
later,  by  order  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  and  carried  to
l'i  nt  A  agnst  ine,  where,  a  parole  having  been  offered
and  refused,  he  was  detained  for  forty-two  weeks.
He  was  exchanged  in  1781,  and  in  the  following
year  he  was  elected  governor  of  South  Carolina,
but  declined  the  office  on  account  of  age  and  in-
firmity. He  continued,  however,  to  take  a  deep
interest  in  public  affairs,  and  gave  his  services  both
in  the  assemblvand  in  the  council. — His  grandson,
Christopher  Edwards,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Charles-
ton. S.  C.,  iS  Nov.,  1785;  d.  there,  24  June,  1852,
obtained  his  early  education  in  the  "  Associate
Academv  "  in  Charleston.  In  1802  he  entered  the
junior  class  in  Yale  college,  and  was  graduated
with  honor  in  1804.  John  C.  Calhoun  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  same  class,  and  the  friendship  formed
with  young  Gadsden  continued  through  life.  He
was  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  Benjamin  Moore,
in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  New  York  city,  25  July,  1807,
and  priest  bv  Bishop  Madison,  in  Williamsburg,
Va.,  14  April,  1810.  In  January,  1808,  he  took
charge  of  the  ancient  parish  of  Berkelev,  S.  C,  but
in  February,  1810,  he  was  chosen  to  be  assistant
minister  of  St.  Philip's  church,  Charleston.  On
the  death  of  the  rector,  in  1814,  Mr.  Gadsden  was
elected  to  fill  his  place.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  South  Carolina  college  in  1815.  After
the  death  of  Bishop  Bowen  in  1839,  Dr.  Gadsden
was  elected  bishop,  and  was  consecrated  in  Trinity
church,  Boston,  Mass.,  21  June,  1840.  Bishop
Gadsden's  episcopate  of  twelve  years  was  marked
by  great  devotion,  energy,  prudence,  and  discretion,
and  he  displayed  noble  qualities  which  endeared
him  to  both  clergy  and  laity.  On  his  visitations  he
was  particularly  attentive  to  the  colored  people,
often  collecting  them  for  purposes  of  devotion  and
instruction.  He  confirmed  more  than  twenty  of
them  on  the  first  occasion  when  he  administered
the  rites.  He  edited  for  several  years  the  "Gospel
Messenger,"  published  several  occasional  sermons,
a  tract  on  "  The  Prayer-Book  as  it  Is,"  and  three
valuable  charges  to  the  clergy,  and  an  essay  on
the  life  of  Bishop  Dehon  (1833).— His  brother,
John,  lawyer,  b.  4  March,  1787;  d.  31  Jan.,  1831,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1804,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  He  was  a  member  of  the  South  Caro-
lina legislature,  and  also  held  the  office  of  U.  S.
district  attorney. — Another  brother,  James,  states-
man, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  15  May,  1788 ;  d.  there,
25  Dec.,  1858,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806.
After  engaging  in  commercial  pursuits,  he  joined
the  army,  and  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of
engineers.  He  served  with  distinction  during  the
war  of  1812  with  Great  Britain,  and  after  the
peace  was  Jackson's  aide  in  the  expedition  to  ex-
amine the  military  defences  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico
and  the  southwestern  frontier.  In  the  following
year,  with  Gen.  Simon  Bernard,  he  was  appointed
to  review  the  examinations,  and  made  a  separate
report,  in  which  his  conclusions  differed  from  those


of  that  officer.  In  1*18,  as  aide-de-camp  I
Jaehaon,  he  took  part  in  the  campaign  against  the
Seminole  Indians,  aiding  in  the  capture  of  their
leaders,  A rl nit hnot  and  Amhrister.  and  personally
interceiitinga  schooner  bearing  the  correspondence
that  leu  to  the  execution  of  these  men.  Later  be
was  constructor  of  works  for  the  defence  of  the
Gulf,  and  when  engaged  in  the  fortification  of  Mo-
bile bay.  in  1820,  was  made  inspector-general  of
the  southern  division.  He  went  with  Jack
Pensacola  when  the  latter  took  possession  of  Flori-
da, and  was  active  in  settling  a  dispute  between
him  and  the  Spanish  governor.  On  the  reduction
of  the  army  in  1822,  he  was  employed  as  adjutant-
general,  in  aid  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  who  was  reor-
ganizing the  war  department,  but  his  name  was
rejected  by  the  senate  for  political  reasons.  After
his  retirement  from  the  army  he  became  a  planter
in  Florida,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legislative
council  of  that  territory.  Under  a  commission
from  President  Monroe,  he  removed  the  Seminoles
from  northern  to  southern  Florida,  and  was  the
first  white  man  that  crossed  the  peninsula  from
the  Atlantic  to  the  Gulf.  Later  he'  returned  to
his  native  state,  became  president  of  the  South
Carolina  railroad,  and  engaged  in  commerce  and  in
rice-culture.  In  1853  President  Pierce  made  him
minister  to  Mexico,  and  on  30  Dec.  of  that  year  he
negotiated  a  treaty  by  which  a  new  boundary  be-
tween the  two  countries  was  agreed  upon,  and
which  considerably  modified  the  provisions  of  the
treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo.  By  the  Gadsden
treaty  the  United  States  became  possessed  of  terri-
tory now  forming  part  of  Arizona  and  New  Mexi-
co, for  which  $10,000,000  was  to  be  paid.  The
treaty  was  confirmed  by  the  senate,  but  with  such
modifications  that  Gen.  Gadsden  was  obliged  to
renew  his  negotiations  in  Mexico.  These  were  in-
terrupted by  a  revolution,  and  Gadsden  was  super-
seded before  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty.  He  then
retired  to  private  life.

GAGE,  Frances  Dana,  reformer,  b.  in  Mariet-
ta, Ohio,  12  Oct.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Greenwich,  Conn.,  10
Nov.,  1884. Her  father,  Col.  Joseph  Barker,  went
from  New  Hampshire  with  the  first  company  of
pioneers  that  settled  Ohio. Miss  Barker  married
in  1829  James  L.  Gage,  a  lawyer  of  McConnells-
ville, Ohio. She  early  became  an  active  worker
in  the  temperance, anti-slavery, and  woman's-
rights  movements,  and  in  1851  presided  over  a
woman's-rights  convention  in  Akron,  Ohio,  where
her  opening speech  attracted much attention.
She  removed  in  1853  to  St.  Louis,  where  she  waa
often  threatened  with  violence  on  account  of  her
anti-slaverv  views,  and  twice  suffered  from  incen-
diarism. In  1857-8  she  visited  Cuba,  St.  Thomas,
and  Santo  Domingo,  and  on  her  return  wrote  and
lectured  on  her  travels. She  afterward  edited  an
agricultural  paper  in  Ohio;  but  when the  civil
war  began  she  went  south,  ministered  to  the  sol-
diers, taught  the freedmen,  and, without pay,
acted  as  an  agent  of  the  Sanitary  commission  at
Memphis,  Vicksburg,  and  Natchez. In  1863-'4
she  was  superintendent,  under  Gen.  Rufus  SaxtOBi
of  Paris  island,  S.  C,  a  refuge  for  over  500  freed-
men. She  was  afterward  crippled  by  the
turning  of  a  carriage  in  Galesburg.  111.,  but  con-
tinued to  lecture  on  temperance  till  August.  1^'iT.
when  she  was  disabled  by  a  paralytic  shock. M  HL
Gage  was  the  mother  of  eight  children,  all of
whom  lived  to  maturity. Four  of  her  sons  8
in  the  National  armv  in  the  civil  war. Mrs.
wrote  many  stories  for  children,  and  verses,  under
the  pen-name  of "Aunt  Fanny." She  was  an
early  contributor  to  the  "Saturday  Review,-'  and


(JACK


(JACK


em


SublM  Plliladclpl.

,.  or  the  Old  Still-lloum

and  "(lertic's  Sacril
(.  \t.  I  .  Matilda  .l«.-l>  n,  reformer.  i>.  in  i

•I  March.  1826.  Ilcr  father,  Dr.  II.  Joslyn,
was  an  active  abolitionist,  and  aha  inherited  from
liim  an  interest  in  the  questions  of  woman  suffrage
inn l  slavery,  she  was  educated  in  Da  IVystcrand
Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1845  was  married  to  Henry
i-.tt  merchant  in  Cicero.  From  1852  till  1H61
nd  spoke  "it  reform  measures,  an < I  was
an  eager  advocate  of  the  abolition  of  slavery  at  any
cost,  hi  1862,  "ii  the  presentation  <>f  col.
eompany  of  the  I22d  New  Vc.rk  regiment.  Mrs.
Gage  made  an  addreaa  in  whioh  she  prophesied
the  failure  «>f  any  oourse  thai  did  not  abolish

In  1*72  she  was  elected  president  of  the
National  woman  suffrage  association,  and  of  the
New  York  state  woman's  suffrage  society,  and  she
is  now  (1887)  vice-president  of  each,  and  one  of  a
s|K><ial  committee  £o  arrange  for  an  international
council  of  women  to  meel  in  Washington  in  1888.
from  1878  till  1881  Mrs.  Gage  edited  and  pub-
lished the  "The  National  Citizen"  in  Syracuse,
N.  Y.  She  is  the  author  of  "  Woman  as  an  Invent-
or "(New  York,  1870),  and  "The  History  of  Wo-
man Suffrage,"  with  Susan  B.  Anthony  and  Kliza-
bcth  Cady  Stanton  (8  vols..  New  York,'  1881-6).

GAGE,  Thomas,  Irish  traveller,  1>.  in  Limerick.
Ireland,  in  1597;  d.  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  in
MB8l  His  father  sent  him  in  1619  to  Spain  to
study  in  the  .Jesuit  college,  l»ut  he  was  Ailed
with  a  great  aversion  to  the  Jesuits,  and  joined
Ike  Dominicans  in  1621.  He  was  afterward  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  in  the  convent  of  Jerez,  and
later  asked  and  obtained  leave  to  join  a  party
of  missionaries  to  the  Philippine  islands,  but  be-
fore his  departure  a  royal  decree  was  promulgated
forbidding  any  foreigner,  under  severo  penalties,
to  go  to  the  Spanish  colonies.  But  the  president
of  the  mission,  Jacinto Cairo, hid Gage  in a

id.  and  they  sailed  from  Cadiz,  2  July,
1627,  with  twenty-seven  Dominican  friars.  After
various  adventures  the  party  reached  Mexico,
where  Oage  decided  to  remain,  and  he  taught
Latin  for  some  time  in  the  convent  school.  In
1626  he  was  employed  as  Indian  teacher  and  mis-
sionary in  Guatemala,  and  afterward  obtained  the
rich  parish  of  San  Jose  de  Amatitlan,  where  he
occupied  himself  more  in  amassing  wealth  than  in
caring  for  his  flock.  When,  in  1686,  he  obtained
from  the  general  of  the  order  permission  to  return
to  Kurope,  he  had  9,000  ducats  in  his  possession.
As  the  provincial  put  difficulties  in  his  way.  he
turned  his  wealth  into  pearls  and  precious  stones,
and  on  7  Jan.,  1687,  left  his  parish  secretly,  and,
making  his  way  through  the  province  of  Nicaragua,
sailed  from  the  gulf-coast  of  Costa  Rica  on  1  Feb.
After  losing  most  of  his  fortune  in  an  adventure
with  Dutch  corsairs,  he  tinallv  reached  Spain  on
2*  Nov.,  1687,  and  in  1688  arrived  in  England,
after  an  absence  of  twenty-six  years.  After  a  visit
to  Italy  in  1689,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  par-
liamentary troubles  in  England,  and  publicly  ab-
1' tired  Soman  Catholicism  in  the  cathedral  of  St.
'aid  in  1644. Ho  was  rewarded  with  the  rectory

1,  and  there  prepared  for  publication  his
Work,  "  New  Description  of  the  West  Indies,  and  a
Journey  of  :t.:i<Mt  Miles  <>n  the  Mainland  of  Mexico

utral  America,  with  a  Residence  of  Eleven
Tears  in  the  Indian  cities  of  Guatemala,  with  a
(inimmar  of  the Poconchi Iju>-  London,

which  he  dedicated  to  Oliver  Cromwell.
This  1mm. k  made  a  sensation,  as,  although  it  was
full  of  gross  exaggeration- and  some  flagrant  un-


truth, it  laid  for  the  Aral  time  before  the  public  a

description  "f  the  Spanish  posMiwions  in  America,
the  knowledge  of  which  SO  far  had Inm-ii  jealously

rdad  by  the  authorities.  The  work  passed
through  several  editions,  and  was  translated  into
the  principal  languages  of  BurQUQ,  A*  Cage  in
his  work  had  treated  of  the  great  riches  of  Mex-
ico and  Central  America,  Cromwell's  attention
was  attracted,  and,  after  many  consultations  with
the  author,  an  expedition  against  the  Spanish
colonies  was  resolved  upon.  <>n  11  March.  I
a  fleet  of  twenty-three  sail,  under  Yice-Admi-
ral  Penn,  having  on  lioard  6,550  troops  and  ma-
rines, left  Bristol,  with  Cage  on  l>oard  as  guide.
The  fleet  arrived  In-fore Havana  on 16  April,  but.

as  the  expedition  had  bean  Knotted  ixforehand,

the  Spaniards  had  taken  measures  of  defence.
After  taking  some  booty  on  the  coast  of  Santo  I>o-
mitigo,  the  fleet  anchored  on  9  May  before  Spanish
Town.  Jamaica,  landed  the  troops  of  (ten.  Wimbles,
and.  after  a  desperate  resistance  liv  the  Sjiaiiiards,
captured  the  whole  island,  which  has  since  re-
mained a  British  colony.  Before  the  conquest
was  concluded.  Gage  died  of  dysentery.

GAGK.  Thomas.  British  soldier,  b.  in  Fi He.  Sus-
sex, in  1721  ;  d.  in  Kngland,  2  April,  1787.  He  was
the  second  son  of  Thomas  Gage,  Viscount  Gage  of
Castle  Island,  and  Baron  Gage  of  Castlebar.  He  was
appointed  major  of  the  44th  regiment  in  Febru-
ary, 1747.  and  at  the  time  of  Bratldoek's  exj>edition
had  risen  to  the  rank
of  lieutenant -colo-
nel. His  command
was  the  first  to  re-
ceive the  onslaught
of  the  French  and
Indians  at  Monon-
gahela,  9  Sept..  1755.
A  It  hough  himself  in-
jured, he  rallied  the
troops  to  aid  in  tak-
ing Braddock,  who
was  mortally  wound-
ed, to  a  place  of  safe-
ty. His  account  of
the  battle,  made  in
a  statement  to  Chal-
mers for  his  "  An-
nals," is  printed  in
the  "Massachusetts
Historical  Society
Collections,"  vol.  :54.
He  accompanied  Gen.  Abercrombie  on  his  Ticon-
deroga  expedition  in  1758,  as  colonel  of  the  80th
regiment  of  light-infantry,  (ten.  Amherst,  in  Au-
gust, 1759,  gave  him  command  of  the  Ontario  de-
partment, and  as  a  brigadier-general  he  participated
in  the  campaign  for  the  conquest  of  Canada  in  17V.*.
On  the  capitulation  of  Montreal  in  September,  1760,
he  was  appointed  military  governor  of  the  city,
and  his  mild  administration  of  this  department
contrasted  favorably  with  the  severity  of  MUTI
government  of  the  TJnohotl  district.  The  22d  regi-
ment was  assigned  to  him  in  June,  1762.  and  in  De-
eember.  176:!,  he  succeeded  Amherst  a>  commander-
in-chief  in  America, with  headquarter- at  New  York.
In  176o  be  surrendered  the  stamped  paper  to  the

municipality. He  directed  the  affairs  of  the  eran

until  rebruarv,  177:1.  when  he  sailed  for  Kngland,
leaving  (Jen.  Ilaldimand  in  command,  that  ofloBf
coming  from  the  southern,  or  Florida,  department,
where  he  had  bean  in  control  since  1766.  Cage's
Correspondence  with  Ilaldimand  during  this  period
is  contained  in  the **  Ilaldimand  Collection  "  in  the
British  museum,  copies  of  which  have  bean  made


r>7o


GAOE


GAGNON


for  the  Canadian  archives,  anil  calendered  in  the
annual  report  of  the  archive  deportment  In  a
letter  t.>  Haldimand  from  London,  4  April.  1774,
Gage  writes  that  be  has  been  ordered  to  Boston
with  four  regimental  to  bring  the  people  to  sub-
uiission  and  enforce  the  coercive  measures  of  the
government.  He  arrived  in  Boston  on  13  May.
17?  I.  and  on  the  17th,  having  spent  four  days  with
Hutchinson  at  Castle  William,  was  received  with
ceremony  by  the  council  and  civil  officers,  and  the
proclamation  of  his  commission  was  signalized  by
volleys  of  musketry  and  cheers  of  the  populace.
In  a*  public  dinner  in  Faneuil  Hall  he  proposed
"  the  prosperity  of  the  town  of  Boston."  But  the
hopes  entertained  of  his  acting  as  an  adjuster  of
the  differences  between  the  colonies  and  the  mother
country  were  short-lived.  He  came  to  Boston  as
the  civil,  but  in  reality  military,  governor  of  the
province.  He  had  some  acquaintance  with  the
Boston  ians  on  a  visit  in  1768.  when  he  came  at  the
request  of  the  king  to  quell  the  disturbances  in
regard  to  quartering  of  the  British  troops.  The
results  of  his  observations  are  given  in  two  pub-
lications, entitled  "  Letters  to  the  Ministry  from
Governor  Barnard,  General  Gage,  and  Commodore
Hood,"  and  "  Letters  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough
from  Governor  Barnard,  General  Gage,  and  the
Council  of  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay"
(Boston.  1769).  The  aspersions  on  the  people  of
Boston  in  those  letters  drew  out  an  "Appeal  to  the
World  "  bv  Samuel  Adams.  Immediately  upon  re-
ceiving official  notice  of  their  passage,  Gage  pro-
ceeded to  put  into  effect  the  Boston  port  bill,  and
the  offensive  measures  of  the  regulation  act.  On
30  June,  1774,  he  issued  a  proclamation  denouncing
the  solemn  league  and  covenant  as  unwarrantable,
hostile,  and  traitorous,  and  threatening  its  pro-
moters with  arrest.  The  text  of  this  document  is
printed  in  the  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Society's
Collections,"  vol.  12.  During  the  summer  months
of  1774,  Gage  had  his  headquarters  at  Salem,  that
being,  under  the  port  bill,  the  capital,  and  the  man-
damus council  being  held  there.  Early  in  1775  he
sent  expeditions  to  Marshfield,  Jamaica  Plains,  and
Salem,  to  seize  military  stores  and  disperse  the  mi-
litia. On  the  night  of  18  April  a  large  force  de-
parted from  Boston,  on  what  Gage  intended  to  be
a  secret  expedition  to  Concord  and  Lexington,  to
get  possession  of  cannon  and  ammunition  belong-
ing to  the  Provincials,  and  on  the  following  day
took  place  the  memorable  conflict  between  the
minute-men  and  Gage's  soldiers,  which  resulted  in
the  discomfiture  of  the  British.  Gage's  account  of
the  battle  of  19  April  is  printed  in  fac-simile  in
the  "Memorial  History  of  Boston."  On  12  June
he  gave  vent  to  his  displeasure  at  the  state  of  affairs
in  another  proclamation,  characterizing  those  in
arms  as  rebels  and  traitors,  but  promising  pardon
to  all  on  submission,  excepting  Samuel  Adams  and
John  Hancock.  The  Americans  fortified  Breed's
(Bunker)  Hill  on  the  night  of  16  June,  and  on  the
following  day  Gage  sent  Gen.  Howe  with  a  large
force  to  dislodge  them.  In  spite  of  contrary  advice,
Gage  determined  that  the  works  should  be  attacked
in  front.  A  Tory  historian  relates  that  he  told
his  advisers  he  was  going  "to  take  the  bull  by
the  horns."  and  adds :  "It  is  remarkable  that  the
general,  during  the  continuance  of  his  command
in  America,  never  once  ventured  an  attack  upon
American  intrenchments ;  he  had  fatally  experi-
enced the  consequences  of  taking  the  bull  by  the
horns."  Immediately  upon  receiving  Gage's  ac-
count of  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  the  government
ordered  his  recall,  and  he  sailed  for  England,  10
Oct.,  1775. A  brief  review  of  his  services  in  Amer-


ica, in  his  own  words,  is  given  in  "Qneriei  of
George  Chalmers,  with  the  Answers  of  Gen,  Gage,
in  Relation  to  Braddock's  Expedition,  Stamp  Act,
and  Gage's  Administration  of  the  Government  of
Massachusetts  Bay," published  in  the ** Massachu-
setts Historical  Society's  Collections."'  voL  84  His
subsequent  career  was  uneventful.  In  Apr
he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  17th  light  dra-
goons, promoted  to  the  rank  of  general  in  Novem-
ber, 1783,  and  in  1785  was  transferred  to  the  11th
dragoons.  He  married,  8  Dec.,  1758,  Margaret,
daughter  of  Peter  Kemble.  president  of  the  coun-
cil of  New  Jersey.  One  of  his  sons  became  third
Viscount  Gage.  The  following  works  represeoi
contemporaneous  publications  relative  to  his  con-
duct of  affairs  at  the  opening  of  the  Revolution:
"General  Gage's  Instructions  of  22  Feb.,  1778,  to
Captain  Brown,  whom  he  ordered  to  take  a  Sketch
of  the  Roads,  etc.,  from  Boston  to  Worcester  "(Bos-
ton, 1775;  reprinted  in  the  Collections  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts historical  society,  vol.  14);  "Narrative
of  the  Excursions  and  Ravages  of  the  King's
Forces,  under  Command  of  General  Gage,  19  April,
1775  "  (Worcester,  1775) ;  "  Lord  Ch m's  Proph-
ecy, an  Ode  to  Lieutenant-General  Gage"  (Lon-
don, 1776);  "Letters  of  the  Two  Commanders-in-
Chief,  Generals  Gage  and  Washington  "  (New  York,
1775);  "  Detail  and  Conduct  of  the  American  War,
under  Gen.  Gage"  (London,  1780).

GAGNON.  Lncian,  Canadian  patriot,  b.  in
Pointe-a-la  Mule,  parish  of  St.  Valentine,  Canada;
d.  in  Champlain,  N.  Y.,  7  Jan.,  1842.  He  was
among  the  first  to  take  part  in  the  agitation  in
Canada  against  the  British  government,  was  pres-
ent at  the  assembly  of  the  six  confederate  counties
at  St.  Charles,  23  Oct.,  1837,  and  left  the  meeting
convinced  that  insurrection  was  the  only  remedy
for  Canadian  grievances.  He  then  travelled
through  every  part  of  the  parish  of  St.  Valentine
and  the  neighboring  parishes,  preparing  the  people
for  the  struggle.  The  chiefs  of  the  insurrection,
who  had  flea  to  the  United  States  on  being  de-
feated at  St.  Charles,  decided,  after  reaching  Swan-
ton,  to  return  to  Canada,  as  they  were  convinced
that  Robert  Nelson  was  waiting  for  them  at  St.
Cesaire  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  force.  As
they  were  not  numerous  enough  to  venture  on  such
an  incursion,  Gagnon  offered  to  go  to  Canada  and
return  with  a  sufficient  number  to  give  the  enter-
prise a  chance  of  success.  He  crossed  the  frontier
during  the  night,  raised  his  native  parish,  as  well
as  the  surrounding  ones,  and  succeeded  in  organiz-
ing a  band  of  fifty  determined  men  with  whom  he
managed  to  recross  the  frontier,  although  it  was
well  guarded.  The  band  entered  Swanton.  where
it  was  received  with  enthusiasm  by  the  refugees
and  by  the  Americans  who  at  this  point  did  every-
thing to  help  the  insurgents.  Between  70  and  80
men  passed  into  Canada;  but,  on  their  way  to  join
Nelson,  they  met  400  volunteers  who  were  waiting
for  them  at  Moore's  Corner.  In  the  fight  that  en-
sued, Gagnon  was  twice  wounded,  and  escaped
across  the  frontier  with  great  difficulty.  He  was
soon  afterward  joined  by  his  wife,  her  mother,  and
his  eight  children,  who  had  teen  driven,  almost
naked,  from  their  home  under  circumstan
great  barbarity.  On  28  Feb.  he  attempted  to  enter
Canada  with  a  band  of  300  men  which  had  bed
organized  by  Nelson.  They  were  arrested  at  the
frontier  by  U.  S.  troops,  and  tried  for  violating  the
neutrality  laws,  but.  as  they  were  without  anus,
they  were  acquitted.  Gagnon  afterward  entered
Canada  and  was  charged  by  Nelson  with  the  data
of  keeping  up  free  communication  between  II
Point  andNapierville. He  was  present  at  the  fight


(i  MI.I.M.'H


GAI'


mi


Nor.,  1888,  and  succeeded  in  reach-
ing the  United  States  afterward. Tha  privathm

that  In-  had  endured  caused  consumption,  which
ultimately  ended  hi*  life,

».  \  1 1  I  \\i  i».  I  dw  in  Samuel,  |  ■ an,  b.  in
Cbariceton  district  s.  c.. it:  Jan.. 1*27;  d.  in

I,<>ui-vill.\ K\..  1 Pel  !!,.  was  graduated

at  tin-  University  <>r  Booth  Carolina  in  184
at  the  medical  college  of  the  tame  state  ii
II*-  removed  to  Florida  during  the  latt«-r  rear,  and

<1  there  until  Is".;,  when  he  tix/k  up  ins
HtJdence  in  New  York  city,  and  later  vi-ii«<i  Fu-
ri>|M-.  On  hi*  return,  be  again  nttled  in  New  York
city,  and  in  IHtiO  received  the  "  Flake"  fund  prize
for  an  essay  on  ozone.  In  the  Spring  ol  l*'il  ha
rcnioM-d  to  Baltimore,  and  afterward  joined  the
Confederate  army,  in  which  he  filled  various  pro*
feaeional  offices  until  the  eloaa  of  the  war.  In
May,  1865,  he  began  to  praotiae  in  Richmond.  Va..
ana  the  following  year  established  the  '•  I v i<  h-
mond  Medical  Journal."  wbiofa  he  removed  to
bocdsvilie  in  1868,  and  published  then*  under  the
title  of  the  "  Richmond  and  Louisville  Medical
Journal."  In  July,  1HT4.  he  also  established  the
'•  American  Medical  Weekly."  In  June,  1807,  he
was  made  professor  of  general  pathology  and
pathological  anatomy  in  the  Medical  college  of
Virginia,  and  in  May.  1808,  he  was  elected  to  the
hair  in  the  Kentucky  school  of  medicine  at
Louisville.  The  following  year  he  was  appointed
professor  of  the  principles  and  practice  of  medi-
cine, and  general  |>athology,  in  the  Louisville  medi-
cal college,  of  which  he  was  the  first  dean.  Hav-
ing loal  his  right  hand  at  the  battle  of  Seven
Pines,  in May,  1802.  Dr.  Gaillard  performed  his

Srofbaaional  and  literary  work  under  the  greatest
ifliculties.  He  was  a  member  of  many  medical
societies,  and  received  a  prize  for  an  essay  on  diph-
theria. In  1878  the  University  of  North  Carolina
conferred  on  him  the  degrees  of  M.  A.  and  LL.  I).
GAI  I. LARD.  John,  senator,  b.  in  St.  Stephen's
district.  S.  C,  S  S-pt..  I76S  :  d.  in  Washington.  I).
K»M  l'cl...  1898,  ||t.  was  0f  Huguenot  descent.
He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  Pierce
Butler,  resigned,  and  served  from  31  Jan.,  1805,
until  his  death.  He  voted  for  the  war  of  1812,  and
was  chosen,  on  account  of  the  death  of  two  vice-
presidents.  Clinton  and  (Jerry,  during  his  term,  to
preside  over  the  senate  pro  tt-m/xire  in  every  con-
gress from  the  11th  to  the  18th,  inclusive.  He
thus  filled  the  president's  chair  for  fourteen  vears.
Thomas  H.  Benton,  in  his  "  Thirty  Years'  View,"
bfl!  "Urbane  in  his  manners,  amiable  in  tem-
|ht.  scrupulously  impartial,  uniting  absolute  firm-
ness of  purpose  with  the  greatest  gentleness  of
manners— such  were  the  qualifications  which  com-
mended him  to  the  presidency  of  the  senate.
There  was  probably  not  an  instance  of  disorder
or  a  disagreeable  scene  in  the  chamber  during  his
long-ciitiniied  presidency.  He  classed  democratic-
ally,  but  was  as  much  the  favorite  of  one  side  of

the  house  as  of  tl t her.  and  that in the  high

jmrty  times  of  the  war  with  Great Britain,  which
so  much  exasperated  party  spirit."

SA1LLARD. Peter  ( 'urilcN, phvsician,  b. in
Charleston,  s.  £,  •»»  Aug.,  l*i:» ;  d.  there,  14  Jan.,
Bis mother, Rebecca Poster, was the
daughter  of  Mrs.  Brewton,  who  was  noted  for  her
patriotism  during  the  Revolution. Dr.  (Jaillard
raduated  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina,
Columbia,  in 1834,  and  at  the  medical  college  of
ie  name  in  Charleston  in  1837,  after  visit-
iis  in  the  interval. He subsequently  re-
turned to  the  latter  city,  where  he  studied  his  pro-
faaaion for several years. He then settled in


Charleston  and  BBfBl  Ml  life  then-.  He  succeeded
Ur.  s.  H.  Dickson  in  ih.">h  as  profaasof  of  mtdiftms

in  Booth  Carolina  medical  college,  and  was  also
assistant  editor  of  the  "Charleston  Medical  Jour-
nal," and  j)rcsidcnt  of  the  South  Carolina  medical
society,  fie  made  a  s|M.iaIty  of  hvgieiie  and  sani-
tary science,  and  Itelicved  that  yellow  fe\.r  i«  mi-
portad  and.  to  »  certain  extent,  contagious.

(JAILLARDET,  Theodore  Frederic,  journal-
ist, b.  in  Auxerre.  France,  7  April.  1*0*;  d.  in  Plessis-

Bosjohard,  France.  1:1  Aw^.,  1888. lb-  bagaa  his

literary  career  as  a  storv-writer  toward  the  end  of
Miration.  He  then  tamed  his  attention  to
the  stage,  and  t|ie  drama  "  La  tour  de  Ne«.le,"
written  jointly  by  M.  (Jaillardet  and  Alexander
Dumas,  the  elder,  in  1888,  involved  the  former  in
I  lawsuit  with  that  author  in  the  same  year.  He
sul>sc(|ucntly  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and
U-canie  the  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  ••  <  "ourrier
daa  Stats- 1  nis,"  juiblishe<l  in  New  V<>rk.  After
revisiting  France  in  1*1*  in  an  unsuccessful  at-
tempt to  obtain  a  seat  in  the  constituent  assembly,
he  returned  to  New  York,  but  subsequently  dis-
posed of  his  interest  in  the  "Courrier.'  Beapoka
for  Horace  Greeley  in  the  presidential  canvass  of
l*7v!.  and  in  1**0  returned  to  France.  M.<  Jaillardet
was  decorated  with  the  red  ribbon  of  the  legion  of
honor  in  1*4:t.  Besides  writing  portions  of  "  1m
tour  de  Nesle,"  he  wrote  "Struensee,  ou  le  mede-
cin  de  la  nine"  (1832),  a  drama  in  five  acts;  and
"Georges,  ou  le  criminel  par  amour,"  a  drama  in
three  acts  (1833).  Besides  his  dramatic  produc-
tions, he  wrote  the"Memoiresdu  Chevalier  d'Fon,"
drawn  from  family  archives;  "Profession  de  foi
et  considerations  siir  le  systctne  rcpuhlicain  des
fitats-Unis,"  presented  to  the  elector*  of  the
Yonne  (1848);  a  series  of  articles  and  letters,
principally  on  Louisiana,  Mississippi,  and  Texas,
appearing  in  the  Paris  "Debats"  (1839);  and  an-
other series,  published  in  the  "Constitutionnel "
and  "  La  Preaee  "  (1850-'00).

(MINE,  Hugh,  printer,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1720;
d.  In  New  York  city,  25  April,  1807.  He  began
business  as  a  printer  and  bookseller  in  New  York
city  in  l?f)0.  and  in  1752  established  the  "Mer-
cury," a  weekly  publication.  (Jaine  was  composi-
tor, pressman,  folder,  and  distributer  of  his  paper,
which  had  a  circulation  of  from  three  to  four  hun-
dred copies.  He  began  to  edit  this  journal  in  the
interest  of  the  Whig  party,  and  when  the  British
troops  neared  New  \  ork  city,  retreated  with  his
press  to  Newark,  N.  J.  He  soon  returned,  how-
ever, and  thereafter  devoted  his  "  Mercury  "  to  the
In  tarsal  of  the  royal  cause,  choosing  for  his  sign
the  "Bible  and  Crown."  At  the  termination  of
tie  Revolutionary  war  Game's  petition  to  remain
in  New  York  was  granted :  but  he  was  compelled
to  relinquish  the  publication  of  his  sheet,  and  con-
fine himself  to  the  printing  and  boohaalling  hast-
tie-s.  After  a  career  of  forty  years  he  retired  with
I  a  handsome  estate.  Although  Hugh  (Jaine  and
his  "  Mercury  "  are  frequently  alluded  to  by  his-
torians, his  career  was  of  itself,  an  uneventful  one.
He  led  an  exemplary  life,  and  was  a  man  of  active
business  habits  ;  but  he  seems  to  have  been  almost
without  conscientious  convictions.

OAINKS,  Film  ii  nd  Pendleton,  soldier,  b.  in
Culpepper  county,  Ya..  20  March,  1777:  d.  in  New
Orleans,  Ijs,,  0  "June,  184U.  James  Gaines,  his
father,  commanded  acompanv  in  the  Revolutionary
war,  was  a  member  of  the  North  Carolina  legisla-
ture, and  took  part  in  the  convention  that  ratified
the  Federal  constitution. Kdmund  early  showed  a

6 reference for  a  military  life. Having  joined  the
.  S.  army,  he  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  of  the


572


GAINKS


OAIXKS


6th  infantry  on  10  Jan.,  1799,  antl  in  April,  1802,
was  promoted  to  l^t  nontenant  He  was  for  many
Tears  actively  employed  on  the  frontier,  and  was
instrumental  in  procuring  tlie  arrest  of  Aaron
Burr.  He  was  collector  of  the  port  of  Mobile  in
1805,  and  was  promoted  to  captain  in  1807.  About
1S11  he  resigned  from  the  army,  intending  to  be-
come a  lawyer,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
1818  returned,  and  became  major  on  24  March.
He  became  colonel  in  1818.  and  at  Chrysler's  Field,
on  11  Nov.,  covered  with  his  regiment  the  retreat
of  the  American  forces.  Later  in  the  same  year  he
was  made  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  colo-
nel. He  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general,  9
March.  1814,  and,  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  de-
fence of  Fort  Erie,  in  August,  1814,  when  he  was
severely  wounded,  "  repelling  with  great  slaugh-
ter the  attack
of  a  British  vet-
eran army  supe-
rior in  number,"
he  was  bre  vetted
major  -  general,
and  received  the
thanks  of  con-
gress, with  a  gold
medal.  Similar
honor  was  done
him  by  the  states
of  Virginia,  of
Tennessee,  and
of  New  York.
He  was  appoint-
ed, in  1816,  one
of  the  commis-
sioners to  treat
with  the  Creek
Indians.  He  was
{i^v^-fiV  in  command  of
thesouthern  mil-
itary district  in  1817,  when  the  Creeks  and  Semi-
noles  began  to  commit  depredations  on  the  fron-
tiers of  Georgia  and  Alabama,  and,  having  moved
against  them,  was  in  desperate  straits  when  he
was  joined  by  Gen.  Jackson  —  a  circumstance
which  may  be  regarded  as  the  initiative  of  those
measures  which  in  1820  added  Florida  to  the
United  States.  In  the  troubles  which  arose  with
the  Seminoles  in  1836,  and  which  cost  Gen.  Thomp-
son his  life,  he  was  again  engaged,  and  was  severely
wounded  at  Ouithlacoochie.  When  the  Mexican
war  began,  some  ten  years  later,  he  made  himself
trouble  with  the  government  by  assuming  the
liberty  of  calling  out  a  number  of  the  southern
militia  without  orders,  and  was  tried  by  court-
martial,  but  not  censured.  He  was  a  man  of  sim-
plicity and  integrity  of  character. — His  wife,  Myra
Clark,  heiress,  b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1805 ;  d.
there,  9  Jan.,  1885,  is  known  from  the  extraor-
dinary lawsuit  with  which  her  name  is  associated.
Her  father,  Daniel  Clark,  born  in  Sligo,  Ireland,
about  1766,  emigrated  to  New  Orleans,  where  he
inherited  his  uncle's  property  in  1799.  He  was
U.  S.  consul  there  before  trie  acquisition  of  Louisi-
ana, and  represented  the  territory  in  congress  in
1806-'8.  He  died  in  New  Orleans,  16  Aug.,  1813,
and  his  estate  was  disposed  of  under  the  provisions
of  a  will  dated  20  Mav,  1811,  which  gave  the  prop-
erty to  his  mother,  Mary  Clark,  who  had  followed
him  to  the  United  States,  and  was  living  at  Ger-
mantown,  Pa.  His  business  partners,  Relf  and
Chew,  were  the  executors.  Clark  was  reputed  a
bachelor,  but  was  known  to  have  had  a  liaison  with
a  young  French  woman  of  remarkable  beauty,
Zulirae  des  Granges,  during  the  absence  of  her  re-


(^Pob»w~  eC *\ «^2-


Euted  husband  in  Europe.  Two  daughters  were
orn  of  this  connection,  one  at  Philadelphia  in
April,  1802,  the  other  (Myra)  in  New  Orieam  in
1805.  The  latter  was  taken  to  the  house  of  CoL
Davis,  a  friend  of  Clark's,  nursed  by  a  lira  lln-
per,  and  in  1812  went  with  Davis's  family  to  reside
in  Philadelphia,  where  she  passed  by  the  name  of
Myra  Davis.  In  1830,  Davis,  being  then  in  the
legislature,  sent  home  for  certain  papers,  and  If]  i  a.
in  searching  for  them,  discovered  letters  that  par-
tially revealed  the  circumstances  of  her  birth.  In
1889  she  married  W.W.Whitney,  of  New  York,
who,  in  following  up  the  discovery,  received  from
Davis  an  old  letter'  that  contained  an  account  of
a  will  made  by  Clark  in  1813,  just  before  his  death,
giving  all  his  large  estate  to  Myra  and  acknowl-
edging her  as  his  legitimate  daughter.  Whitney  and
his  wife  went  to  Matanzas,  Cuba,  saw  the  writer  of
the  letter,  and,  after  collecting  other  evidence,  in-
stituted suits  to  recover  the  estate,  which  included
some  of  the  most  valuable  property  in  New  Or-
leans. On  the  trial  of  one  of  these  causes.  Mrs.
Harper  testified  that,  four  weeks  before  his  death,
Clark  showed  her  the  will  he  had  just  made  in
favor  of  Myra,  permitting  her  to  read  it  from  be-
ginning to  end,  and  acknowledged  the  child's
legitimacy.  Baron  Boisfontaine  testified  that
Clark  told  him  the  contents  of  the  will  and  ac-
knowledged the  child.  On  this  and  other  similar
evidence  the  lost  or  destroyed  will  was  received  by
the  supreme  court  of  Louisiana  (18  Feb.,  1856)  as
the  last  will  of  Daniel  Clark,  though  of  the  docu-
ment itself  no  vestige  had  ever  appeared.  But  by
the  law  of  Louisiana  a  testator  can  not  make  de-
vises to  his  illegitimate  child.  It  was  proved  by
the  testimony  of  two  sisters  of  Myra's  mother,  one
of  whom  swore  she  was  present  at  the  ceremony,
that  Clark  privately  married  her  in  Philadelphia
in  1803,  a  Catholic  priest  officiating;  she  having

Ereviously  learned  that  Des  Granges,  her  supposea
usband,  had  a  prior  wife  living,  and  was  therefore
not  legally  her  husband.  Clark's  contemplated
acknowledgment  of  the  marriage  was  said  to  have
been  frustrated  by  suspicions  of  her  fidelity ;  and,
deserted  by  him,  she  contracted  a  third  mar-
riage. In  another  suit  the  U.  S.  supreme  court  de-
cided that  the  fact  of  the  marriage  and  legitimacy
was  established.  Mrs.  Whitney  survived  her  hus-
band, married  Gen.  Gaines  in  1839,  and  survived
him  also.  In  1856  she  filed  in  the  supreme  court
of  the  United  States  a  bill  in  equity  to  recover
valuable  real  estate  then  in  the  possession  of  the
city  of  New  Orleans,  and  a  decision  in  her  favor
was  rendered  at  the  December  term  of  1867.  The
value  of  the  property  claimed  was  estimated  in  1861
at  $35,000,000.  of  which  Mrs.  Gaines  had  up  to  1874
obtained  possession  of  $6,000,000,  and  numerous  ac-
tions for  ejectment  were  still  in  progress.  Only  a
small  part  of  this  came  into  the  possession  of  the
claimant,  the  rest  having  been  swallowed  up  in  the
interminable  legal  proceedings  that  preceded  the
final  victory.  In  April,  1877,  Judge  Billings,  of  the
U.  S.  circuit  court  at  New  Orleans,  rendered  a  de-
cision in  which  he  recognized  the  probate  of  the
will  of  Daniel  Clark  of  1813.  The  decree  com-
manded the  city  of  New  Orleans  and  other  defend-
ants to  account  to  a  master  in  chancery  for  all  the
income  from  the  property  during  their
and  deprived  them  of  their  titles  and  of  all  ac-
cumulation therefrom.  The  master  made  a  report
from  which  an  appeal  was  taken,  and  in  May,
1883,  judgment  was  again  given  in  favor  of  Mrs.
Gaines  for  $1,925,667,  with  $566,707  as  int
From  this  decision  a  fresh  appeal  was  taken  t"  the
U.  S.  supreme  court  in  the  month  of  June  follow-


(j.MN  i  :s


(.  U.UKKUY


m


and  thus  the  matter  stood  ej  her  death,
l  previous  decision,  Mr\  (iaines  could  ha\e
tamed  out  <»f  their  homes  over  4(H)  families  occu-
pying bind  and  holding  titles  from  the  city;  I»ut,
although  greatly  in  needof  money,  she  preferred  ob-
taining judgment  against  tlf  city  to  taking  harsh
measures. With this view she steadily declined

i!il  tempting  offers  of  money  from  those  who

dd  have  Bhown  little  mere)  to  the  Innocent  hold-

f  the  disputed  property. Although  wealthy

tit  the  time  of  (Jen.  (iaines 's  death,  his  widow  s|>ciit

her  entire  fortune  in  the  effort  to  free  her  inoth-

niime  from  stain  and  secure  the  millions  that
• Anally  decided  to  be  rightfully  hers. See
Wallace's "QmM Argued ami Adjudged in the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States."  vol.  vi.

(.  \  I  n  I  >.  John  P..  governor  <>t  Oregon,  It.  in
Walton,  Boone  co..  Ky. :  d.  in  Oregon  in  1858.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  liar,  and
began practice at Walton. He Mired in the

ican  war  as  major  of  Marshall's  Kentucky
cavalry  volunteers,  and  was  made  prisoner  at  In-
caroacion  in  January,  1*47.  He  was  subsequently
appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Gen,  Scott,  and  dis-
tinguished himself  at  the  battle  of  Molinodel  Bey.
While  he  was  in  captivity  he  was  elected  to  the
:H>th  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  6  Dec.,  1847,
till  21  March.  1849.  lie  was  then  ap|x>itited  by
President  Fillmore  governor  of  the  territory  of
Oregon,  and  filled  the  office  from  1850  till  1853.
He  never  returned  to  the  eastern  states,  but  re-
mained in  Oregon  until  his  death.

(•AINZA,  Gaviiioigah-een  thai.  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Biscay  about  17<>(»;  d.  in  Mexico  about  1N24.
He  came  to  Peru  in  1784  as  officer  of  the  regiment
of  Estremadura,  and  in  1809  was  colonel  of  the
regiment  <>f  Pima.  He  became  brigadier-general
in  1818, and  in  1814  became  commander-in-chief  of
the  Spanish  forces  of  the  South  of  Chili,  against
the  Independents.  One  of*  his  officers,  Ildefonso
Elorreaga,  occupied  Tacna  on  14  March.  Instead
of  marching  on  Santiago,  which  road  was  open  to
him  and  undefended,  he  lost  time  trying  to  prevent
the  juncture  of  the  forces  of  O'Higgins  with  OoL
Mac  ken  na.  He  was  defeated  by  the  former,  and
found  himself  in  a  perilous  position,  when  the
British  commodore,  Hillyar.  offered  his  mediation,
and  the  treaty  of  Lircay  was  finally  signed,  by  which
the  Chilians  recognized  Ferdinand  VII.  and  the
council  of  regency  during  his  captivity,  under  the
condition  that  the  Spanish  troops  should  evacuate
Chilian  territory  within  thirty  (lays.  The  viceroy
disapproved  of  this  treaty,  and  ordered  the  arrest
of  i  iainza.  and  his  transportation  to  Lima,  where  he
remained  a  prisoner  till  his  case  was  brought  before
a  court-martial.  27  May,  1816.  Sentence  was  pro-
nounced on  14  June,  ordering  him  to  be  put  at  lib-
erty and  to  proceed  to  Spain,  to  await  the  disposition
of  the  minister  of  war.  After  the  promulgation  of
the  constitution  of  1830  he  was  sent  as  suit-inspec-
tor of  the  army  to  Guatemala.  The  Spanish  major-
ity of  the  provincial  assembly  there  induced  the
fed.le  Captain-General  Urrutia  to  resign,  and  ap-
■►ointed  (iainza  in  his  place  in  March.  1821.  When
the  news  of  the  declaration  of  the  independence  of
Mexico  by  the  plan  of  Iguala,  24  Feb,  lo21,  arrived,

iza,  convinced  that  it  was  impossible  to  resist
public  opinion,  and  trying  to  save  the  province  for

ii,  convoked a meeting  of  all the  authorities
and  delegates  from  the  municipalities  for  15  Sept..
After  lone  delxate,  the  inde|iendence  from
Spain  was  proclaimed,  and  (iainza  was  intru

l-orarily with the supreme command. He
ward  favond  the  annexation  of  Guatemala  to
Mexico,  and  went  to  that  country  to  live.


(.  \l  IIIKR,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Md.,  in  17"»l ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D

.lime.  1*11.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  Kcvolut  ioiiary
army,  and  took  part  in  marly  every  battle  of  the  war.
He was commissioned major in the "Ic

i  o'i."  and  nrrsd  nndsr  Osa.  St.  Clair  ■gainst  the

Miami  Indians  in  Kovembsroi  that  year.  In  ll'Xl
he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  'id  in-
fantry, serving  until  1  .June.  l^r.'.  In  the  interval
he  was  in  command  at  Fort  Adams,  the  Irarricr
posts  on  the  Mississippi,  and  Fort  Stoddajrf  OB  the
MobO0  river.  At  the  end  of  a  long  and  honorable
career  in  the  army,  OoL  (iaither  returned  to  his
native  county,  where  he  n*sided  until  his  death.
In  professional  life  he  was  noted  for  his  strict  m-v,
as  a  disciplinarian.— His  nephew,  Henry  Chew,
patriot,  h.  in  Maryland  in  1777;  d.  in  I
Grove,  Md.,  12  Feb.,  1H4">,  represented  his  county
in  the  legislature  for  many  years,  but  is  chiefly  rc-
membarstl  for  his  heroic  conduct  in  defence  of  free-
speech  during  the  disgraceful  assault  by  a  neb  OB
the  office  of  the  "  Baltimore  Federalist,"  M  July,
1N12.  Mr.  Cait her  was  the  eldest  of  three  brothers
who  aided  in  repelling  the  attack,  and  when.  OB
promise  of  protection  by  the  authorities,  the  de-
fenders of  the  office  allowed  themselves  to  be  made
prisoners,  he  succeeded  in  escaping,  while  on  the  way
to  the  jail,  by  stepping  into  the  shop  of  a  friend  and
changing  his  hat  and  clothing,  which  had  been
spotted  by  the  blood  of  his  brother.  Fphraim,  who
received  a  flesh-wound  in  the  arm.  The  latter,  who
was  confined  in  the  jail  with  his  younger  brother,
William,  made  his  way  out  as  the  mob  entered  the
I  room  in  which  they  were  confined,  mingled  with
I  the  crowd,  and,  by  stepping  liackward  whenever  a
vacant  place  afforded  him  an  opportunity,  finally
reached  the  street  without  being  again  arrested.
William  was  not  so  fortunate.  After  being  knocked
down  and  otherwise  maltreated  by  the  rioters,  he
J  feigned  death  and  was  thrown  out  with  others  as
dead  into  the  prison-yard.  They  were  afterward
stabbed  in  the  hands  with  penknives  to  test  wheth-
er or  not  they  were  actually  dead.  William  bore
the  marks  of  these  wounds  until  his  death,  and
never  entirely  recovered  from  nervous  shock  pro-
duced by  the  horrors  of  that  night.  (See  Han-
son, Alexander  C.) — William  Lingan,  legisla-
tor, son  of  Ilenrv  Chew,  b.  in  Locust  Grove,  Mont-
gomery co..  Md'..  21  Feb..  1818;  d.  at  Berkley
Springs,  Va..  2  Aug.,  1858.  was  educated  at  Thorn-
ton Hill,  Va..  and  Hagcrstown.  Md.  He  was  early
elected  to  the  legislature,  and  served  sixteen  years,
a  portion  of  the  time  in  each  branch.  In  1851
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  senate,  and  the
same  year  was  appointed  one  of  the  board  of  vis-
itors to  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  was  also
made  a  director  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad
onltehalf  of  the  state,  and  bv  his  watchfulness  and
energy  saved  many  thousands  of  dollars  to  the  com-
monwealth. He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Harrison  and  Tyler  ticket,  and  also  on  the  Clay
ticket,  oanryiag  the  state  for  his  candidates  on  both
occasions. He  U-caine  general  of  militia.

GALKERKY.  Thomas,  K.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Naas,  County  Kildare.  Ireland,  in  1888;  d.  in  New
York  city,  10  Oct..  1898,  When  he  was  three  years
old  his  parents  emigrated  to  the  I'nited  States
and  settled  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  educated  at
Villanova  college,  IV,  studied  t  heologv,  and  was  or-
dained priest  by  Bishop  Newinann.  20  Pee..  1856.
His  first  mission  was  at  Lansingburg.  N.  V..  where
he  built  a  Gothic  church  at  an  expense  of  over
f:{:{.(HK),  and  near  it  a  convent  for  the  Sisters  of  St
MSSph.  He  had  In-come  a  inemlxT  of  the  AugUS-
tinian  order,  and  OB  30  Nov.,  l.sikJ,  was  appointed


.77-1


GALBRAITII


GALES


superior  of  the  commissariat  of  Our  Lady  of
Good  Council,  the  mission  of  the  order  in  Qw
United  States.  Mo  also  held  the  office  of  pastor  at
Lawrence.  .Ma-s.,  where  he  completed  a  church

building.  He  was  noxt  elected  president  Of  Villa-
nova  oouege,  and  daring  his  incambeney  rebuilt
the  college  and  entirely  reorganized  the  course  of
studios.  Be  "as  elected  provincial  of  the  Augus-
tinian  order  when  that  body  was  formed  into  the

Erovinee  of  Villanova  in  18*4.  Shortly  afterward
o  was  nominated  bishop  of  Hartford  by  the  poj)e.
He  sent  his  resignation  to  Rome,  as  he  did  not
wish  to  lie  separated  from  his  religious  brethren,  but
he  was  required  to  obey,  and  was  consecrated  by
Archbishop  Williams,  19  March,  1876.  His  appli-
cation to  nis  new  duties  weakened  a  constitution
never  strong,  and,  feeling  that  his  health  was  fail-
ing, he  set  out  to  seek  rest  at  Villanova.  When  near
New  York  he  was  seized  with  a  haemorrhage,  which
proved  fatal  shortly  afterward.

GALBRAITH,"  Andrew,  colonist,  b.  in  the
north  of  Ireland  about  1692;  d.  after  1747.  His
father,  James,  was  of  Scotch  descent,  and  accom-
panied William  Penn  on  his  second  visit  to  Ameri-
ca. Andrew  came  to  this  country  with  his  father,
and  settled  in  1718,  with  other  Scotch-Irish  colo-
nists, in  Lancaster  county,  Pa.,  where  he  had  re-
ceived from  the  Penns  a  patent  for  212  acres  of
land. He  organized  the  Donegal  church,  was  its

first  ruling  elder,
and  selected  the
site  for  its  build-
ing, which  is  rep-
resented in  the
accompanying  il-
lustration. This
church  was  built
about  1730  in
place  of  a  tempo-
rary log  structure,
of  ten  years  be-
fore, and  is  of
rough  stone,  laid
in  mortar.  The
Donegal  settle-
ment became  the
nursery  of  Pres-
byterian ism  in  a
large  part  of
Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  North  Carolina.  Mr.
Galbraith  was  the  first  coroner  of  Lancaster  county,
and  a  justice  of  common  pleas  for  six  years.  He
was  elected  to  the  general  assembly  in  1732,  and
was  a  justice  of  the  peace  from  1730  till  1747,  when
he  sold  his  farm  and  removed  to  a  place  west  of
the  Susquehanna  river.

GALE,  Benjamin,  physician,  b.on  Long  Island,
N.  Y.,  in  1715;  d.  in  Killingworth,  Conn.,  21  Mav,
1790.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1733,  and
studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Jared  Eliot,  of  Killing-
worth,  marrying  the  daughter  of  his  instructor  and
settling  in  that  town.  He  ranked  high  in  his  pro-
fession, and  was  also  skilful  in  agriculture,  invent-
ing a  drill  plough,  for  which  he  received  a  medal
from  an  English  society.  He  also  took  a  lively  in-
terest in  politics,  and  wrote  frequently  for  the
press,  He  published  "A  Dissertation  on  Inocula-
tion "  (1763),  and  his  method  of  prescribing  a  pre-
paratory course  of  mercury  was  commended  in
England,  and  subsequently  followed  in  this  coun-
try. The  same  year  he  contributed  to  the  Phila-
delphia "  Transactions  "  a  paper  on  the  "  Bite  of
Rattlesnakes."  He  wrote  essays  in  the  "  Trans-
actions" of  the  New  Haven  medical  society,  and
also  "  A  Dissertation  on  the  Prophecies."


GALE,  George  Washington,  educator,  b.  in
Northeast.  Dutchess  <-.,..  X.  v.. :;  |>, ,-..  [780;  d.  in
Galesburg,  111..  18  Sept..  1888.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  in  1814,  and  licensed  as  a  Presbyterian
clergyman  in  October,  1819,  when  he  took  chain
of  the  church  at  Adams.  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.  His
pastorate  was  distinguished  by  a  powerful  revival
of  religion,  in  which  Charles  (i.  Finney  and  other
eminent  men  were  among  the  convert*.  He  As-
signed his  charge  in  1828,  and  afterward
lishod  the  Oneida  manual  labor  institute  at  Whites*
lioro,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  from  1827  t  i  i
His  life  work  was  the  organization  of  Knox  col-
lege at  Galesburg.  111.,  in  1835.  He  was  a  man  of
strong  prejudices  and  acute  intellect  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.

GALE,  Levin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cecil  count  v.  Md..
in  1824;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  28  April.  1875.  lb-
was  the  son  of  Levin  Gale,  who  represented  the
Elkton  district  in  congress  from  3  Dec.,  1827.  till
3  March,  1829.  The  son  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  and  settled  at  Elkton,  Md.  Ifi  i  i  -
ing  with  great  success  in  his  profession,  he  secured
a  large  practice,  and  argued  many  cases  before  the
Maryland  court  of  appeals.  Mr.  Gale  is  the  author
of  "A  List  of  English  Statutes  Supposed  to  be
Applicable  to  the  Several  States  of  the  Union."

GALE,  Samuel,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  St.  Au-
gustine, Florida,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  15  April,
1865.  His  father,  a  native  of  Hampshire,  Eng-
land, came  to  America  in  1770,  as  assistant  pay-
master to  the  British  forces.  The  son  was  edu-
cated at  Quebec,  and  in  1802  began  the  study  of
law  in  the  office  of  Chief-Justice  Sewell  in  Mon-
treal. He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1808,  and,
having  been  appointed  a  magistrate  in  the  Indian
territories,  accompanied  Lord  Selkirk  to  the  north-
west in  1815.  Later,  when  Lord  Dalhousie  was
attacked  for  his  administration  of  Canadian  affairs,
Mr.  Gale  went  to  Britain  as  the  bearer  of  memo-
rials from  the  English-speaking  residents  of  the
eastern  townships  and  other  sections  of  Lower
Canada,  defending  the  viceroy's  conduct.  In  1829
he  became  chairman  of  the  quarter  sessions,  and  in
1831  was  appointed  a  judge,  which  office  he  held
until  ill  health  forced  him  to  retire  in  1849.  While
upon  the  bench,  he  maintained  the  right  of  the
crown  to  establish  martial  law  in  1837.  He  was
deeply  interested  in  the  freedom  of  the  slave,  and
when  the  Anderson  case  was  before  the  Upper
Canada  courts,  was  one  of  the  most  active  among
those  who  aroused  agitation.  Wrhen  the  Prince  of
Wales  visited  Canada,  he  prepared  a  congratulatory
address  from  the  colored  people  of  the  country,
which,  however,  was  not  received,  as  the  prince  was
desired  by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  not  to  recognize
differences  of  race  and  creed  unless  it  were  impera-
tive. He  fought  a  duel  with  Sir  James  Stuart
and  was  severely  wounded.  He  was  the  author  of
a  series  of  letters  to  the  "  Montreal  Herald,"  over
the  signature  of  "  Nerva,"  which  were  strongly  a  >n-
servative  in  tone,  and  made  a  powerful  impn

GALE,  Theophilus,  benefactor  of  Harvard  col-
lege, d.  in  1677.  He  was  a  doctor  of  divinity,  a
classical  scholar,  and  a  learned  theologian  and
philosopher.  When  he  died,  he  left  his  library  to
the  college,  more  than  doubling  its  collection  of
books,  which  had  been  already  enriched  by  gifts  of
Gov.  Winthrop,  Richard  Bellingham,  John  Light-
foot,  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  Richard  Baxter, and  others.

GALES,  Joseph,  journalist,  b.  in  England  in
1760 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  24  Aug.,  1841. He  was
originally  a  printer  and  bookseller  at  Sheffield,
where  he  established  and  published  the  "  Regi
His  democratic  principles  having^  involved  him  ir.


«;  kLES


G  \UNEE


m


difficulty  with  the  government,  be  sold  his  journal

in  1798  to  .Iiiiiks  Montgomery,  the  poet,  who  had

brought ii|>  in hi-  family,  ami  emigrated  to

the  Unitecf  States,  settling  in  Philadelphia. Then

litcd  the  "Independent  Gazetteer,"  in  which,

\i  a  proficient stenographer,  he  flr-t printed

hind  njM.rts  i>f  the  debates  in  OOOgrtMi In

■  in-  sold  the  paper  t<>  Samuel  Harrison  Smith
ami  removed  t>>  Raleigh,  N.  C.,  where  hi-  founded
a  new  ••  Register,"  the  publication  of  which  he  con-
tinued until  ho  had  reached  an  advanced  age,  when
In-  transferred  it  to  his  son,  Weston  Ualeigh,  and
t"  Washington  to  sttend  the  remainder  of  hie
life  with  his  eldest  son. Joseph. Here  be  a— r—  in-

<ted  in  African  colonization,  and  was  an  active

■ember  of  the  American  colonization  society  al-

HBoet  to  the  day  of  his  death. — His  son.  Joseph.

journalist,  !>.  in  Ecldngton,  near  Sheffield,  Ens;.,

:  d.  in  Washington.  I>.  ('..  21  July,

I,  whs  educated  at  the  Cniversitv  of  North
Carolina,  learned  printing  in  Philadelphia,  and  in

1  Uvaine  the  assistant,  and  afterward  the  part-
ner, of  Samuel  Harrison  Smith,  who  had  removed
the  "  Independent  Qaaetteer"  t<>  Washington  and
Bjhanged  it-  name  to  the  "  National  Intelligencer."
In  1*10  he  succeeded  to  the  sole  proprietorship  of
the  journal,  which  was  then  published  tri-weeldy.
In  1812  he  formed  a  partnership  with  his  brother-
in-law.  William  Win-ton  Seaton,  and  in  January.
1818,  began  the  daily  issue  of  the  "  Intelligencer."
which  was  Anally  suspended,  after  the  death  of
both  partners,  in  1H0SI.  From  the  time  of  their
coming  together  up  to  1820,  Galcsaml  Seaton  were
the  exclusive  report. t-  as  well  as  the  editors  of
their  journal,  one  devoting  himself  to  the  house,
the  other  to  the  senate.  As  a  rule  they  only  pub-
lished running  reports,  but  on  special  occasions
the  proceedings  were  given  entire.  Hut  for  their
industry,  a  most important  part  of  our  national

r rd would  now  be  lost. Notably  was  this true

in  the  case  of  the  memorable  debate  between  Hayne
and  Webster.  The  original  notes  of  the  tatter's
h  form  a  volume  of  several  hundred  pages,
and.  corrected  and  interlined  by  the  statesman's
own  hand,  were  carefully  treasured  by  Mr.  Gales.
At  this  period  he  had  abandoned  the  practice  of
reporting,  and  the  full  reproduction  of  that  par-
ticular oration  was  an  exception  to  the  custom  of
the  office.  The  "Intelligencer"  was  a  strong  ad-
vocate of  the  war  of  1812,  and  when  the  British
under  Admiral  Cockburn  entered  Washington,  the
anger  of  that  officer  seemed  to  be  especially  aroused
against  the  journal,  one  of  whose  editors  was  Eng-
lish by  birth.  He  at  first  proposed  burning  the
office,  but  being  dissuaded  by  occupants  of  the  ad-
joining houses,  wreaked  his  revenge  upon  the  print-
ing materials  and  other  property.  He  ordered  the
valuable  library  to  be  taken  into  the  street  and
burned,  himself  assisting  in  the  destruction,  the
ty|>c  thrown  from  the  windows,  and  the  presses
broken,  thus  causing  a  loss  of  several  thousand
dollar-.— Seaton,  journalist,  son  of  Weston  U.
.  !>. in Ualeigh.  N.C.. IT May, 1N2H;  d.  in

liington.  !>.('..  29  Nov..  1878,  was  graduated

at  the  university  of  North  Carolina  in  1*1*. A

month later,  on  the  death  of  his  father,  he  took

rial  charge  of  the Ualeigh  "Register." At

i-cginning  of  the  war  he  cut.  red  the  Con-
federate army,  and  served  four  years  as  adjutant-
ral  of  a  brigade  in  northern  Virginia,  being
tit  at  nearly  all  the  Utiles  fought  in  that  lo-
cality. After  the  war  In-  returned  to  journalism,
0  till  1809  was  connected  with  the
igh  "Sentinel."  At  the  time  of  his  sudden
death  he  was  superintendent  of  the  document*


room  of  the  C.  S.  house  of  representatives,  having
bean  appointed  at  the  owning  of  the  cm  h  congress.

<•  I  LI,  Francisco,  Spanish  navigator,  i>.  i  .
villa  in  1689;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1591.
The  want  of  a  pari  Qfl  the  coast  of  California,
when'  ships  arriving  from  the  Philippines  could
rexictual,  had  long  been  felt.  In  l"t"»",  I'edn.
I dc Contreras.  archbishop of Mexico and

(irovisional  viceroy  of  New  Spain,  fitted  out  two
rigal  ipulco,  ami  gave  the  command to

Gnu,  enjoining  him  not  only  to  select  a  place  for
a  |M>rt,  but  to  examine  the  whole  coast  of  North
America,  which  some  liclicvcd  to  extend  to  China,
while  others  thought  it  was  separated  bv  the
Strait  of  Aniau.  (iali,  who  had  sailed  as  far  as
•lapan.  gives  the  following  reasons  for  Ix-licving
that  there  was  a  strait:  "When  we  were  300
leagues  northeast  of  .Japan,  we  found  a  very  deep
sea  with  a  current  coming  from  the  north  and
northwest;  the  waves  were  long  and  high;  from
whatever  side  the  wind  blew,  the  current  and
the  waves  always  followed  the  same  direction.  In
this  way  we  sailed  700  leagues;  it  was  onlv  when
we  were  within  200  leagues  of  the  coast  of  Mexico
that  we  no  longer  felt  this  sea  and  current,  and
this  fact  makes  bm  think  that  a  channel  or  strait
will  be  found  between  the  continent  of  New  Spain
and  the  countries  of  Asia  and  Tartary.  Moreover,
we  met  in  this  interval  of  700  leagues  a  large  num-
ber of  whales,  besides  bonitos  and  other  such  fish
as  are  always  found  in  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar;
for  they  prefer  opening  their  way  through  (piarters
where  there  are  strong  currents;  this  confirms  me
still  more  in  the  opinion  that  there  is  a  strait."
(tali,  after  visiting  the  Ladnmes,  Manila,  Macao,
and  the  Liu-Kiu  islands,  sailed  eastward,  and  on  14
Oct..  landed  on  the  coast  of  America  at  37°  30'
north  latitude.  He  saw  a  high  land  wall  wooded
and  totally  free  fr<>m  snow;  then,  on  his  route  to
Acapulco,  he  saw  fires  along  the  coast  during  the
night,  and  smoke  in  the  daytime,  from  which  he
concluded  that  all  this  country  was  inhabited.  On
his  return,  he  found  that  the  archbishop  was  no
longer  in  office,  and  the  project  of  founding  a  port
on  the  ooatt  of  California  was  abandoned.  The
relation  of  Gali,  written  in  Spanish,  was  sent  to
the  viceroy  of  the  Indies;  it  fell  into  the  hands  of
Linschot,  who  translated  it  into  Dutch  and  in-
serted  it  in  his  work  on  the  "Track  Charts  of  the
Indies"  (Amsterdam,  1590).  Hackluyt  has  a  trans-
lation in  his  collection,  and  there  is  also  a  French
translation  from  Linschot  (Amsterdam,  1010).  In
all  these  works  Gali  is  called  Gualle.  There  is  also
a  Spanish  translation  taken  from  the  French  ver-
sion (Madrid.  1802).  Gali  intended  to  give  a  fuller
account  of  his  voyage,  and  some  think  that  he  did
write  a  larger  work,  which  has  l>ecn  lost  ;  there  are
fragments  of  it  in  the  national  library  of  Mexico,
under  the  title:  "  Viaje.  descubrimientos  roboar-
vaciones  de  Acapulco  a  Filipiims  y  desde  alb  a  Ma-
cao y  por  la  COOta  de  Nipon  a  la  Nueva  Kspaila."
The  narrative  in  existence  proves  him  an  expeft*
enced  navigator  and  a  talented  observer.  He  had
on  Inmrd  his  vessel  a  skilful  astronomer,  .luan
.laynie,  who  u-cd  an  instrument  of  his  own  in-
vention for  finding  the  variation  of  the  needle.

I.  VL1NEE.  clergyman.  He  was  a  nieinlier  of
the  order  of  St.  Sulpice.  and  accompanied  I^a  Sidle
OB  his  voyage  to  this  country.  In  1070  he  vi-ited
the  -ite  ..f  Detroit,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the  first
white  man  to  arrive  at  that  locality.  Ho  (Hiited
with  La  Salle  at  the  head  of  hake  Ontario,  and
with  a  fellow-priest,  named  Dottier,  coasted  the
southern  shore  of  Lake  Erie,  and  entered  the  I  >e-
troit  river. At  one  of their  camping-places  the


570


GALLAGHKK


GALLAHER


altar  service  was  washed  into  the  lake,  and  this
calamity  was  attributed  directly  to  the  evil  <>w.  It
happened  that  <>n  reaching  Detroit  they  stumbled
upon  a  >t. Hi'-  image,  which  Galinee  believed  to  be
a  representation  of  the  devil,  whereupon,  in  his
exasperation,  he  demolished  the  image,  ami,  with
the  help  "f  his  "coureurs  des  l>ois,"  buried  the
fragments  in  the  river.  He  prepared  a  map  of  the
great  lakes,  according  (o  which  he  does  not  seem
to  have  known  that  Michigan  was  a  peninsula.
This  was  the  second  map  made  of  this  district,  the
first  having  been  drawn  by  Champlain  in  1G32.

GALLAGHER,  Hugh  P.,  clergyman,  b.  in
Killvgonlan,  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  in  1815;  d.
in  San  Francisco.  Cal.,  in  March,  1882.  He  came
to  the  United  States  in  1837  and  completed  Ins
theological  studies  at  the  seminary  of  St.  Charles
Borromeo,  Philadelphia.  He  was  appointed  pro-
feasor  of  classics  a  few  months  afterward,  and  in
1840  was  ordained  priest.  He  was  placed  in  charge
of  Pottsville,  where  he  effected  great  reforms
among  the  miners,  and  established  a  temperance
society  which  soon  had  over  5,000  members.  After
having  charge  of  another  parish  in  Pennsylvania,
he  was  made  president  of  the  theological  seminary
in  Pittsburg  in  1844,  and  also  given  charge  of  a
large  parish  there.  He  founded  and  edited  for
some  time  the  "  Pittsburg  Catholic,"  and  in  1844
founded  St.  Francis's  college  for  boys.  In  1850  he
introduced  the  Sisters  of  Mercy,  for  whom  he  es-
tablished St.  Aloysius's  academy  for  girls.  He  also
founded  "  The  Crusader,"  at  Summitville,  Cambria
co.  In  1852  he  was  appointed  theologian  to  the
first  plenary  council  of  Baltimore,  and  in  the  au-
tumn of  the  same  year  went  to  California.  Hefe
he  built  a  church  at  Benicia,  aided  in  erecting  the
cathedral  of  St.  Mary  in  San  Francisco,  and  began
a  church  in  Oakland.  In  1853  he  established  the
"Catholic  Standard,"  the  first  Roman  Catholic
journal  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  edited  it  for  sev-
eral months.  He  went  to  Europe  in  1853,  se-
cured a  large  number  of  priests  for  the  Californian
mission,  and  placed  fourteen  students  in  ecclesi-
astical colleges  to  be  educated  for  the  same  pur-
pose. While  in  Ireland  he  secured  the  services  of
Sisters  of  Mercy  and  nuns  of  the  Presentation  or-
der for  the  schools  and  hospitals  he  intended  to
establish  in  California.  After  obtaining  large  do-
nations on  the  continent  he  returned  to  California
in  1854.  The  failure  of  Adams's  express  and  bank-
ing company  in  1855,  by  which  large  numbers  of
the  working  classes  were  impoverished,  made  it
necessary  for  them  to  seek  a  safer  place  of  deposit
for  Their  savings  afterward.  Father  Gallagher  was
selected  as  their  banker,  and  he  acted  in  this  ca-
pacity for  several  years,  during  which  time  several
million  dollars  passed  through  his  hands.  His
health  suffered,  and  in  1860  he  was  obliged  to  re-
tire to  the  northern  part  of  the  state,  where  he
purchased  a  large  building  at  Yreka,  and  converted
it  into  a  church.  In  the  same  year  he  built
churches  in  Carson  City,  Genoa,  and  Virginia  City.
He  returned  in  1861  to  San  Francisco  and  at  once
set  about  building  St.  Joseph's  church,  St.  Joseph's
free  schools,  and  St.  Joseph's  hall.  The  schools
formed  the  most  important  work  of  his  life.  In
1865  he  founded  the  Magdalen  asvlum,  which  he
placed  in  charge  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy. He  had

Kreviously  been  instrumental  in  founding  St.
[ary's  hospital.  During  the  commercial  stagna-
tion of  1869-'70  he  laid  before  the  legislature  a
plan  for  the  improvement  of  Golden  Gate  park,  and
obtained  an  appropriation  for  the  purpose.

GALLAGHER,  Nicholas  Aloysius,  R.  C.  bish-
op, b.  in  Temperanceville,  Belmont  co.,  Ohio,  19


l'Vl'..  1846.  He  was  educated  at  Mount  St.  M.uv's
of  the  West,  and,  after  finishing  his  theological
studies,  was  ordained  priest  at  Columbus  in  lst;s.
In  1888  ha  m stationed  at  St.  Patrick's  church,
Columbus,  attending  at  the  same  time  the  chapel
of  St.  Joseph's  cathedral.  In  1872  he  waa  ap-
pointed president  of  the  seminary  of  St.  Aloysfoa.
near  Columbus,  and,  when  Bishop  Rosecran
his  residence  at  St.  Joseph's,  he  was  made  pastor
of  St.  Patrick's  and  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  of
Columbus.  He  was  administrator  of  the  see  during
the  vacancy  from  October,  1878,  to  August,  1880.
He  was  next  named  titular  bishop  of  Canopus.  and
appointed  administrator  of  the  diocese  of  Galvet>
ton.  He  was  consecrated,  30  April,  1882.  Bishop
Gallagher  has  done  much  to  restore  order  in  the
diocese  intrusted  to  his  care,  but  finds  difficulty  in
keeping  pace  with  the  tide  of  emigration  flowing
into  Texas.  In  1884  there  were  forty  priests,  fifty
churches  and  chapels,  several  female  academies
conducted  by  Ursuline  nuns  and  others,  and  about
38,000  Roman  Catholics  under  his  jurisdiction.

GALLAGHER.  William  Davis,  journalist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1808.  His  father,
who  was  implicated  in  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798,
emigrated  to  this  country,  and  died  soon  afterward.
His  widow  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  young
Gallagher  was  apprenticed  in  a  printing-office  in
1821.  Four  years  later  he  began  to  write  occasion-
ally for  the  press,  and  edited  the  "  Backwoods-
man," at  Xenia,  Ohio,  in  1830 ;  the  "  Cincinnati
Mirror,"  in  1831,  to  which  he  contributed  a  num-
ber of  prose  tales  and  poems  that  attracted  much
attention  ;  the  Cincinnati  "  Western  Literarv  Jour-
nal and  Monthly  Review,"  in  1836;  "The  Hespe-
rian :  A  Monthly  Miscellany  of  General  Litera-
ture," while  also  engaged  in  the  management  of
the  Columbus  "  Ohio  State  Journal,"  in  1838 ;  and
in  1839  became  associate  editor  of  the  Cincinnati
"  Gazette,"  maintaining  that  connection  until  1850,
in  which  year  he  accompanied  Hon.  Thomas  Cor-
win  to  Washington  in  a  confidential  capacity,  the
latter  having  just  been  appointed  secretary  of  the
treasury.  In  1853  Mr.  Gallagher  removed  to  Louis-
ville, and  in  1854  joined  the  editorial  staff  of  the
"  Daily  Courier,"  but  withdrew  within  a  few  years,
and  retired  to  a  farm  near  that  city,  where  he  wrote
much  on  agriculture.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
again  employed  in  the  U.  S.  treasury  department
Since  that  date  he  has  been  a  resident  of  Louisville
and  its  neighborhood.  Mr.  Gallagher  first  became
known  as  a  writer  in  1828  bv  the  publication  of
"A  Journey  through  Kentucky  ana  Mississippi,"
in  the  "  Cincinnati  Chronicle."  His  first  poetical
contribution  that  attracted  general  attention  was
"  The  Wreck  of  the  Hornet.  This  was  reprinted
in  a  collection  of  his  poems  entitled  "  Errato  "  (8
vols.,  Cincinnati,  1835-'7).  He  edited  "  Select  ions
from  the  Poetical  Literature  of  the  West"  i Cin-
cinnati, 1841).  In  1849  he  delivered  the  annual
address  before  the  Ohio  historical  and  philosophi-
cal society,  of  which  he  was  president,  on  "  The
Progress  and  Resources  of  the  Northwest."  One
of  the  most  elaborate  of  his  agricultural  ess
his  "  Fruit  Culture  in  the  Ohio  Vallev."  His  lat-
est volume  is  "  Miami  Woods :  A  Golden  Wedding
and  Other  Poems "  (Cincinnati,  1881).  His  next
and  concluding  volume  will  comprise  "Ball
the  Border,"  "  Civile  Bellum,"  being  poems  of  the
civil  war.  and  "  New  Fables  of  the  Old  Fairir-.*'

GALLAHER.  John  Nicholas,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Washington,  Ky..  17  Feb.,  1839;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  7  Dec,  1891. He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  and  studied  law,  but
afterward  went  to  the  General  theological  seminary.


OALLARDO


GALLATIN


m


Hs  iw  nnlaiin'<i  desooo  by  Dr.

' .min-.  irrmml  I >i ~  1 1« »| ■  of  tin-  ili. k-c-m-.  in  ( -hrist
h.  Iiouisville,  Kv..  7  June, !*«>*.  and  pi
Bishop  J. P. B.  Wilmer,  in Trinitv  church,
Orleans,  I.h..  :w»  May,  ix<>i». During  his  dl
hs served a* assistant miiii-t.-r in Christ
li.  Ixxiisville,  and  on  his ordination  to  the

•1  became  rector  of  Trinity  church.
nix. He wtis  siih-c<picutly.  for  a  short time.
r  of  Memorial  church, Baltimore, Mil.,  and
afterward of  Zion church, New York city. In

i  lie  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  I),  from
hunbla, In  i*?'.t  be wm abetad faiafaop  of  LonM*
ana,  and  was  consecrated  in  Trinity  church,  New
Orleans,  5  Feb.,  1880.

I.  kLLARDO,  \imlio  I. .us  -al-vnr-d,.
can  poet,  1>.  in  Leon,  Guanajuato,  :t  Nov..  \Ki\  ;  d.
S  ipa.  Cal  .  'J7  Nov.,  1869.  In  his  earliest  youth
his  parents  settled  in  Guadalajara,  and  he  studied
in  the  seminary  of  that  city.  After  his  marriage
ive  himself  up  entirely  to  literature,  anil  pub-
lished many  minor  poems  and  pieces  for  the  thea-
tre, which  were  well  received.  His  style  is  simple
and  natural,  and  in  his  patriotic  poems  he  shows
an  enthusiastic  belief  in  the  ulterior  success  of  the
republic  and  the  overthrow  of  the  empire.  These
productions  attracted  the  persecution  of  the  Im-
perialists, and  in  1866  he  was  forced  to  emigrate  to
Francisco,  Cal.  There  he  continued  his  poetical
laliors,  contributed  to  the  Spanish  papers  of  the
state,  and  in  1868  founded,  in  San  Francisco,  "  Bl
Republicano."  His  works  are  three  volumes  of
jMMrns,  "Suefios  y  Sombras "  (Mexico,  1856),
••  Nubes  y  Estrellas  (Guadalajara,  1865),  and  "  Le-
yendas  y  Romances"  (San  Francisco,  1868);  also  a
collection  of  poems,  "Levendas  intimas,"  and  a
novel.  ••  Adah,  6  el  Amor  de  un  Angel,"  published
in  the  literary  section  of  his  paper  in  California.
He  also  wrote  about  twenty  comedies,  of  which
the  best  known  are  "El  Pint'or  da  Floreneia,"
'•  Ahrojos  del  Corazon,"  ••  Ix>s  Mart  ires  de  Tacu-
••  I  a  Ilechicera  de  Cordoba,"  and  the  drama
"  Maria  Antonieta  de  Ijorena,"  which  by  many  is
considered  his  best  production.

GALLATIN,  Albert,  statesman,  b.  in  Geneva,
Switzerland.  2\)  Jan.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Astoria.  L.  I..  12
Aug..  1S4!». Ho  was  descended  from  an  ancient

Ktrician  family  of  Geneva,  whose  name  had  long
en  honorably  connected  with  the  history  of  Swit-
zerland. His  father,  Jean  Gallatin,  was  engaged
in  trade,  and  died  when  the  boy  was  two  years  old,
while  his  mother,  Sophie  Albertine  Rolaz  du  Rosey,
survived  her  husband  seven  years. Young  Albert,
who  had  been  baptized  by  the  name  Abraham  Al-
fonse  Albert,  was  confided  to  the  care  of  Mademoi-
selle Pictet,  a  relative  of  his  father,  and  from  her
he  received  his  early  education. In  1773  he  was
to  a  boarding-school,  and  a  year  later  entered
I  niversity  of  Geneva,  where  he  was  graduated
in 17?!*, standing  first in mathematics,  natural
philosophy,  and Ijatin translation. The  liberal
spirit  of  the  times  was  not  without  its  influence  on
the  young  man. His  grandmother,  Madame  Su-
sanne  Gallatin- Yaudcnct,  was  a  woman  of  strong
character,  with  many  friends,  among  whom  were
Frederick,  landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel,  and  Voltaire.
Through  her  influence,  a  commission  of  lieutenant-
iel in the Hessian troops,  then serving in
was  offered  to  (Jallatin ;  l>ut  hedeeSned
it,  saying  that  he  would  "never  serve  a  tyrant."
In  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  his  family,  he  se-
\a  in  April.  17H0,  with  his  college
I.  Henri  S<  rre,  for  America,  where  they  might
"drink  in  a  love  for  independence  in  the  freest
country  of  the  universe." He  sailed  from  l'Orient
vol.  ii. — 37


late  in  Key,  i?^<).  and  reached  Boston  on  14  July.

His  c\|m  riences  for  tl nsuiti.

from  snonornrlnf ;  he  vnttdetw  from  Boston  so

.Maine,  when-  M  engaged  in  trading.  He  served
as  a  volunteer  against  a  threatened  invasion  by
the  British,  and  at  mie  time  was  in  temporary  com-
mand of  a  small  fort  in  Passamaquoddy.  His
trading  ventures  failed,  nnd  lie  returned  t<>  BostOU
with  a  reduced  purse  in  October,  178L  Here  f..r
a  time  he  SBpOOCtsd  himself  by  giving  instruction
in  the  French  language,  and  in  July.  17H2,  was
granted  jMTinissj.iii  to  teach  the  students  of  Ilar-
vard  in  that  language,  reOCJTJng  from  the  corpora-
tion a  OOmpsnSsflotl  Of  fIMM)  for  his  services.  When
peace  was  restored,  he  left  Boston  and  went  to
Philadelphia,  by  way  of  New  York,  to  deliver  the
letters  to  eminent  Americans  which  he  had  re-
ceived in  Paris.  In  Philadelphia,  through  the  in-
SnsnOS  of  his  friend.  Savary  de  VsJeonlon,  he  was
led  t<>  in\est iii large  tracts  of  laud  in  West  Vir-

finia.  This  venture  proved  snoOSOSfnl,  and  in
'ebruary,  1784.  he  settled  in  PnjettS  county.  Pa..
then  a  part  of  Virginia,  where  he  opened  a  country
store.  During  the  next  few  years  he  was  constant-
ly engaged  in  purchasing  property  and  in  locating
claims  for  others,  ■pending  his  winters  generally
in  Richmond,  then  the  gayest  citv  in  the  I'nion.
He  appears  to  have  l>een  interested  in  politics,  and
his  ideas  seem  to  have  influenced  the  speeches  of
John  Smilie,  who  represented  Favette  county  in
the  convention  of  ratification  held  in  Bsptembst,
1787.  Two  years  later  he  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  held  in Philadel-

Rh in.  and  was  among  those  who  shared  the  ant  i-
deralist  views  then  prevalent.  This  was  his
entrance  into  the  public  service.  In  1790  he  was
sent  to  the  legislature  from  Fayette  county,  and
was  re-elected  in  the  two  following  years.  He
took  an  active  part  in  its  proceedings,  and  in  17!W
was  elected  to  the  U.S.  senate:  but.  after  serving
two  months,  he  was  declared  ineligible  by  a  strict
party  vote  on  the  ground  that  he  had  been  a  citi-
zen of  the  United  States  only  eight  years,  having
taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  in  October.  17H5.  In
November,  1793,  he  married  Hannah,  the  daughter
of  Com.  James  Nicholson,  and  this  alliance  greatly
widened  his  political  connection.  A  year  later,
through  his  tact,  courage,  and  fidelity,  he  suc-
ceeded in  bringing  about  a  peaceful  settlement  of
the  "Whiskey  Insurrection."  Indeed,  historians
have  agreed  in  giving  to  Gallatin  the  honor  of  pre-
venting a  more  serious  outbreak.  At  the  subse-
quent election  he  was  chosen  to  represent  Fayette
county  in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and  also
was  elected  to  congress.  His  election  to  the  legis-
lature was  contest ed,  and  finally  declared  void  after
a  long  debate,  during  which  he  made  his  s|Kacch
"on  the  western  elections."  Another  election  was
then  held,  in  which  Gallatin  was  victorious.  After
remaining  in  the  legislature  till  IS  March,  he  ob-
tained leave  of  absence.  He  entered  congress  on
7  Dec.,  1795,  as  a  follower  of  James  Madison,  who
was  then  the  leader  of  the  Republican  opposition,
and  continued  a  memlx-r  of  that  body  until  his
ap|Kiintment  as  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1801.
Cms  of  the  first  measures  introduced  by  Iiim  was  a
bill  calling  for  the  precise  condition  of  the  treas-
ury. His  object  was  to  establish  the  Sinenses  of
the  government  in  each  department  of  the  service
on  a  permanent  footing,  for  which  annual  appro-
priations should  Ik-  made,  and  for  any  im|x>rtant
expenditure  to  insist  on  a  iptfltal  appropriation.
He  also  came  into  prominence  when  the  bones  de-
manded from  the  president  perms  connected  with
the  treaty  of  1796  with  Great  Britain. The  presi-


;»7s


GALLATIN


GALLATIN


dent  ret  timed  answer  that  he  considered  it  a  dan-
gerOU  precedent  to  admit  the  right  of  the  house
to  see  the  |)ii[>ers,  and  absolutely  refused  compli-
ance with  the  request.  In  the  debate  that  followed,
Gallatin  charged  John  Jay  and  other  Federalists
with  having  pusillaniinottsly  surrendered  the  honor
of  their  country.  In  reply  to  this,  Uriah  Tracy,  of
Connecticut,  said :  "I  cannot  be  thankful  to  that
gentleman  for  coming  all  the  way  from  Geneva  to

five  Americans  a  character  for  pusillanimity."
hroughout  his  congressional  career  Gal  latin  par-
ticipated in  all  of  the  important  debates,  but  al-
ways made  the  treasury  department  and  its  con-
trol, past  and  present,  the  object  of  his  unceasing
criticism.  The  establishment  of  the  committee  of
ways  and  means  was  due  to  his  suggestion,  and  he
was  ever  a  warm  advocate  of  internal  improve-
ments. His  third  term  closed  in  1801.  In  the
first  term  he  asserted  his  power,  and  took  his  place
in  the  councils  of  the  party.  In  his  second,  he  be-
came its  acknowledged  chief.  In  the  third,  he  led
its  forces  to  final  victory.  Besides  maintaining  his
views  in  debate,  he  published  pamphlets  on  "A
Sketch  of  the  Finances  of  the  United  States"
(Philadelphia,  1796) and  "Viewsof  the  Public  Debt,
Receipts  and  Expenditures  of  the  United  States"
(1800). When  Thomas  Jefferson  became  president,

Gallatin  was
made  secretary
of  the  treas-
ury, and  held
the  office  con-
tinuously un-
til 1813.  He
at  once  applied
himself  to  the
mastery  of  the
details  of  the
public  finances,
and  undertook
not  only  the  re-
duction of  the
debt,  but  also  of
the  taxes.  His
/7//  ^P /fo  management  of

s//U>esyf OayCCaZ^C- the  treasury  de-
^  ^_  partment was

eminently  suc-
cessful, and  he  soon  obtained  a  reputation  as  one
of  the  greatest  financiers  of  the  age.  The  public
debt  on  1  Jan.,  1802,  was  $86,712,632.25,  and  this
he  reduced  until,  on  1  Jan.,  1812,  it  was  only
$45,209,737.90.  In  his  annual  reports,  which  were
models  of  clearness,  he  pointed  out  methods  for
the  gradual  extinction  of  the  debt.  In  1812  his
report  says:  "The  redemption  of  principal  has
been  effected  without  the  aid  of  any  internal
taxes,  either  direct  or  indirect,  without  any  addi-
tion during  the  last  seven  years  to  the  rate  of
duties  on  importations,  which,  on  the  contrary,
have  been  impaired  by  the  repeal  of  the  duty  on
salt,  and  notwithstanding  the  great  diminution  of
commerce  during  the  last  four  years."  The  war
of  1812  then  occurred,  and  the  national  debt  in-
creased steadily  until  it  reached,  on  1  Jan.,  1816,
$127,334,933.74.  After  negotiating  several  loans,
he  severed  his  connection  with  the  treasury  de-
partment, and  he  was  sent  with  James  A.  Bay-
ard to  St.  Petersburg  as  U.  S.  commissioner  to
treat  for  peace  with  Great  Britain  under  the  me-
diation which  the  emperor  Alexander  had  offered
to  the  United  States.  The  British  government
refused  to  accept  the  intervention  of  a  foreign
power,  and  the  conference  was  not  held.  Mean-
while he  was  continued  as  commissioner,  and  sub-


sequently was  associated  in  the  negotiations  con-
ducted at  Ghent.  After  months  of  tedious  delay,
dnring  which  the  British,  Unshed  with  th<

on  the  continent  over  Napoleon,  made  ex-
orbitant demands,  a  treaty  was  signed  on  Christ-
mas day  of  1814.  Gallatin's  biographer,  Henry
Adams,  says :  ••  Far  more  than  oontemporarii
supposed,  or  than  is  now  imagined,  the  treaty  of
Ghent  was  the  special  work  and  the  peculiar  tri-
umph of  Mr.  Gallatin."  John  Austin  Stevens
says:  "By  his  political  life  Mr.  Gallatin  acquired
an  American  reputation :  by  his  management  of
the  finances  of  tne  United  States  he  plac.  >1  himssq
among^  the  first  political  economists  of  the  day;
but  his  masterly  conduct  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent
showed  him  the  equal  of  the  best  of  Europetjq
statesmen  on  their  own  peculiar  ground  of  diplo-
macy." His  services  were  rewarded  with  the  ap-
pointment of  minister  to  France  in  February,  1815,
but  he  spent  some  time  in  travel  both  in  EuroM
and  in  the  United  States,  finally  entering  on  tne
duties  of  his  office  in  Januarv,  1816.  Meanwhile
he  took  part  in  the  commercial  convention  held  in
London  during  the  summer  of  1815.  During  his
career  in  Paris  he  aided  John  Quincy  Adams  in
preparing  a  commercial  treaty  with  Great  Britain,
and  also  was  associated  with  William  Eustis  in
negotiating  a  treaty  with  the  Netherlands  in  1817.
He  left  France  in  1823,  and  returned  to  the  United
States,  where  he  was  occupied  for  some  time  in
attention  to  his  private  affairs,  refusing  a  seat  in
the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  the  navy,  and  declining
to  be  a  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency,  to  which
he  was  nominated  by  the  Democratic  party.  In
1826,  at  the  solicitation  of  President  Adams,  he  ac-
cepted the  appointment  of  envoy  extraordinary  to
Great*  Britain,  and  negotiated  commercial  treaties
by  means  of  which  full  indemnification  was  ob-
tained from  England  for  injuries  that  had  been
sustained  by  citizens  of  the  United  States  in  con-
sequence of  violations  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  he  settled  in  New
York  city,  where  from  1831  till  1839,  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  National  bank  of  New  York.  In  1831
he  published  his  "  Considerations  on  the  Currency
and  Banking  System  of  the  United  States,"  and
during  the  same  year  he  was  a  member  of  the  free-
trade  convention  held  in  Philadelphia,  preparing
for  that  body  the  memorial  which  was  submitted
to  congress.  Mr.  Gallatin  was  likewise  associated
in  the  movement  which  led  in  October,  1830,  to
the  foundation  of  the  New  York  university.  He
became  the  first  president  of  the  council,  but  re-
signed at  the  end  of  the  year.  After  his  resigna-
tion from  the  bank,  his  life  was  devoted  to  litera-
ture, and  especially  to  historical  and  ethnological
researches.  In  1839  he  prepared  an  argument  in
behalf  of  the  United  States  to  be  laid  before  t  In-
king of  the  Netherlands  as  an  umpire  on  the  Maine
boundary  question,  and  in  connection  with  this
undertaking  he  collected  a  statement  of  the  facts,
which  he  revised  and,  together  with  the  speech  of
Daniel  Webster,  a  copy  of  the  Jay  treaty,  and  eight
maps,  published  at  his  own  expense  ius  the  "
of  the  United  States  to  the  Northeastern  Boun-
dary "  (New  York.  1840).  He  presided  in  1844  at  |
meeting  held  in  New  York  to  protest  against  the
annexation  of  Texas,  and,  in  the  course  of  the  ad-
dress which  he  made,  said  that  "the  resolution  of
the  house  declaring  the  treaty  of  annexation  by
the  United  States  of  America  and  the  republic  of
Texas  to  be  the  fundamental  law  of  union  bt
them  was  a  direct  and  undisguised  usurpation  ol
power  and  a  violation  of  the  constitution."  The
war  with  Mexico  he  regarded. as  "the  only  blot


■MB  the  escutcheon  of  the  United  States,"  and  ho
published  ••  Peace  with Mexico"  (184?)  unci

pamphlets  of  which  180.000
circulated,  ami  which  hud  un-
doubted influence  in  bringing  iiIm.ui  peace.  In
1840,  when  L>rd  Ashl'iirli.n  visited  the  United
States  in  connection  with  tin-  treaty  which  Itcars
me,  Mr.  (iallatin  published  a  Pamphlet  on
Question,"  which  was  distinguished
by  impartiality,  moderation,  and  power  of  reason-
ing. It  put  before  the  i pie,  a* well  m  the  Dt-
ps, tin-  precise  merits  of  the  OUUUuteitj,
and  powerfully  contributed  to  the  ultimate  jicace-
ful  settlement.  In  1K-12  he  was  associated  in  the
establishment  "f  the  American  ethnological  society,
becoming  its  tlrst  president,  and  in  lH4.'t  he  was
'■>  hold  a  similar  ofllcr  in  the  New  York  his-
torical society,  an  honor  which  was  annually  con-
ferred on  him  until  his  death.  His  scientific  pub-
lieatious  include  "Synopsis  of  the  Indian  Tribes
within  the  United  States  east  of  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains, and  in  the  British  and  Russian  Possessions  in
North  America  "(Cambridge,  188(1)  and  "  Notes  on
the  Semi-Cmliied  Nations  of  Mexico.  Yucatan,  and
Central  America,  with  Conjectures  on  the  Origin
of  Semi  -Civilization  in  America"  (New  York.
John  Austin  Stevens  says  of  him:  "  To  a
higher  degree  than  any  American,  native  or  for-
eign born,  unless  Franklin,  with  whose  broad  na-
ture he  had  many  traits  in  common,  Albert  (Jalla-
tin  deserves  the  proud  title,  aimed  at  by  many,
reached  by  few,  of  Citizen  of  the  World."  See
"Writings  of  Alln-rt  Gallatin,"  by  Henry  Adams
■  vols..  Philadelphia,  1879) :  "  Life  of  Albert  Gal-
latin." by  Henry  Adams  (1879);  and  "Albert  Gal-
latin." by  John  Austin  Stevens,  in  "American
Statesman  Series"  (Boston,

(■  \  LLAUDET,  Thomas  Hopkins,  educator,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  10  Dec.  ITS? :  d.  in  Hartford.
Conn.,  9  Sept.,  1851.  His  family  was  of  Huguenot
origin.  At  an  early  age  he  moved  with  his  par-
ents to  Hartford,  Conn.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  INT),  and  after  hesitating  for  some  time
as  to  whether  he  should  study  law, engage  in  trade,
or  study  divinity,  entered  the  Theological  seminary
at  Andover  in  1811.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1814.  His  attention  having  been  called  to  the  neg-
lected condition  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  m  this
country,  he  went  to  Kurope  in  1815,  visiting  in  suc-
cession London,  Kd  in  burgh,  and  Paris.  The  work
which  had  been  begun  in  France  in  1760,  by  De
PEpee,  was  successfully  carried  on  by  the  AbW
Sicard  :  and  that  which  had  been  begun  near  Ed-
inburgh, at  an  earlier  date,  l»y  Thomas  Rraidwood,
and  later  transferred  to  London,  was  under  Un-
charge of  Dr.  Joseph  Wats.ui.  a  nephew  of  Braid-
HfaoL  Gallaudet  made  himself  familiar  with  the
meth(Mls  in  use  at  both  establishments,  and,  return-
ing to  the  United  States  in  1816,  he  brought  with
assistant  Ijaurcnt  Clerc,  a  deaf-mute,  and
pupil  of  Sicard.  In  the  following  year,  his  ar-
rangements having  been  completed,  he  began  work
in  Hartford.  Conn.,  with  seven  pupils.  His  school
came  a  prosjierous  asylum,  and  its  founder,
niiud  much  encouragement,  remained  in  charge
■  lent  until  1K10,  when  he  resigned  on  ac-
•  •  r  ill  health.  He  continued,  however,  to  take
if*,  part  in  the  management  of  the  institu-
tion, as  one  of  its  directors,  and  to  give  it  the
benefit  of  his  wisdom  and  experience.  In  1888  he
became  chaplain  of  the  ret  real  for  the  insane  at
Hartford.  Conn.,  which  office  he  retained  till  his
death.  During  his  lifetime  he  published  extensive-
A,.rk>  are  "Sermons  Preached  to
an  English  <  ionfregatioo  in  Paris"  (I^mdon,  1818);


GALLAUDET


m


'•  Bible  St..ries  for  the  Young";  M Child's  B<-.k  of
the  Soul"  (8d  «<l..  I860);  ••  Youth's  Book  of  Natu-
ral Theology,"  and  other  similar  work".  He  also
WW  ■  contributor  to  the  -Annals  of  the  Deaf
and  Dumli"  (Hartford).  A  biography  of  0
laudet  was  published  by  Hainan  Humphrey.  D.  D.
>).— His  wife,  Sophiu  Fowler,  b>
in  liuilford.  Conn.,  in  1?1*H;  d.  m  Washington.
1»  i  ..  18  May.  1877.  was  one  of  Mr.  (iallaici
deaf-mute  pupils.  She  gave  hearty  aid  both  to
her  husliand  ami  to  her  ML  Edward  M.  (ial-
lauilet,  in  the  s(.|„,ols  .,f  which  they  respectively
had  charge.— Their  son.  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hartford.  Conn..  .'{  June,  1*>'2,  was  graduated
at  Trinity  college  in  1*12.  He  taught  in  the  New
York  institution  for  deaf-mutes  from  1848  till
1858,  and  in  the  mean  time  took  Mdm  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  U-ing  ordained  dea-
con in  June,  1N50,  and  iiriest  in  June.  I86L  lb-
founded  St.  Ann's  church  for  deaf-mutes  in  Octo-
Ikt,  1K52.  and  in  1808  a  chunh  and  rectory  were
secured  in  Eighteenth  street,  near  Fifth  avenue.
In  addition  to  bli  many  other  duties.  Oallaudet
accepted  the  pastorate  of  the  Sisterhood  of  the
Good  Shepherd  in  April.  18(59,  and  the  chaplain-
cv  of  the"  midnight  mission"  in  November,  18TL
In  OetOOer,  1K72.  "The  Church  Mission  to  Deaf-
Mutes"  was  incorporated,  and  he  was  appointed
its  general  mannger.  In  this  capacity  he  lias  l«  •  n
the  pioneer  of  church  work  among  deaf-mutes
throughout  the  country,  and  institutions  similar  to
St.  Ann's  have  grown  up  in  Philadelphia.  Balti-
more. Albany.  Boston,  and  other  cities.  He  has  at-
tended all  the  conventions  of  teachers  of  deaf-
mutes  held  in  this  country,  and  was  present  at  the
convention  held  at  Milan  in  September,  1880,  and
at  that  held  in  Brussels  in  August,  1KXS.  In  the
summer  of  1886  he  visited  California  in  the  inter-
est of  deaf-mutes.  In  Decemlier,  1885,  he  founded
the  "Gallaudet  Home  for  Deaf-Mutes,"  on  a  farm
on  the  Hudson  river,  between  New  Hamburg  and
Poughkeepsie,  especially  intended  for  the  aged  and
infirm.  lie  resigned  the  chaplaincy  of  the  mid-
night mission  in  1874.  but  continues  to  hold  his
other  offices  (1887).  Trinity  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1862,  and  he  has  been  a  trustee  of  that
college  since  1888.  He  has  prepared  from  the  first
the  annual  reports  of  the  "Church  Mission."  and
has  been  a  contributor  to  the  "American  Annals
of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb."  and  other  periodicals.
— Another  son,  Edward  Miner,  educator,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn..  B  Feb.,  1887,  was  educated  at
Trinity,  but  not  graduated.  He  began  to  teach  in
1888  in  the  Hartford  institution  which  his  father
had  founded,  and  in  1881  at  the  invitation  of
Amos  Kendall,  went  to  Washington.  D.  C,  with
his  mother,  and  organized  the  Columbian  institu-
tion for  the  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind.  In  1864  he
tided  in  establishing  the  National  deaf-mute  col-
lege, became  its  president,  and  in  1865  also  profes-

f  moral  and  political  science.  He  visited  the
principal  deaf  am!  dumb  institutions  of  Euro|>c  in
1887,  and  in  1868,  after  his  return,  published  an
elalM irate  report  of  his  observations.  In  1880,  in
compliance  with  a  request  made  bv  principals  of
schools  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in  this  country,  he
attended  the  international  congress  of  instructors
of  deaf-mutes  held  at  Milan,  Italy.  In  18X1  he
succeeded  James  A.  Garfield  as  president  of  the
literary socictv at Washington, D.  C He was

lent of  the  Convention  of  American  instruc-
tors of  deaf-mutes,  held  at  Jacksonville,  111.,  in  LC
In  1888  he  visited  Kngland.  at the  wqnetl  of  the
British  government,  and  gave  information  to  the
royal  commission  on  the  education of  the  blind.


580


GALLISON


OALLITZIX


deaf.  nn«l  ilumh,  regarding  the  system  pursued  in
ttir  United  Slat.-.  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  I>.  in  iw.».  and  Columbian
university  that  <>f  Ph.  D.  in  the  same  year.  Be  tl
the  author  of  a  popular  "  Manual  of  International
Ijaw"  (1H79),  ami  "Life  of  Thomas  Hopkins  Gal-
laudct  " '  i.\.'w  York,  1888).

i. ALLISON,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Marblehead,
Mass..  in  October,  1788;  d.  25  Dec,  1820.  After  he
WM  graduated  at  Harvard,  in  1807,  he  studied  law
and  practised  in  Marblehead.  and  then  removed  to
Boston.  For  several  years  he  edited  the  "  Weekly
Meoeenger,"  and  advocated  plans  for  the  gradual
abolition  of  slavery  in  the  United  States.  He  pub-
lished "Reports  in  the  Circuit  Court"  (2  vols.,
1807;  2d  «'<l.,  Boston,  1845),  and  an  "Address"  to
the  Peace  society,  of  which  he  was  a  member.

GALLITZIN,  Demetrius  Augustine,  clergy-
man, b.  in  the  Hague,  Holland,  22  Dec,  1770;  d.
in  Loretto,  Cambria  co.,  Pa.,  6  May,  1841.  His
father  was  Russian  ambassador  to  Holland.  The
Gallitzin  family  was  one  of  the  oldest  and  noblest
in  Russia,  and  had  always  exercised  a  great  and
sometimes  a  controlling  influence  in  the  affairs  of
that  country.  The  mother  of  the  young  prince
was  a  daughter  of  Field-Marshal  Count  von  Schmet-
tau,  one  of  the  favorite  generals  of  Frederick  the
Great.  Both  father  and  mother  were  admirers  of
Voltaire  and  Diderot,  and  their  son  was  brought
up  without  religious  training.  In  1786  the  prin-
cess, after  a  severe  illness,  returned  to  the  Roman
Catholic  church,  of  which  she  had  once  been  a
member.  A  year  afterward  Demetrius  also  became
a  Christian,  taking  the  name  of  Augustine  on  his
conversion.  He  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  the
Austrian  general,  Van  Lilien,  in  1792,  in  the  first
campaign  against  France.  Before  its  close  he  was
dismissed,  the  Austrian  government  having  decid-
ed to  discharge  foreign  officers.  His  parents  now
wished  him  to  travel,  and  the  unsettled  state  of
the  continent  determined  them  to  send  Demetrius
to  the  United  States.  The  Rev.  Felix  Brosius  was
appointed  his  tutor.  To  avoid  the  inconvenience
of  rank,  he  took  the  name  of  Augustine  Schmettau,
winch  was  afterward  Americanized  into  Smith,  and
was  borne  by  him  for  some  time  after  his  ordina-
tion. Supplied  with  letters  of  introduction  from
the  prince-bishops  of  Hildesheim  and  Paderborn  to
Bishop  Carroll,  to  whom  his  mother  confided  him,
he  sailed  from  Rotterdam,  18  Aug.,  1792.  He  ar-
rived in  Baltimore  on  28  Oct.,  shortly  afterward
expressed  a  wish  to  become  a  priest,  and  entered
the  seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  Baltimore,  with  this
intention.  Both  his  parents  were  dissatisfied  with
his  choice,  and  his  father,  who  had  procured  him
a  commission  in  the  Russian  army,  begged  him  to
come  home,  saying  that  his  becoming  a  priest
would  of  itself  prevent  his  succession  to  the  family
inheritance.  The  young  prince,  however,  perse-
vered, and  was  ordained  on  18  March,  1795.  He
was  the  second  priest  ordained  in  the  United
States,  and  the  first  who  received  holy  orders  in
this  country,  as  the  Rev.  Theodore  Bazin  had  been
made  deacon  in  France  before  coming  to  America.
Desiring  to  remain  in  the  seminary.  Father  Gallit-
zin, or  Father  Smith,  as  he  was  then  called,  be-
came a  member  of  the  order  of  Sulpitians.  But
Bishop  Carroll,  with  a  view  to  recruiting  his  health,
sent  him  to  the  mission  at  Port  Tobacco.  Finding
that  he  was  not  improving,  the  bishop  directed  him
to  go  to  the  extensive  mission  of  which  Conewago
was  the  centre,  and  at  which  his  friend,  Father
Brosius,  then  was.  His  reply  to  the  bishop  was  of
such  a  character  as  to  call  forth  a  severe  repri-
mand and  a  summons  to  Baltimore. Here  he  was


placed  in  charge  of  all  the  German  Catholics  of
the  city.  In  179(5  he  entered  on  the  Conewago
mission,  reeiding  in  Taneytown,  and  visiting  sev-
eral places  in  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania.  The
zeal  of  the  young  priest  was  not  always  according
to  prudence.  His  too  great  haste  to  correct  abuses,
ana  the  complaints  made  of  his  arbitrary  meas-
ures, called  forth  a  second  letter  of  admonition
from  Bishop  Carroll  in  1798.  In  1799  the  Roman
Catholics  of  Maguire's  settlement  petitioned  the
bishop  for  a  resident  pastor.  Father  Gallitzin  was
appointed,  and  at  once  set  about  the  work  of
lishing  a  Roman  Catholic  colony.  The  district  he
selected  for  this  purpose  was  one  of  the  wildest
and  most  uncultivated  of  the  Alleghanies,  in  what
is  now  Cambria  county,  Pa.  It  contained  hardly  a
dozen  Roman  Catholic  families.  In  1800  he  had  a
church  built  of  pine  logs,  the  only  one  between
Lancaster  and  St.  Louis.  He  bought  more  than
20,000  acres,  and  invited  settlers,  supplying  them
with  homes  on  easy  terms,  and  waiting  until  such
time  as  they  would  be  able  to  pay  for  them.  But
his  expectation  of  realizing  from  his  inherited  es-
tates made  him  incur  obligations  which  for  a  long
time  were  a  source  of  humiliation  and  embarrass-
ment. His  father  died  in  1803,  and  his  relatives
in  Russia  immediately  took  possession  of  the  es-
tates. It  was  thought  by  his  mother  that  his  pres-
ence in  Russia  would  be  advantageous  to  his  inter-
ests, but  no  consideration  could  prevail  on  him  to
leave  the  settlement  he  had  founded.  By  her  ad-
vice he  appointed  three  noblemen  his  agents,  with
full  power  of  attorney  to  bring  suit  against  his
relatives,  while  she,  in  the  event  of  failure,  took
steps  to  secure  the  property  for  herself,  through
her  contract  of  marriage.  He  built  a  village,  which
he  named  Loretto,  in  1803,  on  his  own  land.  It  is
situated  about  four  miles  northwest  of  Cresson
station,  on  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  had  a  population  of  150.  He
used  his  influence  to  have  it  made  the  capital  of
Cambria  county  when  the  latter  was  laid  out,  but
without  success,  and,  as  he  was  the  agent  for  sev-
eral firms  in  Philadelphia  and  other  large  cities
for  the  sale  of  lands  in  western  Pennsylvania,  the
formation  of  the  new  county  only  multiplied  his
business  and  increased  his  embarrassments.  Up
to  the  death  of  his  mother  in  1806  he  had  received
remittances  from  her  regularly.  Although  the
emperor  of  Russia  decided  in  1808  that,  having  be-
come a  Roman  Catholic  priest,  he  could  inherit  no
Sart  of  his  father's  property,  his  sister,  the  Princess
[aria,  continued  for  some  time  to  send  him  large
sums,  which  he  employed  in  meeting  his  engage-
ments, but  on  her  marriage  with  the  penniless
Prince  of  Salm  this  resource  also  failed.  Mean-
while his  colony  began  to  branch  out  and  lay  the
foundation  of  other  congregations  at  Ebenshurg.
Carrolltown,  St.  Augustine,  Wilmore,  Summit  ville,
and  several  other  parts  of  Pennsylvania,  and  as,
owing  to  the  scarcity  of  priests,  he  could  not  ob-
tain an  assistant,  his  labors  were  unceasing.  In
1809  he  passed  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  arch-
bishop of  Baltimore  to  that  of  the  newly  appoint-
ed bishop  of  Philadelphia.  His  real  name  also  had
become  generally  known,  and  as  he  had  been  natu-
ralized as  Augustine  Smith,  the  legislature,  on  hit-
petition,  gave  him  the  right  to  resume  that  of  De-
metrius Augustine  Gallitzin.  In  1811  he  wi
ited  by  Bishop  Egan,  of  Philadelphia,  and  confir-
mation was  administered  for  the  first  time  in  the
part  of  the  diocese  of  Pittsburg  lying  west  of  the
Alleghanies.  The  name  of  Father  Gallitzin  haf
now  become  famous,  and  he  was  spoken  of  for  the
see  of  Bardstown,  Ky. He  was  actually  nominated


G  vl.l.np


(i  M.l.nW  \V


BB1


;


for  l  tint  <>f  Detroit,  but  pmbably  refused  1 1 1.-  honor.
Although  after  1817  In-  n->  longer  received  remit-
tances from  his  reeatrves  m  Bnroua, Ui  SumhW
t«it tint  i' >n  improved  considerably  in  the  year*  foUow>

I  lirrr  -.till  remained  u  \aluable  collection  «>f
Greek  hip i  Boman  antiquities  which  hod  been  Ml
he  In-  mother  in  tin-  hands  of  a  trusty  friend  to  be
disposed  of  for  his  hem-tit.  It  ffM  purchased  by
bis  old  friend  and  * ■li«M»|-miit«-.  tin-  king  of  the
Netherlands.  With  the  proceeds  from  this  sale
•in-  subscriptions  from  friends  in  Europe
and  tin'  I'nited  States,  he  was  enabled  to  Ml
his  colony  from  debt  after  expanding  $150,000
r>u  it-  creation.  He  was  appointed  vicar-gcncral
of  thi'  diocese  of  Philadelphia  in  1881,  and  Bishop
Con  we  11  offered  later  to  make  him  his  coadjutor
bishop.  Imt  tin-  offer  was  declined.  The  appoint-
meiit  of  Dr.  P.  P.  Kenrick  to  l«-  coadjutor  was
displeasing  to  Father  (iullitzin.  and  In-  wrote  a
very  plain  but  respectful  letter  to  the  new  prelate
on  the  subject  The  actioa  of  the  bishop  in  regard
to  certain  irregularities  in  one  or  two  congrega-
tions was  so  little  in  harmony  with  his  ideas  that
jned  his  vicar-generalship.  The  rest  of  his
life  was  passed  in  the  performance  of  duties  of  the
most  arduous  and  self-sacrificing  character.  In
spite  of  a  few  harmless  eccentricities  and  some
errors  of  policy,  the  character  of  Father  (iullitzin
affords  a  fine  type  of  zeal  combined  with  tender-
ness of  heart.  "  If  he  hod  possessed  a  heart  of
p»ld."  said  one  who  knew  him  well,  "he  would
nave  given  it  to  the  unfortunate."  While  engaged
in  duties  that  would  have  taxed  the  endurance
of  the  most  zealous  clergyman,  he  found  time
to  write  works  that  are  still  popular  anions  his
IB" religionists.  They  are  "Defence  of  Catholic
Principles  in  a  Letter  to  a  Protestant  Clergyman  "
0816);  "  Letter  to  a  Protestant  Friend  on  the  Bolj
Scriptures"  (Ebensburg,  1820);  "Appeal  to  the
Protestant  Public";  and  "Six  Letters  of  Advice"
(1X14).  There  are  several  lives  of  Father  (iullit-
zin. the  best  being  "  Leben  und  Wirken  des  Prin-
7.en  Demetrius  AugUStiu  (Jallitzin,"  by  the  Rev.
Henry  Lemcka  (Minister,  1861);  "Memoir  of  the
Life  and  Character  of  the  Rev.  Prince  Demetrius
A.  de  (iallitzin,"  by  Very  Rev.  Thomas  Heydeti :
and  '•  Life  of  Demetrius  August  in  Gallitzin,  Prince
and  Priest,"  by  Surah  M.  Brownson. —  His  cousin.
Princess  Elizabeth,  b.  in  St.  Petersburg.  Ku—iu.
in  1786;  d.  in  St.  Michael's,  La.,  8  Dec..  18*1,  be-
came a  convert  to  the  Roman  Catholic  faith  at  the
age  of  twenty,  and  was  received  into  the  commu-
nity of  the  Sacred  Heart  at  Metz  in  1886,  In  1*40
she  was  sent  out  as  visitor  of  the  houses  of  the
Saciv-1  Heart  in  the  United  States.  She  founded
a  convent  in  New  York  and  several  schools
throughout  the  United  States,  as  well  as  a  mi— ion
among  the  Pottuwattumic  Indian-.

t.  VI. LOP,  John,  fisherman  and  pilot,  d.  in
January.  1660,  He  was  1  mrn  in  England.  Be  was
emploved  by  the  magistrates  of  Boston  to  accom-
pany John  Mason  in  an  expedition  against  a  eora-
iianv  of  pirates,  under  command  of  a  man  named
lull.  Severe  cold  delayed  the  measures  for  bring-
ing the  pirates  to  justice,  and.  after  spending  two
month-  in  -ean-hing  for  Bull  in  their  pinnace.  Ma-
son  and  Gallop  were  compelled  to  return  without
him.  a-  be  hau  escaped  to  England  (apt.  Gallop
afterward  went  to  Connecticut,  where  he  was  asso-
ciated with  Mason  in  several  exploits  against  the
Indians,  and  was  also  employed  a-  a  pilot.  While
sailing  in  his  bark  of  twenty  tons  from  Connecti-
cut to  Long  Island,  on  80  July,  1686,  with  one
man  and  two  boys,  he  captured  near  Block  island
a  pinnace  belonging  to  John  Oldham,  a  trader,  on


hoard  of  which  wen-  fourteen  Indians,  who  had
murdered  Oldham,  and  were  Dairying  off  his  Tea-
sel. After  Bring  OB  them  with  such  effect  that
the  Indian-  sought  refuge  under  the  hatches,  he  ran
on  the  pinnace,  and  -truck  lier  0B  the  quarter  with
Mich  force  a- almost  to  overturn  her.  I'hi-  fright-
ened the  Indians  so  that  -ix  of  them  leaned
and  were  dn.-wncd.  After  repeating  thi-  action
several  times,  only  four  Indian-  remained  under
the  hatches.  He  then  ventured  to  board  the  i»in-
.  and  I m>u ml  two  of  the  savages.  Reincnilicr-
Bag  their  wonderful  adroitness  in  untying  each
other,  he  threw  one  of  hi-  prisoners  overboard, He

found  the  body  Of  Oldham  still  warm,  and  cleft
through  the  brains,  with  hands  and  ftjsj  cut  off.
After  removing  the  goods  and  sails  he  took  the
vessel  in  tow,  but  was  obliged  to  part  her  on  account
of  the  strong  wind, and -he  drifted  to  the  Narragan-
-ett  shore.  Gallop's  son  John  afterward  took  part
with  the  Connecticut  troops  in  King  Philip's  war,
was  foremost  in  the  assault  on  the  swamp  fort,  and
was  shot  dead  just  inside  the  entrance.

GALLOWAY.  Charles  IL,  M.  K.  bishop,  b,  in
Mi— i— ippi  about  1849.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Mississippi,  became  an  itinerant  min-
ister of  the  M.  K.  chunh.  and  was  a  popular  and
impressive  preacher,  and  a  strong  advocate  of  pro-
hibitory liquor-  legislation.  During  the  yellow-
fever  epidemic  of  1878  he  remained  at  his  post,  and
-ulTered  a  severe  attack  of  the  disease.  In  1881  he
was  elected  editor  of  the  New  Orleans  "Christian
Advocate,"  and  in  1886  was  ordained  a  bishop  of
the  Methods*]  Episcopal  church,  south.

GALLOWAY,  Joseph,  lawyer,  b,  near  West
River,  Anne  Arundel  co.,  Md.,  about  1988:  d.  in
Watford,  Herts,  England.  29  Aug..  lHOy.  After  a
course  of  preliminary  study,  during  which  he
seems  to  have  acquired  a  taste  for  religions  specu-
lating, which  remained  with  him  through  life,  he
studied  law  and  began  to  practise  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  acquired  distinction  in  his  profession,
lie  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Benjamin  Franklin,
and  when  the  latter  went  to  England,  in  1704,  he
placed  in  Galloway's  hands  his  valuable  letter-
books  and  other  papers  for  safe  keeping.  He  was
chosen  to  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania  in  1757,
and  almost  continuously  thereafter  until  the  Revo-
lution, and  wai  its-|»eakerfro'm  1700  till  1774.  being
usually  elected  by  a  unanimous  vote.  In  1709
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  In  his
capacity  of  member  of  the  state  legislature  he
made  a  speech  in  opposition  to  John  Dickinson
and  in  favor  of  changing  the  government  from  the
proprietary  to  the  roval  form.  In  the  earlv  part
of  the  colonial  struggle  he  exhibited  ij  nqiathy  for
the  ciown.and  grew  to  be  an  active  Tory.  Through
his  influence  as  sjH-aker  of  the  assembly  he  hml
himself  cho-eii,  with  his  friend.  Chief-Justice  Allen,
who  also  became  a  Tory,  to  the  Provincial  congress,
with  the  purpose,  no  doubt,  of  influencing  that
body  in  favor  of  the  king.  As  a  — bet  of  the
Congress  in  1 774  he  proposed  a  scheme  of  govern-
ment, to  consist  of  a  president-general,  to  bl  ap-
pointed by  the  kiinr.  and  to  hold  oflicc  during  his
pleasure,  and  a  grand  council,  to  be  chosen  OOM
in  three  years  by  the  assemblies  of  the  various
colonies. In iWemlier  of  the  same  Mar  he  was

cho-en  to  the  congress to meet tile  next May.  lllld

soon  thereafter  published  "  A  Candrd  Examination
of  the  Mutual  Claims  of  Oreat  Britain  and  the
Colonies:  with  a  Plan  of  Accommodation  on  Con-
stitutional Principles'*  (New  York:  reprinted  in
London.  I780)>  After  serving  in  the  UtmgfOBl  of
1778  he  retired  to  hi-  country  -  seal  when  Or.
Franklin  vi-ited him,  and unavailiiigly  sought  to


089


GALLOWAY


OALT


Induce  him  t<>  loin  the  cause  of  Independent

Deoember,  1776,  be  joined  Gen.  Howe,  the  British
commander,  ami  accompanied  him  in  Ids  iwivance
through  New  Jeney,  serving  his  cause  by  procur-
ing intelligence  nnd giving  advice.  <>n  the  taking
of  Philadelphia  he  WH  appointed  superintendent
of  the  poUee  of  the  city  and  suburbs,  of  the  port,
and  <>f  tin'  prohibited  articles,  and  thus  l<eoaine  the
head  of  the  civil  government  during  the  British
occupation.  At  the  evacuation  of  the  city  be  re-
tired with  the  enemy,  and  in  the  following  Octo-
ber went  to  England,  and  never  returned.  In
1779  he  was  examined  before  the  house  of  com-
mons on  the  conduct  of  the  war  in  America,  and
made  accusations  against  the  British  commander,
and  printed  three  letters  to  a  nobleman  on  the
same  subject,  charging  that  the  failure  of  the  Brit-
ish was  Iwcause  of  Gen.  Howe's  incompetency.
The  Pennsylvania  assembly  in  1788  attainted  Gal-
loway of  high  treason,  and  ordered  the  sale  of  his
.states,  worth,  according  to  his  testimony  before  a

f>arliamentary  committee,  £40,000.  He  also  pun-
ished, besides  several  pamphlets,  "Historical  and
Political  Reflections  on  the  American  Rebellion  "
(London,  1780),  and  "  Brief  Commentaries  upon
such  Parts  of  the  Revelation  and  other  Prophecies
as  immediately  refer  to  the  Present  Times,  in  which
the  Several  Allegorical  Types  and  Expressions  of
those  Prophecies  are  translated  into  Three  Literal
Meanings  v'  (1802).  To  the  latter  book  Dean  Whit-
aker  made  a  caustic  reply,  which  called  forth  from
Galloway  an  answer  entitled :  "The  Prophetic  or
Anticipated  History  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  .  .
Prefaced  by  an  Address,  Dedication,  Expostulatory
and  Critical,  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  VVhitaker,  Dean  of
Canterbury  "  (London,  1803).

GALLOWAY,  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Gettys-
burg, Pa.,  20  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,
5  April,  1872.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  parentage.
After  removing  to  Ohio  in  1819,  he  was  graduated
at  Miami  in  1833,  at  the  head  of  his  class,  and  in
the  following  year  taught  a  classical  school  at
Hamilton,  Ohio.  In  1835  he  was  elected  professor
of  ancient  languages  in  Miami,  but  resigned  in
consequence  of  ill  health  in  1836.  He  resumed
teaching  in  1838,  first  at  Springfield,  Ohio,  and
later  as  professor  of  ancient  languages  at  South
Hanover  college,  Indiana.  In  1841  he  returned  to
Ohio,  where  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1842.  He  practised  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,
until  1844,  when  he  was  elected  to  be  secretary  of
state  and  removed  to  Columbus.  He  held  this
office  for  eight  years,  and  after  declining  a  re-elec-
tion resumed  his  profession.  In  1854  he  was  elect-
ed to  congress  as  a  Republican  and  served  one  term.
He  was  defeated  by  S.  S.  Cox  in  1856,  and  again  in
1858.  Mr.  Galloway  took  an  active  part  in  the
political  conflicts  arising  out  of  the  Kansas  ques-
tion. He  rendered  important  legal  services  to  the
war  department  during  the  civil  war.  He  was
active  in  religious  matters,  and  was  for  thirteen
years  a  ruling  elder  in  the  Presbyterian  church.

GALLUP,  Joseph  Adams,  *  physician,  b.  in
Stonington,  Conn.,  30  March,  1769 ;  d.  in  Wood-
stock, Vt.,  12  Oct.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  medical  school  with  its  first  class  in
1798,  and  practised  his  profession  in  Hartland  and
Bethel,  Vt.,  until  1800,  when  he  removed  to  Wood-
stock. Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  D.
in  1814.  From  1820  till  1823  he  was  president  of
the  Castleton  medical  college,  and  its  ptofeosor  of
theoretical  and  practical  medicine.  In  1827  he
established  a  clinical  school  of  medicine  at  Wood-
stock, which  was  incorporated  as  the  Vermont
medical  college  in  18535,  and  in  1827-'34  was  a  pro-


fessor there.  His  first  writings  were  printed  in
180S  in  the  "  Vermont  Gazette,  a  paper  published
in  Windsor,  and  attracted  much  attention.  His
other  publications  were  "Sketches  of  Kpidemic
Diseaeee  in  the  State  of  Vermont,"  to  which  are
added  "Remarks  on  Pulmonary  Consumption11
(1803, re-published  in  London);  "Pathological  lie-
flections  on  the  Supertonic  State  of  Dis.
and  other  pamphlets;  and  "Outlines  of  the  Insti-
tutes of  Medicine  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1839).

GALLY,  Merritt  (gaw'-ly),  inventor,  b.  near
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,  1838.  His  father,  a
Presbyterian  clergyman,  died  in  1844,  and  in  Ids
eleventh  year  the  boy  became  a  printer.  He  ob-
served the  methods  of  engravers  who  came  into
the  office  to  take  proofs  of  cuts,  and,  with  some  old
files  and  a  grindstone,  managed  to  construct  a  set
of  tools,  with  which  he  soon  did  all  the  engraving
of  the  office,  and  thus  earned  money  to  obtain  the
books  and  appliances  needed  for  the  study  of  me-
chanics and  engineering.  At  sixteen  years  of  age
he  constructed  a  printing-press,  and,  in  partnership
with  an  older  brother,  established  a  newspaper,  of
which  the  boys  were  respectively  editor  and  printer.
This  venture  was  fairly  successful,  but  Merritt,  de-
siring a  more  complete  education,  left  the  business
to  his  brother,  and,  with  no  other  capital  than  his
engraving  tools,  set  out  to  work  his  way  through
college.  With  these,  and  by  his  talent  for  por-
trait-painting, he  earned  sufficient  money  to  enable
him  to  take  the  full  college  course.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rochester  in  1863,  became  a  student  at  Au-
burn theological  seminary,  and  in  1866  was  or-
dained by  the  presbytery  of  Lyons.  For  three
years  he  served  as  a  pastor,  but,  owing  to  loss  of
voice,  was  obliged  to  retire  from  the  pulpit.  He
then  returned  to  his  former  pursuits,  and  con-
structed a  press  for  artistic  printing.  This  was
known  as  the  "  Universal "  printing-press,  and  its
success  was  such  that  he  established  a  manufactory
for  building  the  presses  in  1869.  In  the  progress
of  this  enterprise  he  invented  and  constructed  a
large  number  of  tools  and  mechanical  appliances
specially  designed  to  render  the  presses  perfectly
interchangeable  in  every  part.  In  1876  he  es-
tablished himself  in  New  York  city,  sending
his  presses  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  anil  from  this
time  forward  he  has  devoted  himself  to  inven-
tion. Over  four  hundred  patent  claims  have
been  granted  him  for  improvements  in  printing
machinery,  electric  and  telegraphic  instruments
and  devices,  philosophical  apparatus,  and  musical
instruments.  He  has  invented  a  multiplex  tele-
graph, and  in  1873  patented  a  device  for  convert-
ing the  variable  velocity  of  machinery  into  constant
velocity.  In  1876  his  attention  was  directed  to  the
growing  demand  for  automatic  musical  instru-
ments. His  first  important  improvement  consisted
in  a  set  of  pneumatic  appliances  acted  upon  by  a
succession  of  small,  graded  perforations  in  a  sheet
of  paper  passing  over  a  tubed  "tracker-range."
The  perforations  in  the  paper  control  the  pressors
of  air  in  the  pneumatic  apparatus,  enabling  the  in-
strument not  only  to  produce  automatically  the
notes  of  the  music,  but  to  render  every  gradation
of  tone  almost  as  perfectly  as  if  produced  by  a
skilful  performer.  His  experiments  resulted  in  the
production  of  the  "  Orchestrone,"  the  sua
which  has  warranted  the  establishment  of  i
sive  works  for  manufacturing  the  instruments.

GALT,  John,  Scottish  novelist,  b.  in  Irvine,
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  2  May,  177!) :  d.  in  Greenock,
Scotland,  11  April,  18:i!>.'  He  was  educated  in
Greenock,  and,  after  spending  some  years  in  mer-
cantile pursuits,  began  the  study  of  law  at  Lin-


SALT


G  \I.T


568


.  London. In  I*0*.'  be  set  .>ut  on  ■  tour
parly  three  yean  toaouthern  Bump*  and  Um

terranean, ami while in the Levant li

introduce  British  (foods  tut •  >  the  oonti-
f  Turkey,  in  defiance  of  the  It*-rl in
reea,  !••'!  to  i"ii>i.liTnhii-  diplomatic
spondcnec. While  abroad,  he  formed  the  ac-
quaintance of  Lord  Byron  ami  Mr.  Hobbouse,  and
travelled  much  with  them  over  land  and  water. <m
his  return  t>>  England,  he  first  appeared  In-fore  the
public  a>  an  author,  and  the  published  results  of
his  observations  while  on  the  continent  obtained
_-ree  of  popularity. From  this  time  until
It,  when  he  went  to  Canada,  he  published  manv
works,  which,  though  not  uniformly  ma  awful,
gained him public  favor. His  connection with

kdii  was  through  Ins  appointment  as  an  agent
to  urge  on  the  imperial  government  the  claims  for
compensation  of  Canadians  who  had  sustained
losses  during  the  war  of  1812. The  resulting  ne-

itions  and  investigations  led  to  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Canada  land  company,  with  a  capital
of  £1.000.000.  This  association  procured  a  grant
of  1.1 00.000  acres  in  one  block,  and  a  scheme  for
•migration  on  an  extensive  scale  was  adopted.  Mr.
Quit,  in  honor  of  whom  the  town  of  Gait,  <>nt..  La
named,  was  appointed  sii|>erintendent  of  the  com-
pany, and  in  1827  began  the  work  of  colonization
by  founding  what  is  now  the  city  of  Guelph.  He
then  took  an  extended  voyage  on  Lake  Huron,
visiting  Detroit,  Buffalo,  and  other  places  in  the
L'nited  States,  and  on  his  return  to  Canada  caused
a  road  to  be  constructed  through  the  dense  forest
hring  between  Lake  Ontario  and  Lake  Huron.
Notwithstanding  Mr.  Gait's  energy,  the  affairs  of
the  Canada  lanil  company  did  not  prosper, and  in
1  he  was  recalled,  and,  after  contributing  sig-
nally to  the  prosperity  of  Canada,  was  obliged  to
take  advantage  of  the  insolvent  deDtors'  act.  On
his  return  to  England  he  resumed  writing,  pro-
duced many  books,  and  contributed  largely  to
newspapers  and  magazines.  As  a  novelist  he  had
BO  classic  predilections,  and  was  less  distinguished
for  literary  finish  and  the  skilful  elaboration  of
his  plot  than  for  rough  common  sense  and  a  mild  ele-
ment of  interest  always  sufficiently  strong  to  secure
his  stories  a  reading.  He  wrote  altogether  about
forty-fire  works,  including  "  Ijawrie  Todd,"  a  novel
relating  some  of  his  Canadian  experiences  (1830) ;
an  '•  Autobiography  "  (2  vols.,  1833);  and  "  Liter-
ary Life  and  Miscellanies  of  John  Gait"  <:$  rols.,
l^ll).— His  son,  Thomas,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
London.  England,  12  Aug.,  1H15,  was  educated  in
England  and  in  Scotland,  and  in  1888  emigrated
to  Canada  with  his  father's  family.  Two  yean
afterward  he  returned  to  Great  Britain,  remained
th-ie  three  years,  and  then,  returning  to  Toronto,

nd  the  employ  of  the  Canada  land  company,
in  which  he  remained  six  vears.  He  then  liega'n
the  study  of  law  in  the  office  of  .lust ice  Draper,
and  was  called  to  the  Imr  of  Upper  Canada  in
In  1858  he  was  made  queens  counsel  and
in 1MIJ9  a  Judge  of  the  court of  common  pleas,

rward  was  chief  justice,  and  was  knighted  in
-  —Another son. Sir Alexander Tilloeh,

ilian  statesman,  b.  in  Chelsea,  London.  Eng-
land, 6  Sept.,  ]si;,  Was  educated  in  England  and
nd  early  displayed  literary  ability,  contrib-
uting to  ••  Eraser's  Magazine''  when  only  fourteen.
H>  emigrated  to  Canada  when  a  boy,  and  in  is:t;i
became  a  clerk  in  the  service  of  the  British  and
American  land  company,  whose  operations  \\.  iv
limited  to  the  eastern  townships  of  Lower  Canada,
appointed  commissioner  of  the  company  in

1844, and held the offlCO for twelve year-, and


under  his  management the  business  of  the  oor-
|h, ration baoaOM pnapaVOOK I" 1MB Mr.  (ialt
was elected a meinlxT of parliament for the
comity  . if  Sherbrooke.  and  though he  ■
Liberal  in  politics,  he  opposed  the  administration

of  Mosam  Baldwin,  and  imfintilni.  voted  against

the rabaUion losses bill,  and,  despairing  at that
time of Canada's future,  signed the annexation
manifesto. When  Toronto  became  tin-  -eat  of  |
eminent,  after  the  de-
struction of  the  par-
liament  buildings  at
Montreal,  Mr. (Jalt  re-

ajgnad,  and  did  not

re  -  enter  politics  till
1H.">3.  when  he  was
again  alaotad  for  Sher-
brooke. and  continued
in  parliament  till  his
resignation  in  1872.
On  the  resignation
of  the  Brown-Dorion
government  in  Au-
gust, 1858,  the  gov-
ernor-general. Sir  Ed-
mund w.  Hand,  called
upon  Mr.  (Jalt  to  form
an  administration,  but
he  declined.  The
same  year  he  proposed

resolutions  in  parliament  in  favor  of  a  federal
union' of  the  British  North  American  colonies,  and
these  lx*came  the  basis  of  the  policy  of  the  Cartier-
Macdonald  government,  which  he  joined  the  same
year.  Together  with  Sir  George  E.  Cartier  and
John  Rose,  he  went  as  a  delegate  to  Great  Britain
to  urge  the  confederation  of  the  British  North
American  provinces,  and  the  construction  of  tin-
Intercolonial  railway  before  the  imperial  govern-
ment. He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council,
and  minister  of  finance,  from  August,  18o8,  till
May,  1862,  when  the  ministry  was  defeated  on  the
militia  bill,  and  held  the  same  office  again  from
March.  18(14,  till  August,  1866,  when  he  resigned
in  consequence  of  his  opposition  to  the  educa-
tional policy  of  the  administration  relative  to  the
British  population  of  Lower  Canada.  He  became
a  third  time  a  member  of  the  privy  council,  and
minister  of  finance  of  the  Dominion  on  1  July,  1867.
but  resigned  on  4  Noveml>er  of  that  year,  for  pri-
vate reasons.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Charlotte-
town  union  conference  in  1864,  and  to  that  of
Quebec  the  same  year:  a  member  of  the  confeder-
ate council  of  trade  held  in  (Quebec  in  1865;  a
delegate  to  Washington  respecting  the  renewal  of
the  reciprocity  treaty  in  1866;  and  to  the  London
colonial  conference  "in  18*56-'?.  In  1868  he  went
to  London  with  Dr.  (now  Sir  Charles)  Tum>er.  t<>
confer  with  the  imperial  government  on  UM  Nova
Scotia  question,  and  again  boOBttM  finance  minister
on  the  resignation  of  Sir  John  Hose  in  18<>».  Ib-
was  a  member  of  the  fisheries  commission  of  IS
appointed  under  the  treaty  of  Washington;  con-
ducted negotiations  on  behalf  of  Canada  for  a
commercial  treaty  with  France  and  Spain  in  I89t\
and  in  1881  was  the  delegate  for  Canada  at  the  in-
ternational monetary  conference  in  Paris.  He  was
Canadian  high  commissioner  to  (Jreat  Britain
from  1880  till  1km;{.  Sir  Alexander  is  a  lhn-nt
speaker,  ami  is  regarded  BB  one  of  the  ablest  min-
isters of  finance  Canada  has  ever  had.  His  mone-
tary statements  always  have  Iteen  noted  for  clear-
ness. The  most  noticeable  features  of  his  financial
administration  wen'  the  consolidation  of  the  pub-
lic  debt,  with provisions  for  its  redemption {  the


584


GALUSHA


gAlvez


■MoasMnoMBl  «»f  dived  foreign  trade;  iho  aboli-
tion of  tin'  canal  and  Lake  Si.  Peter  tolls  ;  ami  the

laming  <>f  provincial  doCm  as  currency.  He  was
president  of  t lit-  St.  Lawrence  and  Atlantic  rail-
way in  1S.VJ-':!.  and  carried  out  the  amalgamation

of  thai  line  with  the  Quebec  and  Biohmood,  To-
ronto ami  (iuelph.  and  Montreal  and  Toronto,
Conning  the  railway  system  now  known  as  the
(J rami  Trunk  railway,  of  which  line  he  was  in
■8  a  government  director.  He  declined  the
honor  of  the  ('.  B.  (civil)  in  1807,  but  in  1869  was
created  a  K.  C.  M.  G.,  and  in  May,  1878,  was  ad-
vanced to  the  dignity  of  Knight  Grand  Cross.  He
is  an  honorary  LL.  D.  of  Edinburgh  university,
and  received  a  diploma  for  special  services  in  con-
nection with  the  international  fisheries  exhibition
in  London  in  1883.  During  the  earlv  part  of  his
political  career  Sir  Alexander  was  a  Liberal  in  poli-
tics, but  from  1857  he  has  allied  himself  to  the  Lib-
eral Conservatives.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Canada
from  1849  to  1859,"  and  several  pamphlets.

GALUSHA,  Jonas,  statesman,  b.  in  Norwalk,
Conn.,  11  Feb.,  1753;  d.  in  Shaftsbury,  Vt,  24
Sept.,  1834.  He  removed  to  Shaftsbury  in  1775,
and  in  the  battle  of  Bennington  led  two  companies.
Besides  filling  many  minor  offices,  he  was  councillor
for  thirteen  years,  judge  of  the  supreme  court  for
two  years,  and  governor  of  the  state  from  1809
till  1818,  and  again  from  1815  till  1820.  In  1808,
1820,  and  1824  ne  was  a  presidential  elector.  He
was  president  of  the  constitutional  conventions  of
1814  and  1822.  In  his  religious  sentiments  Gov.
Galusha  took  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Bap-
tist church,  of  which  he  was  a  member. — His  son,
Elou,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shaftsbury,  Vt. ;  d.  in  Lock-
port,  N.  Y.,  13  June,  1859,  was  ordained  to  the  Bap-
tist ministry  in  early  life,  and  served  as  pastor  of
churches  in  Whitesborough,  Utica,  Rochester,  and
Lockport,  N.  Y.  At  one  time  he  was  president  of
the  Baptist  missionary  convention  of  New  York.
He  was  an  attractive  preacher,  and  one  of  the
most  widely  known  and  esteemed  among  the  Bap-
tist ministers  of  his  generation.

GALVEZ,  Jos§  de  (gal'-veth),  Marquis  of  Sonora,
Spanish  lawyer  and  statesman,  b.  in  Velez-M&laga
in  1729 ;  d.  in  Madrid  in  1786.  He  was  graduated
in  law  at  the  University  of  Alcala  de  Henares,  and
gained  considerable  distinction  by  his  eloquence
in  the  defence  of  several  lawsuits.  He  became  ac-
quainted in  Madrid  with  the  French  ambassador,
Marquis  de  Duras,  who  engaged  him  as  an  assist-
ant in  the  prosecution  of  claims  at  the  Spanish
court.  There  Galvez  attracted  the  attention  of
Charles  Ill.'s  prime  minister,  the  Marquis  of  Grim-
aldi,  and  became  his  private  secretary.  In  1764  he
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  council  of  the  In-
dies, and  in  1771  sent  on  a  mission  to  Mexico  to
settle  difficulties  that  had  arisen  between  the  au-
diencia  and  the  proprietors  of  the  mines  regarding
revenue.  lie  soon  arranged  everything  satisfac-
torily, introduced  improvements  into  the  adminis-
tration, which  saved  several  millions  yearly  to  the
government,  and  made  several  voyages  into  the  in-
terior to  study  the  situation  and  the  necessities  of
the  country.  He  returned  to  Spain  in  1774,  and
next  year  was  appointed  president  of  the  council
of  the  Indies,  in  which  office,  the  most  important
in  the  kingdom  after  that  of  prime  minister,  he
rendered  great  service  to  the  state  and  the  colonies.
In  1779  he  founded  in  the  valley  of  Sonora  in  Mexi-
co a  colony,  which  soon  prospered,  and  for  which
he  was  created  a  marquia. —  His  brother,  Matias.
b.  in  Velez-Malaga  in  1731 :  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexi-
co, 3  Nov.,  1784,  entered  the  administration  through
the  influence  of  his  brother  Jose,  and  obtained


rapid  promotion,  being  appointed  in  1781  captain-
generaiof  Guatemala.  There  he  laid  in  1782  the
foundation  of  the  new  cathedral,  after  the  removal
of  the  capital  from  old  Guatemala,  which  had  been
ruined  by  the  earthquakes  of  177:5.  In  the  same
year  war  began  with  England,  and  the  Hrit.ish
forces  occupied  several  places  on  the  Atlantic  coast,
but  Galvez  in  1782-'3  successively  drove  them  from
Omoa,  Roatan,  San  Juan,  Rio  Tinto,  and  Minefields,
and  in  recompense  was  appointed  in  the  latter  year
viceroy  of  Mexico.  During  his  short  administra-
tion he  had  the  streets  of  the  capital  cleaned  and
paved,  and  patronized  the  Academy  of  fine  arts,  fof
which  he  ordered  from  Italy  plaster  models  of  t  he
principal  art-treasures.  During  his  administration
Alejandro  Valdes  began  to  publish  "  La  Gaceta,"
the  first  newspaper  of  Mexico.  He  also  proposed
to  the  home  government  the  establishment  of  a
bank  of  loans,  for  which  he  had  abundant  subscrip-
tions, and,  although  the  idea  was  not  executed  in
his  time,  he  may  be  considered  as  the  originator  of
the  banking  system  in  Spanish  America.  In  1784
the  small-pox  ravaged  Mexico,  and  Galvez  was  ac-
tive in  mitigating  the  sufferings  of  the  poorer
class. — n is  son,  Bernardo,  b.  in  Malaga  in  1755;
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  30  Nov.,  1786,  was  called
to  court  at  the  age  of  sixteen  years  by  his  uncle,  the
minister,  and  entered  as  cadet  in  the  regiment
of  Walloon  guards.
Wishing  to  perfect
himself  in  military
science,  he  obtained
leave  of  absence  in
1772  and  went  to
France,  where  he
served  three  years
in  the  regiment  of
Cantabria,  and  was
promoted  lieuten-
ant. In  1775,  when
Charles  III.  de-
clared war  against
Algiers,  Galvez  re-
turned to  Spain  and
served  as  captain
in  the  expedition
of  Gen.  O'Reilly.  jg£  C^^jL^^^
He distinguished  ^1

himself  in  several  CL^

encounters  with  the  Moors,  rose  to  the  rank  of
colonel,  and  on  his  return  in  the  same  year  was
given  the  rank  of  brigadier.  Early  in  1776  he
was  appointed  second  in  command  to  the  governor
of  Louisiana.  Luis  de  Unzaga,  and  after  the  pro-
motion of  the  latter  to  be  captain-general  of  Cara-
cas, toward  the  end  of  the  year,  took  charge  of  the
government.  He  made  great  improvements  in
several  branches  of  the  administration,  and  gath-
ered and  colonized  several  tribes  of  wandering  In-
dians, whom  he  succeeded  in  civilizing.  In  177*
the  Continental  congress  sent  Capt.  Willing  as  agent
to  New  Orleans,  and  Galvez  assisted  him  secretly
with  arms  and  ammunition  and  $70,000  in  cash.
Spain  offered  her  mediation  between  the  colonies
and  Great  Britain,  and,  her  offer  being  repulsed  by
the  latter,  declared  war  on  16  June,  1779.  Galvez
immediately  formed  a  plan  of  campaign,  and,  al-
though he  had  only  a  small  military  force  under  his
command,  he  did  not  wait  for  re-enforcements,  but,
organizing  volunteer  regiments,  marched  north-
ward on  the  eastern  river  bank.  He  took  Fort
Manchac  on  27  Aug.,  and  in  SeptemlxT  captured
Baton  Rouge,  Fort  Panmure,  and  Fort  Natchez.
In  October  he  received  re-enforcements  from  Ha-
vana, and  was  made  a  major-general. He  then  in-


G  \i.\  i:/.


(JAMA


BBS


rested  Mobile  with  his  combined  forces,  ami  in  I
i,  raptured  Kort  Charlotte,  forcing  the  cil
udcr. His  army,  with  the  organize*!  militia,
•oon  rose  to  14,000  hum.  ami  In-  in\adcd  tin-  north-
western |>art  <>f  Florida,  defeating  tin-  British  in
ral  encounter*,  and  besieged  l\*nsacola,but,lie-
unahlc  tn  attark  it  from  tin-  sea -side  fur  want  of
siege  artillery  ami  a  Beet,  went  in  January,  l?Ht,  to
ilia,  ami  returned  in  February  with  tin-  neces-
sary material. The  British  capitulated  on  !»  May,
her  with  HX)  prisoners  ami  the  armament.
-i coast fell into the hamU  of the
ish. "I'll i  —  feat  Of  (ialve/  was  celebrated  l»v  M.

tie  Poydras  in  a  |>oeiii  which  <ru  published  at  the
.  iis»-  of  the  kinjr  of  Frame.  After  the  signature
of  peace  at  Versailles,  8  Sept.,  17m:{.  Galvez  was  n-
warded  by  the  title  of  oounl  ami  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-general, ami  was  appointed  captain-general
of  (nlw.  On  the  death  of  his  father  he  was  pro-
noted  \ nerov  of  Mexico,  taking  charge  of  the
rnment,  17. June,  17So.  He  improved  the  work-
ing of  the  mines,  augmenting  the  crown  revenue
from  them,  while  at  the  same  time  he  protected
their  owners  from  the  unjust  exactions  of  the  rev-
enue officers,  rebuilt  the  old  theatre,  ami  repaired
the  causeways  of  the  Piedad  and  TlalpjaB,  In
l?v"i  a  famine  desolated  the  province,  ami  an  epi-
demic broke  out  in  the  following  year,  and  Galvez
did  all  in  his  power  to  alleviate  the  public  suffer-
ings, giving  large  contributions  from  his  private
purse  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  He  also  con-
structed on  the  site  of  the  ancient  summer  palace
of  the  M ontezumas,  Chapultepec,  a  palace  for  him-
self and  his  successors  at  the  ex|>ense  of  over
£{00,000,  and,  as  it  was  built  like  a  strong  fortn m
with  bastions  and  heavy  artillery,  his  enemies  ca-
lumniated him  at  the  court, insinuating  that  he  in-
tended to  declare  himself  independent  of  Spain.
The  home  government  began  to  manifest  some  dis-
trust.and  this  preyed  on  Gal  vexe  mind.  He  became
melancholy  and  reserved,  seeking  his  only  distrac-
tion in  the  chase.  In  consequence  of  violent  over-
exertion he  fell  ill  and  died  after  a  few  days  in  the
archiepiscopal  palace  of  Tacubaya.

OAIjYEZ,  Mariano,  b,  in  Guatemala  in  the  lat-
ter jmrt  of  the  lHth  century;  d.  in  Mexico  about
1k*>o.  He  was  a  foundling,  and  was  adopted  by  a
rich  family,  whose  name  he  assumed.  He  received
his  early  education  in  the  convent-school  of  Guate-
mala, but  afterward  studied  law  in  the  university  of
that  city,  and  was  graduated  as  doctor  in  1819.  He
was  private  counsellor  of  Gov,  Gain/a  17.  c),  and  it  is
probably  due  to  his  influence  that  the  latter  did  not
op|Mise  the  popular  movement  for  liberty.  Galvez
favored  the  annexation  of  Guatemala  to  Mexico.
but  when  the  tir-t  Federal  congress  of  Central
rica  met  in  Guatemala  in  1825,  he  was  one  of
the  deputies,  and  became  president.  In  the  civil
war  of  1826,  (Jalvez  took  part  with  the  Federalists.
and  headed  a  revolutionary  movement  against  the
Unitarian  government,  which,  although  promptly
suppressed,  hastened  the  invasion  of  Guatemala  by
Morazan.  whose  forces  Galvez  joined  in  Ahuacha-
pam.  On  24  Aug.,  1831.  Galvez  was  elected  chief
of  the  state  of  Guatemala,  and  under  his  admin-
istration science,  arts,  ami  education  were  fostered,
and  many  public  improvements  made.  In  Febru-
ary, lXo-*i,  he  was  re-elected  for  a  second  term,  dur-
wrhich  the  Asiatic  cholera  afflicted  the  country,
and  the  reactionary  party  persuaded  the  unadu-
1  people  of  the  interior  that  the  disease  w.i~
caux'd  by  the  poisoning  of  the  springs  by  order
of  the  government.  Several  revolutionary  move-
Is  began* and  in  January.  1888,  the  city  of  An-
tigua, Guatemala,  pronounced  against  Galvez"*  gov-


ernment. <in  the  18th  the  revolutionary  forces  of
Beoatepeque  occupied  the  dtj  "f  Guatemala,  and
Galvez  left  the  country  f  where  ht  prac-

tise! law  for  soiimj  years  with  distinction.

<•  V  I  V.  Antonio  Leon  de  (gah  -mah..  Mexican
astronomer,  b.  in the  citv of Bexioo in 1  l-l'i ;  d.

there, II .Sept.. INrJ. Hi studied ill thl

of  Situ  Ildefoiiso.  early  showing  a  taste  for  astron-
omy. As  the  means  for  a  course  in  that  science
were  wanting  in  Mexico,  hi'  instructed  Massif
by  reading  the  works  of  Newton.  Wocblcr.  Grave-
siml.  Mum 'hembriN-k,  Bcruatilis.  Im  Caillc.  and
other  eminent  writer*.  He  wa>  for  many  years  a
clerk  in  the  oflice  of  the  secretary  of  the  supreme
court,  ami  nothing  would  have  been  known  of  hit
scientific  work  if  the  astronomer  I,a  Lamlc  had
not  published  in  his  "Comiaissemciit  des  temps"
(Jama's  name  as  that  of  the  author  of  the  first
exact  olisorvation  of  the  longitude  <>f  Mexico,  ami
eulogized  his  calculation  of  the  ecli|>se  of  thoiU
of  I  Nov.,  1771,  which  he  promlsad  to  publish  in  the
memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Paris.  At  the  same
time  he  commissioned  Gama  to  take  observations
of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  and  of  the  tides  on  the
Pacific  coast  from  Acapulco  to  Val|>araiso.  This
called  the  public  attention  to  the  merits  of  Gama,
and  the  scientist  Joaquin  Velasquez  de  Leon,  at  the
foundation  of  the  Mining  school,  appointed  him
professor  of  mechanics,  pyrotechnics, and  aerometry,
and  commissioned  him  to  make  observations  upon
the  impending  eclipse  of  the  sun  and  other  celes-
tial phenomena.  The  viceroy,  Manuel  Flores,  who
was  himself  a  distinguished  mariner  and  geogra-
pher, commissioned  him  to  calculate  the  probable
date  of  appearance  of  a  comet,  which  had  been
predicted  by  the  London  astronomers  for  1788.
The  necessity  of  providing  for  his  family  forced
Gama  to  give  time  to  mechanical  pursuits,  which
would  have  been  better  employed  in  the  service  of
science.  But  he  still  found  leisure  to  write  on  ex-
perimental physics,  medicine,  mathematics,  and
Mexican  antiquities,  of  which  he  exhibited  pro-
found knowledge.  When  in  1790  the  Aztec  calen-
dar-stone was  discovered,  he  wrote  an  essay  about
it,  "Historical  and  Chronological  Description  of
Two  Stones  that  were  found  in  the  Plaza  of  Mexi-
co upon  the  Occasion  of  laying  the  New  Pave-
ment" (Mexico,  1888),  explaining  its  use  among
the  Indians.  Also,  a  treatise  on  their  arithmetic,
gnomonics,  and  hieroglyphics.  Present  t  praises
Gama  as  treating  his  subject,  not  with  the  accus-
tomed credulity  of  the  antiquarian,  but  with  the
caution  of  a  mathematician,  who  demonstrates
whatever  he  asserts,  (buna's  only  work  preserved
in  book-form  is"  Deeoripoion  Orograaoa  del  Kclipse
del  Sol.  el  24  de.lunio  de  1778"  (Mexico,  17781

GAMA,  Jose  Basilio  da,  Brazilian  |»..t,  b.  in
the  district  of  Bio-das-Mortes,  Brazil,  in  174(1;  d.
in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  81  July  1788,  He  hfllonjjon  to
a  poor  family,  was  brought  t<>  Kio  Janeiro  at  an
early  age  by  a  monk  of  St.  Francis,  and  was  edu-
cated by  the  Jesuits,  who  afterward  received  him
into  their  order.  He  was  reduced  to  great  pnvcrtv
after  the  missionary  xpelled  from Brazil,

but  finally  lonooodod  in  entering  a  seminary,  where
he  studied  the  umolastk  philosophy. Be  then

went  to  Portugal,  and  from  there  to  Italy.  He
returned  to  Portugal  in  1775,  being  called  by  the
marquis  of  POmbal  to  celebrate  the  unveiling  of
an  equestrian  statue  of  king  .lost-  I„  in  an  ode.
which  UBS  awarded  Um  prize,  and  (buna  was  given
a  place  in  the  department  of  state  and  a  patent  of
nobility.  After  the  downfall  of  Poiuhal.  Gama
lo-t  his  oflice  ami  went  to  Brazil,  where  he  founded
an  academy  of Arcadians  modelled  after  that  of


686


( i  A  M  A


CAM  BIER


Rome,  which  was  dissolved  l>y  the  viceroy,  Count
of  Ke/.ende.  under  suspicion  that  it  whs  a  political
association.  Sana  was  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  l'"i-
tugal  in  1785,  narrowly  escaj»ed  Imnishinent  to
Angola,  and  was  onlyset  at  liberty  in  1?HU.
AlH>ut  this  period  he  became  an  enemy  of  the
Jesuits,  and  published  his  poem  of  "Uruguay"
the  object  of  which  is  to  show  that  they
had  attempted  to  found  an  independent  state
among  the  Indians  of  that  province.  The  poem
of  '*  Uruguay  "  contains  some  clever  descriptions
of  the  forest  scenery  of  South  America,  but.  while
inveighing  against  the  Jesuits,  says  nothing  of
the  civilization  they  introduced,  or  of  its  destruc-
tion l>v  their  banishment  from  the  colonies  of
Spain  "and  Portugal.  Da  Gama  afterward  was
elected  a  mem  tier  of  the  Academv  of  Lisbon.  He
is  buried  in  the  church  of  Boa  Hora  in  that  city.
He  also  published  "  Lenitivo  da  Saudade  do  prin-
cipe  D.  Jose"  (1788).  and  "  Quitubia,"  another
poem,  named  after  a  negro  chief  who  assisted  the
Portuguese  in  an  expedition  against  Angola  (1791).
(JAMA,  Jos6  Bernardo  Fernandez,  Brazilian
historian,  b.  in  Pernambuco  in  1802;  d.  in  Rio  de
Janeiro  in  1852. In  his  youth  he  entered  the  army,

r>articipated  in  the  constitutional  revolution  of
labia,  10  Feb.,  1821,  and  also  in  forcing  the  Portu-
guese troops  to  abandon  Brazil,  15  Feb.,  1822,  and
the  subsequent  declaration  of  independence  at  Ipi-
ranga,  7  Sept.,  1822.  For  the  action  of  Bahia  he
was  decorated  with  the  military  medal  that  was
instituted  in  commemoration  of  that  movement,
and  in  1837  received  the  order  of  the  Cruceiro ;
but,  as  he  was  of  humble  family  and  had  no  friends
in  government  circles,  he  never  advanced  above  the
rank  of  lieutenant  of  the  staff,  and  as  such  was  re-
tired in  1842.  He  then  gave  up  his  time  to  his-
torical researches,  and  published  a  work  which
established  his  name  as  a  writer,  "  Memorias  Histo-
ricas  da  Provincia  de  Pernambuco,  precedidas  de
um  ensaio  topographico-historico  "  (4  vols.,  Per-
nambuco, 1844-'9).  As  he  was  too  poor  to  have
this  work  printed,  the  provincial  assembly  of  Per-
nambuco authorized  him,  in  1843,  to  establish  a
quarterly  lottery  to  the  extent  of  fifteen  contos
e  reis  (about  $7,500),  the  proceeds  of  which  were
to  be  invested  in  its  publication.

GAMARRA,  Agustin  (gah-mar'-ra),  Peruvian
soldier,  b.  in  Cuzco,  27  Aug.,  1785;  d.  in  Ingavi,
Bolivia,  18  Nov.,  1841.  He  studied  theology  in  the
college  of  San  Buenaventura  of  his  native  city,  but
entered  the  Spanish  army  in  1809  as  a  volunteer.
He  rose  gradually  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,
served  in  Bolivia  against  the  Argentine  forces,  and
in  1821  came  to  Lima  in  command  of  the  2d  bat-
talion of  the  regiment  of  Cuzco.  He  then  joined
the  Independents,  was  promoted  colonel  and  then
brigadier,  and  served  as  chief  of  the  staff  of  the
Peruvian  contingent  under  Bolivar  and  Sucre  in
1824.  He  was  promoted  general  of  division,  appoint-
ed prefect  of  Cuzco,  and  in  1828  was  commander-
in-chief  of  the  army  in  the  campaign  against  Bo-
livia, concluding  the  war  by  the  treaty  of  Piquisa,
for  which  he  was  rewarded  with  the  rank  of  grand
marshal.  He  afterward  pronounced  against  La-
mar, president  of  Peru,  was  declared  provisional
president  in  1829,  and  in  the  same  year  elected
president  for  four  years.  His  administration  was
progressive,  although  constantly  interrupted  by
revolutionary  movements.  When  his  term  was
finished  he  delivered  the  executive  to  Gen.  Orbe-
gozo,  but  soon  headed  a  rebellion  against  him.  He
acknowledged  the  government  of  Orbegozo  in  1834,
and  emigrated  to  Bolivia.  When  Gen.  Santa  <  ruz
interfered  in  the  Peruvian  struggle  between  Orbe-


I


gozo  and  Sal.iverrv,  (iamarra  opposed  the  inter-
vention with  a  force  that  he  had  raised  in  the
south  of  Peru,  but  WSJ  defeated  by  Santa  Cruz  at
Yanacocha,  and  banished  to  Chili  in  Juni
When  war  was  declared  between  Chili  and  Pem  in
1837,  Gamarra  joined  the  second  Chilian  expedi-
tion, and  in  1839  was  again  elected  president  of
Peru.  In  1841,  when  the  Bolivians  overthrew  the
government  of  Ballivian  and  pronounced  again  in
favor  of  Santa  Cruz,  Gamarra  invaded  the  neigh-
boring republic  at  the  head  of  an  army,  but
defeated  and  killed  in  battle  at  Ingavi.

GAMARRA  Y  DAVALOS,  Juan  Benito,
Mexican  author,  b.  in  Zamora,  Mexico,  in  1745;
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  1  Nov.,  1793.  He  was
educated  in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso  in  the
city  of  Mexico,  and  in  November,  1764,  entered
the  congregation  of  San  Felipe  Neri  in  the  town
of  San  Miguel.  Here  his  superiors  appointed  him
their  attorney-general,  and  sent  him  to  Madrid  and
Rome  to  conclude  arrangements  for  the  final  es-
tablishment and  endowment  of  the  congregation
in  Mexico.  Pope  Clement  XIII.  made  him  apos-
tolic prothonotary,  and  he  was  given  the  degree  of
doctor  of  theology  by  the  University  of  Pisa,  and
elected  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  Bologna.  On
his  return  to  Mexico  he  brought  a  collection  of
paintings,  drawings,  a  large  library,  and  a  collec-
tion of  physical  instruments  for  his  college.  He
reorganized  the  plan  of  studies  of  the  college,  and
was  also  the  first  in  Spanish  America  to  introduce
a  course  of  lectures  on  modern  philosophy.  He
took  great  interest  in  the  advancement  of  instruc-
tion in  New  Spain,  and  was  the  founder  of  many
new  colleges.  The  viceroy  proposed  him  for  sev-
eral high  offices,  but  Gamarra  refused  them  alL
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  preparing  a  plan  for
the  organization  of  another  university  for  the  vice-
royalty.  He  published  "  Musa  Americana  "  (Cadix,
1769):  "  Elementa  recentioris  Philosophite  "  (Mex-
ico, 1774);  "Academias  filosoficas"  (1774);  "Las
antigiledades  de  Xochicalco"  (Bologna,  1774);
"  Errores  del  Entendimiento  Humano"  (Puebla,
1776);  "Maximas  de  Ed ucacion  "  (Mexico,  L780M
"  Reflexiones  Critieas  sobre  las  Historias  Escojidas
del  Antiguo  Testaraento"  (1781);  and  left  others
in  manuscript,  which  are  preserved  in  the  National
library  of  Mexico  and  by  private  collectors.

GAMBIER,  James,  admiral,  b.  in  the  Bahama
islands,  13  Oct.,  1756;  d.  in  Iver,  near  Uxbridge,
England,  19  April,  1833.  His  ancestors  were  French
Protestants,  wno  were  expatriated  by  the  revoca-
tion of  the  edict  of  Nantes,  and  his  father  was
lieutenant-governor  of  the  Bahamas.  Jan:
tered  the  navy  at  an  early  age  and  obtained  the
rank  of  post-captain  in  1778.  He  commanded  the
frigate  "  Raleigh  '*  and  was  engaged  in  the  reduc-
tion of  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1780.  In  the  follow-
ing year  he  aided  in  repelling  the  French  attack
upon  Jersev.  He  was  appointed  to  command  the
"  Defence,''  of  74  guns,  in  1793,  and  aided  Lord
Howe  against  the  French  fleet,  which  was  com-
manded by  Villaret  de  Joyeuse.  The  "  Defence  "
was  the  first  to  break  through  the  enemy's  line  in
the  engagement,  which  took  place  on  1  June.  1?!»4.
He  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  rear-admiral  in
1795,  of  vice-admiral  in  1799,  and  was  third  in
command  of  the  channel  fleet  in  1801.  In  1803
he  was  appointed  to  be  the  governor  of  Newfound-
land. Having  been  raised  to  the  rank  of  full  ad-
miral in  1805,  he  commanded  the  fleet  during
the  three  days'  bombardment  of  Copenhagen  in
September,  1807.  He  captured  the  Danish
and  in  return  for  his  services  was  made  a  baron
and  offered  a  pension,  which  he  declined. In


0  \MMKLL


067


1806  he  wn.1  appointed  to  command  the  channel

fleet,  am!  prepared  n  oodl  <<f  signals  and  pMll

Instructions  for  the  discipline  of  the  MTT, Bj

nc-li  -•|iiailri)ii  in  Ai\  mads  in  ih*ki

ami  burned  II \ ••  "f  n-  ships. In  OOBMOMMtOi  ■

dtwupT-rtrri'  with  Lord  ( 'ochrane,  who  had  charge
<>f  tin-  British  fire-ships,  Lord  Gambier  requested a
court-martial,  by  which  be  wii  acquitted.  In  1814
he  was  placed  ui  the  bold  of  tin-  oowniMioMn  to
negotiate  a  treaty  with  the  United  States,  which
mcluJcd  at  (ihcnt.  24  Dee..  1M1.  Subsc-
<{tii*nt lv  he  live.)  in  retirement,  received  the  grand
f  tin-  Hath  in  1H1">,  im. i  was  much'  admiral
of  tli«'  llr<  t  on  the  accession  of  William  I\

WA.MI''1  I  .  II .mi il ton  Rowan, govarnoraf  Mis-
souri, b,  in  Winchester,  Va..  ,'!•  Nov.,  \~,\ih-,  d,  in
ti  City.  Mo.,  :U  .Ian..  1864. His  education
i  principeilj  at  Hampden  Sidney,  and
when  about  eighteen  years  of  age  he  was  admitted
to  the  liar  of  Virginia. In  IHls  he  went  to  Missou-
ri, and  resided  several years  in  Franklin,  Howard
00. Me  was  elected  secretary  of  state  in  1N'J4,  which
office  be  held  one  year. He  then  Ix-came  a  successful
m  St.  Louis,  served  on  the  hench  from  1851
till  I8SB,  and  was  presiding  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Missouri. At  one  time  he  was  a  member
of  the  state  honse  of  represents! i ves. In  1861  he
was  elected  to  the  State  constitutional  convention,
which Ixxly  appointed  him  provisional governor
of Missouri,  the regular  governor,  Clail)orne P.
n. having joined the  secession party. He
held  this  office  until  his  death. In  the  State  con-
vention of  1881,  as  chairman  oi the  committee
li-ral  relations.  Gov.  Gamble  made  a  report
expressing  a  hope  for  an  amicable  adjustment  of
the  existing  difficulties  without  civil  war. He  pro-
iiouneed  the  president's  call  for  troops  unconsti-
tutional, and  appealed  to  the  legislature  to  unite
for  the  preservation  of  the  state. Later  the  gov-
ernor was  authorized  to  receive  a  loan  of  $500,000
id  to  purchase  ammunition,  and  the  state  mili-
tary was  put  under  his  command. On 12  June,
1801,  he  issued  a  proclamation  calling  into  service
~),000  of  the  state  militia  "for  the  purpose  of  re-
eding invasion,  and  for  the  protection  of  the  lives,
ilicrty.  and  property  of  the  citizens." On  12  June,
18<>2.  the  State  convention  passed  a  resolution  ex-
sing  confidence  in  the  integrity  and  patriotism
the  governor  and  state  officers. On  13  .June  he
lbmitted  a  message  to  the  convention,  declaring
lat  he  would  furnish  aid  to  any  state  that  would
adopt  a  measure  of  emancipation. On 22  July.
(iov.  Gamble  summoned  the  militia  to  defend  the
state  against  Confederate  guerillas. He  called  the
adjourned  State  convention  to  reassemble  in  June,
1863,  to  consult  and  act  on  the  subject  of  emanci-
pation, and,  after  expressing  a  desire  for  peace,
offered his  resignation, which  was not  accepted.
(iov.  Gamble  in 1838  organized  the  2d  Presbyte-
rian church  in  St.  Louis.
(.  \  M  HI. K,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Lycoming  county,
-  Jan.,  1809;  d.  in  Williamsport,  Pa..  22  Feb.,
He  received  a  public-school  education,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1888. He
ted  to  the  legislature  in  1K41,  and  re-elect-
ed in  the  following  year,  serving  as  chairman  of

the  committi f  ways  and means,  when the  ap-

it ion  for  the  Portage  railroad  over  the  Allc-

mountains  was  made, lie  was  then  elected

.reasasa  Pwnimni.  UM  llliy,  from 1881 till

1889. He  was  rnade  president-judge  of  the  district

•omposed  of  Clinton,  Centre,  and  Clearfield  cotnv

B '.  but  retired  to  private  life  in  the  fol-

Hc was elected president-judge of

ling  district  in  1888,  and  served  ton  years.


UAMHLK.  Thomas,  naval  officer,  d. in

the  s,,i,  of  Maj.  William  (iamble,
an  officer  of  the  Revolution,  The  son  was  ap-
pointed midshipman in 1804,  lieutenant ill 1*>M>,

ami  commander  in  1818  He  died  while  command-
ing the  "  Erie  "  in  the  Mediterranean.— His  brother.
John  M.,  I>.  alx.ut  lT'.U  ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N
II  S-pt..  lN3(t.  WM appointed  midshipman,  and  U
lieutenant  of  the  marine  corps  in  1N<H».  He  be-
came 1st  lieutenant  in  1811*  captain  in  1  HI 4,  ma-
jor by  brevet  iii  1*111.  major  in  1K14.  and  lieuten-
ant-colonel by  brevet.  .*(  March.  1*27. — Another
brother.  I'eter,  d.  11  S-pt..  1814*  was  appointed
midshipman  in  1N<>9  anu  became  lieutenant  in
1814  He  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Ijikc  Cham-
plain,  while  acting  1st  lieutenant  of  the  flag-ship.
— Another  brother.  Francis  L..  an  officer  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  died  in  the  West  Indies.  ||  Sept..  1824.

LAM  HO  A,  Francisco  Javier  (gam-lxi-ah).
Mi  \ican  lawyer,  b.  in  (iuadalajani.  1?  Dec..  1717;
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  4  June.  171*4.  He  0BJM
of  a  rich  family,  but  was  left  an  orphan  in  his
early  youth,  and  his  fortune  was  squandered  by  the
executors.  He  began  his  studies  at  the  College  of
San  Juan,  in  his  native  city,  continued  at  that  of
San  Ildcfonso,  Mexico,  and  finished  them  in  the
university  of  that  city  in  1731*.  He  then  entered
the  practice  of  law,  and  soon  became  famous  bv  his
successful  defence  of  a  complicated  suit.  In  May,
17m,  he  was  sent  by  the  tribunal  of  commerce  on
a  commission  to  Madrid,  to  arrange  some  intricate
(|uestions  at  court,  and  there  studied  mining  engi-
neering, afterward  writing  a  treatise  on  subterra-
nean geometry,  which  apj>eared  as  part  of  his  work
on  law.  He  was  treated  with  distinction  by
Charles  III.,  and  commissioned  president  of  the
supreme  court  of  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  ar-
ranged the  ordinances  of  the  court,  and  composed
the  famous  "Black  Code"  for  the  government  of
the  slaves.  On  being  promoted  to  the  presidency
of  the  supreme  court  of  Mexico,  he  reformed  the
forensic  practice,  introduced  a  clear  style  of  plead-
ing, and  was  the  founder  of  a  new  school  of  jurists.
To  simplify  the  proceedings  still  further,  he  la-
bored for  many  years  on  a  codification  of  the  min-
ing laws,  which  appeared  under  the  title  of  "  <  '«>m-
entarios  &  las  ordenanzas  de  minas,  dedicadas  al
Rey  Don  Carlos  III."  (Madrid,  1761),  accompanied
by  an  alphabetical  list  of  mines,  their  distance
from  the  capital,  and  of  the  most  common  mining
terms  of  the  province,  that  differ  from  those  used
in  Spain.  •  The  arguments  in  two  of  the  most  fa-
mous lawsuits  that  he  defended  were  printed
(Mexico,  1788  and  1754),  and  he  left  many  manu-
scripts, which  are  preserved  in  the  National  librarv.

(•A.M.MKI.L.  William,  educator,  b.  in  KecV
field.  Mass..  10  Feb.,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1831,  and  for  the  three  years  following
was  a  tutor  then*.  He  was  chosen  professor  of
rhetoric  and  Knglish  literature  in  1888,  and  in
1H80  was  transferred  to  the  <  hair  of  history  and
political  economy.  In  1n.*><*  RooheatOK  university
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  Prof,  (iammell  s
service  in  Brown  university  covered  a  term  of
thirty  years.  Since  his  retirement  from  the  uni-
versity in  IN64  bo  ho*  devoted  much  attention  to
the  affairs  of  various  educational  and  charitable
institutions.  He  has  written  a  life  of  Roger  Will-
iams (Boston,  1*4(»).  and  one  of  (iov.  Samuel
Ward,  for  Sparks's  ••  American  Biographies  "  :  also
a  "History  of  American  Baptist  Missions."  at  the
request  of  the  American  Baptist  missionary  union.
For  a  time  he  IM  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "Chris-
tian  IJevuvv."  ami he  has  written  BXtenoivi  ly  for

that  and  other  pecfodioala


588


GANNETT


GANA,  Jose"  Francisco,  Chilian  soldier,  h.  in
Santiago,  18  Nor.,  IT'.H  ;  d.  in  Nofioa,  10  Feb.,  1862.
lie  entered  military  service  in  IHOO  as  a  cadet,  and
in  1806  wai  promoted  2d  lieutenant  of  the  king's
regiment,  in  which  he  served  during  the  apprehen-
sion of  an  ESngliah  invasion  in  1809,  and  after  the
declaration  of  independence  in  1810  till  1812,  when
he  retired  to  give  himself  entirely  to  study.  In  1820
Gana  entered  the  service  again  00  3  May,  and  took
part  in  the  expedition  of  Gen.  San  .Martin.  Gana
with  his  battalion  captured  the  city  of  Huaras  with
t  he  whole  garrison,  and,  as  the  provinces  of  Trujillo,
Lambayeqna,  and  Piura  pronounced  for  the  insur-
rection, the  whole  northern  portion  of  Peru  was
separated  from  the  rule  of  the  viceroy.  The  vice-
roy, La  Serna,  abandoned  the  capital  on  6  July,
and  on  the  12th  San  Martin  occupied  the  city,  and
independence  was  solemnly  proclaimed  on  28  July.
Meanwhile  Gana  took  part  in  the  assault  of  Callao,
14  Aug.,  and  after  the  final  surrender  of  21  Sept.
was  promoted  major.  Gana  participated  in  Gen.
Sucre's  expedition  to  the  south,  and  command-
ed a  column  that  attacked  the  Spanish  forces  at
Quilca,  14  Aug.,  1823,  and,  notwithstanding  the
loss  of  one  third  of  his  troops,  routed  the  enemy
and  pursued  him  toward  Arequipa.  In  October  he
returned  to  Chili,  and  in  1825  was  sent  with  his
battalion  under  Col.  Sanchez  to  garrison  Talca
against  the  attacks  of  the  bandit  Pincheira,  whom
he  surprised  and  defeated.  In  December  of  the
same  year  he  was  promoted  colonel,  and  his  bat-
talion formed  part  of  Gen.  Freire's  expedition  to  Chi-
loe,  which  archipelago  was  still  held  by  the  Spanish
under  Gen.  Quintanilla.  He  participated  in  the
decisive  battle  of  Bellavista,  14  Jan.,  1826,  and
was  commissioned  by  Freire  to  sign  the  capitulation
of  Pudeto  on  19  Jan.,  which  surrendered  the  rest
of  Chilian  territory  to  the  independent  forces.  In
1830  he  joined  the  rising  of  his  party  under  Freire,
and,  after  their  defeat  at  Lircay  on  17  April,  de-
clined to  serve  under  the  government  of  trie  con-
servatives, and  retired  from  active  service.  He  was
called  into  service  again  by  the  government  of  Gen.
Bulnes,  7  Nov.,  1842,  and  assigned  to  the  presidency
of  the  military  college.  Twice  he  represented  the
district  of  Talca  in  congress,  and  in  1849  was  ap-
pointed intendant  of  the  province  of  Atacama.  In
September,  1851,  he  was  called  by  the  new  president,
Manuel  Montt,  to  the  secretaryship  of  the  army
and  navy,  and  in  1853  was  appointed  president  of
the  military  court  of  appeals,  being  promoted  in
1854  to  brigadier-general.  At  the  same  time  he
was  dean  of  the  philological  faculty  of  the  univer-
sity, a  literary  honor  which  no  other  Chilian  gen-
eral ever  attained.  In  1856  he  was  sent  as  minister
to  Ecuador,  and  on  his  return  in  1857  again  took
charge  of  the  portfolio  of  the  army  and  navy.  In
1858  he  was  sent  on  a  special  mission  to  Spain. In

1860  he  was  elected  senator  of  the  republic,  and  in

1861  appointed  counsellor  of  state.
GANDARA  Y  NAVARRO,  Jos6  de  la  (gan  -

da-ra-e-nav-ar'-ro),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Bilbao,  15
Oct.,  1820.  He  entered  the  military  college  as  a
cadet  in  1832,  joined  the  army  in  1834  as  sub-
lieutenant, and  served  in  the  campaign  against  the
Carlists  till  1839,  participating  in  all  the  battles.
Afterward  he  served  with  distinction  in  the  colo-
nies, and,  after  reaching  the  rank  of  brigadier,  was
appointed,  in  1857,  governor  of  the  islands  of  Fer-
nando Poo  and  Annobon  y  Corisco.  In  1862  he
became  major-general,  and  in  November  of  that
year  was  made  military  governor  and  commander-
in-chief  of  the  province  of  Santiago  de  Cuba.  The
insurrection  against  the  Spanish  domination  of
Santo  Domingo,  which  had  been  annexed  in  1881,


In'gan  in  the  department  of  Cilwio  in  February,
1863;  the  troops  were  soon  driven  into  the
towns,  and  the  interior  cities  wrested  from  them.
(iandara,  without  waiting  for  orders  from  the
home-government,  despatched  re-enforcements  to
his  comrades  by  the  frigate  "Isabel  II.,"  then  in
jtort.  He  afterward  received  orders  to  march  with
all  the  forces  at  his  command  to  the  assistance  of
the  commander-in-chief.  He  landed  in  Puerto
Plata,  17  Sept.,  1863,  driving  the  insurgent  forces
back,  and  afterward  occupied  the  city  of  Santo
Domingo  and  San  Cristobal,  the  latter  after  a  series
of  bloody  engagements  with  the  enemy.  In  lsi;i  he
was  promoted  to  lieutenant-general  and  appointed
captain  -  general  and  commander-in-chief  of  the
island,  and  in  that  year  won  the  battle  of  Monte-
cristi.  The  provisional  government  now  began
peace  negotiations,  which,  however,  led  to  no  favor-
able issue.  Meanwhile  the  home  government  re-
solved to  abandon  the  struggle,  and  in  May,  1865,
Gandara,  with  his  troops,  evacuated  the  island.  He
subsequently  received  the  appointment  of  gov-
ernor-general of  the  Philippine  islands,  and,  after
the  restoration  of  the  Bourbon  monarchy,  was  mili-
tary chief  of  the  king's  household,  and  captain-
general  of  Castile.  He  published  "  Historia  de  la
Anexion  v  Guerra  de  Santo  Domingo."

GANNEAKTENA,  Catharine,  Indian  convert,
b.  in  northern  New  York;  d.  in  La  Prairie,  Cana-
da, in  1673.  She  was  by  birth  an  Erie  Indian,  but
had  been  adopted  into  the  Oneida  tribe.  Her  hus-
band was  a  Christian  Huron,  and  she  showed  a
desire  to  embrace  Christianity  when  Father  Bruyas
preached  the  gospel  to  the  Oneidas  in  1668.  Cath-
arine had  long  been  esteemed  for  her  modesty  and
gentleness,  and  was  of  great  assistance  to  the  mis-
sionary in  learning  the  language  of  the  tribe.  She
was  ill  treated  by  her  relatives  because  of  her  inch-
nation  to  Christianity,  and  to  escape  persecution  she
set  out  for  Montreal  in  company  with  her  husband,
and  afterward  went  to  Quebec,  where  she  was  bap-
tized by  the  name  of  Catharine,  and  confirmed  by
Bishop  Laval.  During  her  stay  at  Montreal  she
received  instruction  from  Father  Raffeix,  who  re-
quested her  to  found  a  village  in  which  Indians
from  the  Five  Nations  that  were  afraid  to  acknowl-
edge their  conversion  to  Christianity  might  settle.
At  the  close  of  1669  she  was  joined  by  several
members  of  her  family,  who  had  become  converts,
and  founded  the  colony  of  La  Prairie.  The  village
received  constant  accessions  from  the  missions  in
the  Iroquois  cantons,  and  in  1670  had  become  so
important  that  a  regular  government  was  organ-
ized. A  system  of  laws  was  promulgated,  accord-
ing to  which  no  one  was  allowed  to  reside  in  the
village  except  he  renounced  three  things — belief  in
dreams,  polygamy,  and  drunkenness.  Any  Indian
violating  these  rules  was  expelled.  The  little  colo-
ny was  long  noted  for  the  piety  and  innocent  life
of  its  inhabitants,  who  regarded  their  founder  as  a
saint  and  reverenced  her  as  a  mother.

GANNETT,  Ezra  Stiles,  clergyman,  b.  in  (  am-
bridge,  Mass.,  4  May,  1801 ;  d.  near  Boston,  Mass.,
25  June,  1871.  He  was  a  grandson  of  President
Ezra  Stiles  of  Yale.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
with  first  honors  in  1820.  studied  divinity,  and  in
1824  became  the  colleague  of  Dr.  William  K.  t  han-
ning  in  Boston,  finally  succeeding  him  as  pastor.
He  was  a  foremost  figure  in  the  Unitarian  contro-
versy which  agitated  the  New  England  churches  in
1825-'35.  but  in  the  latter  year  was  driven  by  ill-
ness to  Europe,  and  during  the  summer  following
his  return  was  seized  with  a  paralytic  stroke,  which

left  him  a  cripple  for  life. Hebecam >-ed

the  "Christian  Examiner,"  and, his  lecture-,  at


BBO


tarian  doctrines  were  the  delight  of Boston
,_'i.in-. Hi delivered  the  annual  slsotion
tsmion  hi  1849,  m  1848  the  "Dudklan  led

hi  that  vear  wax  given  the  degree  of  I).  I>.  by

II took  pejl  in  ■  neond  control
h  arose  in  the  I  nitarian  denomination,  end,
i  inscribed a-  be  Vll  bl  hi- infirmity,  lie  did

am  amount  of  mini-tcrial  end  literary  wi.rk.

||, m  ,  i.  nt  of  tin-  Amerioen  Unitarian  asao-

ii  in IM7  ".*)!,  of  the Benevolent frat«>niity

hurches  in  1857  ''•'■  end  an  overseer  of  Har-

1  'n  the  bronze  baa-reliefs  of  the

soldiers'  monument  «»n  Boston  roramon his  (ace

«j>|H-itrs  in  tin-  sanitary  commission  group ;  end

I'r lman's  aid  soeietv  had his  U-st  labors  in

its  behelf. II"1  was  killed  by  a  railway  accident.

(.  \\NON.  Mary,  actress,  h.  in  New  York  ritv,
I.  there,  '2-2  Feb.,  1868.  She  wee
d  on  the  stage  by  bef  jwri-nts  when  she  was
three  years  of  age,  in  the  Richmond  Hill  theatre,
end  at  the  age  of  -ix  ap|>carcd  at  the  Bowerv  the-
atre. For  yean  she  played  child's  parts,  end  later
ap|>eared  in  medley  performances  that  involved
song,  deuce,  and  rapid  changes  of  character.  In
•  Miss  (iannon  married  George  W.  Stephen-
eon,  a  lawyer  of  New  York  city,  who  BOOH  died.
Beeiuming  her  maiden  name,  she  became  sue
ively  a  member  of  several  stock  companies,  ami
was'  valued  for  her  sprightliness  and  versatility.
She  excelled  in  comedy  and  burlesque,  but  was
not  without  ability  to  render  sentimental  and  pa-
thetic characters  effectively.

(.  \  NO,  John,  clergymen,  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  J.,
22  July.  1727;  d.  near  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1804.
He  was  of  Huguenot  extraction,  his  great-grand-
father, Francis  Gevneaux,  having  escaped  from  the
island  of  Guernsey  during  the  persecution  of  the
Pmtestants  and  settled  at  New  Ilocbelle,  N,  Y.
His  education  was  irregular  end  limited.  He  was
lined.  21)  May,  17~>4.  as  pastor  of  the  Scotch
Mains, N.  J.. Baptist church,  and  shortly  after-

ird  travelled  and  preached  extensively  in  the
southern  colonies,  and  was  settled  as  pastor  for
two  years  in  North  Carolina.  In  1700  he  returned
to  N'ew  Jersey,  and  also  preached  for  a  while  in

liladclphia  and  New  York.  When,  in  1708,  the
1st  Baptist  church  in  New  York  was  organized,
to  became  its  pastor  and  continued  successfully  in
this  relation  for  twenty-six  years.  Mr.  Gajio  was
en  ardent  patriot,  and  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution
served  for  some  time  as  chaplain  to  Gen.  Clinton's
New  York  brigade.  In  the  conflict  on  Chatterton
Hill  he  was  continually  under  fire,  displaying  a
and  o,uiet  courage,  which  commanded  the  ad-
miration of  officers  and  men.  Returning  to  New
York  at  the  close  of  the  war  he  found  his  church
scattered  and  greatly  reduced,  but  prosperity  soon
returned.  In  May,  1788,  he  removed  t,,  Kentucky,
and  became  pastor  of  the  Town  Fork  church,  near
Lexington,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.  Ib-
was  twice  married  ;  his  first  wife  was  the  sister  of
the  wifaof  Dr.  Manning,  first  president  of  Brown
university.  It  has  been  said  of  him  that,  "as  a
minister  of  <  'hrist,  he  shone  like  a  star  of  the  first
nitude  in  the  American  churches." — His  son,
phen,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  citv.  25  Dec.
.':  d.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,  is  Aug..  1*2S.  was
prevented  by  the  Revolutionary  war  from  receiv-
ing a  collegiate  education,  and  pursued  a  short
r f  study  with  reference  to  the  medical  pro-
fession. He  was  appointed  a  surgeon  in  the  army
at  the  aire  of  nineteen,  and  for  two  years  was  in  the
public  service.  While  practising  as  a  physician  at
Tappan.  now  Orangetown,  N.  Y..  he  was  convert-
ed, and.  at  once  feeling  it  hi-  duty  to  give  himself


to  the  Christien  mini-try,  was  oedsined

ter  preaching  for  a  time  In  th.

•  rk  lie  was  called,  in  17W.  t<»  the  pastor-
ate of  the  1-t  Baptist  church  in  Providence,  R.  1.
II.  accepted  the  call  and  s|M'iit  the  remainder  of
hi-  day-  in  iniiii-tering.  with  distinction  and  -u<-
Osee, to this, the oldest Ba|»ti-t church in the

United  state-. Be  was  one  of  the  overseers  of

bVDWn  university  from  1784  till  hi-  •hath.

(.  \Nn|  .  HerVM  Doddridge,  clergvman.  b.  in
Fishkill.  N.  Y..  7  Feb..  1888, Be  wee  graduated  at

Columbia  in  1888  end  el  the  New  Brunswick  semi-
nary in  1H4:{.  He  wa-  Uosnesd  to  pn-a>-h  in  1*43,
and  had  charge  of  Dutch  Reformed  churches  in
bold,  N.  J.,  and  New  York  city  till  1876,  when
he  beoanie  pastor  of  the  first  Presbyterian  church
in  St.  Louis.  Tin-  charge  he  resigned  in  1888,  to
Ix-coine  lir-t  secretary  of  the  Prnshjtni JSII  boaM  Of
aid  for  college-  and  academies,  in  Chicago,  111.  In
lWl  the  degree  of  I).  I),  was  conferred  ii|«>n  him
by  Rutgers  college.  His  publication-  are  ••  Bible
Slave-holding  not  Sinful."  a  reply  to  "Slave-hold-
ing not  Sinful"  by  Dr.  Samuel  B.  How  (1856),  and
various  sermons  and  hvinns.

GANSKVOORT,  IVter,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  17  July.  174l>;  d.  there.  2  July.  1*12.  He
was  appointed  major  of  the  2d  New  York  regi-
ment. 1!)  July,  177."),  and  in  August  joined  the
army  that  invaded  Canada  under  Montgomery.
He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  19  March,  1770,
colonel  of  the  3d  regiment.  21  Nov..  1770,  and  ap-
[H.inted  to  the  command  of  Fort  George.  In  April,
1777,  he  had  charge  of  Fort  Schuyler,  previously
called  Fort  Stanwix,  and  gallantly  defended  it
against  the  British  and  Indians  under  St  Leger,
whose  co-operation  with  Burgoyne  he  prevented.
The  siege  lasted  twenty  days,  and  for  his  vigorous
SMfioe  he  received  a  vote  of  thanks  from  congress.
In  the  spring  of  1779  he  was  ordered  to  join  Sulli-
van in  his  western  expedition.  He  distinguished
himself  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  picked  men  bv
■uprising  the  lower  Mohawk  castle,  and  captured
all  the  Indian  inhabitants  by  the  dexterity  of  his
movements.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-general
in  1781  by  the  legislature  of  New  York.  In  1783
he  accompanied  Gen.  Washington  on  his  tour  to
the  northern  battle-fields.  During  the  controversy
caused  by  the  New  Hampshire  land  grants,  many
of  the  insurgent  regiments  belonged  to  Gen.  (ian-e-
voort's  brigade.  These  dist  urbances  an  »se  in  Schagh-
ticoke,  St.  Coyeh,  and  adjacent  regions. He  re-

S aired  to  Saratoga  and  solicited  troops  from  Gen.
tark,  but  the  latter  refused  to  interfere  unless  or-
dered by  (Jen.  Heath,  his  superior  officer.  With
what  volunteers  he  could  raise,  GaiiM-voort  ad-
vanced to  St.  Ooyoh,  where  he  found  a  force  of
500  men  ready  to  support  the  insurgent  militia
Having  only  SO  men.  ne  retired  five  miles,  and  at-
tempted, by  writing  to  the  leaders,  to  induce  them
to  lay  down  their  arms,  but  his  request  was  in
vain,  and  the  so-called  reliels  remained  undis-
turlied.  (Jen.  Ganscvoort  filled  several  ini|N>rtant
offices.  He  was  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs,
commissioner  for  fortifying  the  frontiers,  and
militarv  agent.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-general
in  the  l'.  S.  army  in  1H<M>. —  His  brother,  Leonard,
h,  in  Albany  in  1751  :  d.  there  in  1H10.  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Continental  congress  from  New  York
during  1787-'8.  He  was  also  a  BMBBbsr  of  the
New  York  provincial  congress,  state  senator  in
1781  Vend  L797-1808,and  member  of  assembly  in
I  ad  1788  Sto  country-seat  of  White  HeU,
near  Albany,  formerly  renowned  for  its  geoeroVS
hospitality,  was  occupied  by  his  deeeesnents  un-
til recently,  when  it  was  destroyed  by  fire.— Peters'


090


GANTT


GARAY


I


OOlMln.  Leonard,  b.  in  1754;  d.  in  1834,  was  first
judge  of  Albany  county  in  1794-7.— Peter's  grand-
soii,  (inert,  naval  ofttoer,  b.  in  Ghuuaroott,  Sam-
toga  co.,  N.  V..  7  June,  1812;  d.  in  Schenectady.
N.  Y.,  15  July,  18(18,  was  the  son  of  Leonard  11.
(iauM'v.M.rt.  lie  was  appointed  midshipman  in
1888;  Lieutenant  In  1887:  oonunander,  14  Sept.,
1855;  oaptain.  18  July.  1S(>2 ;  and  commodore  in
is»><>.  lie  was  lieutenant  on  the  brig  "Somers"
when  Commander  Alexander  S.  Mackenzie  exe-
cuted Midshipman  Spencer  for  mutiny  (see  Mac-
kknzik),  and  waf  one  of  the  council  of  officers  that
approved  and  sustained  the  act.  lie  rose  to  promi-
nence during  the  Mexican  war,  in  which  he  distin-
guished himself  in  command  of  the"  John  Adams."
le  was  engaged  in  the  Indian  war  of  1856,  and
did  honorable  service  in  the  battle  of  Sitka  on  the
Pacific  coast.  For  some  time  after  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  chief  of  the  ordnance  de-
partment at  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard,  but  subse-
quently was  in  command  of  the  iron-clad  "  Roan-
oke." His  last  cruise  ended  in  September,  18G4,
and  he  retired  as  commodore  on  28  Jan.,  1867.
His  service  in  the  navy  covered  a  period  of  forty-
five  years,  eighteen  being  spent  at  sea.

GANTT,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  Prince
George  county,  Md.,  in  1746;  d.  near  Louisville,
Ky.,  about  1837.  He  studied  medicine,  received
the  degree  of  M.  D.,  and  entered  on  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  Somerset  county,  Md.  His  atten-
tion was  next  turned  to  the  ministry,  for  which  he
made  due  preparation.  He  then  went  to  England,
where  he  obtained  orders  in  1770.  Returning  home,
he  officiated  for  a  time  in  his  native  parish,  and  in
1776  went  to  All  Hallow's  parish,  Worcester  coun-
ty. Four  years  later  he  became  rector  of  his  na-
tive parish,  and  sustained  himself  on  his  estate  by
the  practice  of  medicine.  In  1795  he  removed  to
Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  occupied  himself  in  the  du-
ties of  the  ministry.  After  1800  he  was  repeatedly
chosen  chaplain  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  About  1807,
under  the  auspices  of  Bishop  CJaggett,  he  went  to
Kentucky,  in  the  interests  oi  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church,  and  died  there  at  an  advanced  age.

GARAKONTHIE,  Daniel,  chief  of  Onondaga
Indians,  d.  in  Onondaga,  N.  Y.,  in  1676.  After
the  flight  of  the  French  missionaries  from  Onon-
daga in  1658,  Garakonthie,  who,  although  not  yet
a  Christian,  had  examined  with  care  the  customs  of
the  French  colonists,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  mis-
sionaries, became  openly  the  protector  of  the  Chris-
tians and  an  earnest  advocate  for  peace.  In  1661
he  persuaded  the  Onondagas  to  send  an  embassy
to  Quebec,  and  to  restore  some  of  their  captives  as
a  preliminary  to  peace.  Father  Le  Moyne  accom-
panied the  embassy  on  its  return,  and  was  received
with  great  honor  by  Garakonthie,  who  converted
his  cabin  into  a  chapel  for  the  missionary.  The
chief  then  set  out  on  an  embassy  to  Montreal  with
nine  of  the  French  prisoners.  He  was  well  re-
ceived, restored  his  captives,  and  obtained  the  lib-
eration of  several  of  his  countrymen.  On  his  re-
turn he  baffled  the  efforts  of  the  chiefs  who  wished
to  make  war  on  the  French,  frustrated  a  plot
against  Le  Moyne's  life,  and  prepared  to  conduct
the  missionary  and  the  remaining  captives  to  the
St.  Lawrence  in  1662.  During  the  war  that  fol-
lowed the  departure  of  Le  Moyne,  Garakonthie  en-
deavored to  procure  the  release  of  French  captives,
and  protected  the  little  body  of  Christians  at  Onon-
daga as  far  as  his  authority  extended.  In  the  spring
of  1664  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  decree  of  the
council  for  another  embassy,  the  object  of  which
was  to  restore  the  French  prisoners  and  solicit
peace; but  the French,  while  expressing  their


gratitude  for  the  efforts  of  Garakonthie,  avoided
making  terms. In  August,  however,  an  agreement

was  made  for  an  exchange  of  prie ire,  and  he  set

out  with  the  French  captives,  hut  his  parts  was
attacked  by  the  Algouquins,  and,  after  sew  i
compelled  to  return.  Although  always  friendly  to
the  French,  and  feeling  the  truth  of  Christianity,
lie  did  not  show  any  desire  to  become  a  Christian
until  1669.  Then, at  a  conference  with  the  French
governor  in  Quebec,  he  declared  his  love  for  Chris-
tianity, and  that  he  renounced  "polygamy,  the
vanity  of  dreams,  and  every  kind  of  sin.  1 1
baptised  with  great  pomp  in  the  cathedral  of  Que-
bec by  Bishop  Laval,  the  governor  being  his  god-
father, and  Mile.  Bouteroue,  the  daughter  of  the
intendant,  his  godmother.  He  received  the  name
of  Daniel  at  the  font,  and  was  then  entertained
with  honor  in  the  castle.  His  conversion  produced
a  great  effect,  not  only  at  Onondaga,  but  in  the
other  settlements.  Some  of  the  sachems  endeav-
ored to  diminish  his  influence,  declaring  that  he
was  no  longer  a  man,  and  that  the  black  robes
had  disordered  his  intellect ;  but  when  any  em-
bassy was  to  be  sent,  or  an  eloquent  speaker  was
desired  for  any  occasion,  Garakonthie  quickly  re-
covered all  his  power.  His  influence  was  recog-
nized even  by  the  English  governors  of  New  York,
who  asked  his  mediation  to  effect  a  peace  between
the  Mohawks  and  Mohegans.  ne  was  frequently
engaged  on  embassies  to  New  York  and  Albany,  as
well  as  to  Quebec  and  Montreal.  He  opposed  the
superstitions  and  dances  of  the  tribes,  and  did
much  to  check  them.  When  he  found  his  end  ap-
proaching he  gave  his  last  counsels  to  his  family,
and  ordering  the  funeral  banquet  to  be  prepared,
he  invited  to  it  the  chiefs  of  Onondaga,  and  sang
his  death-song.  Then  he  exhorted  the  sachems  to
become  Christians  and  to  banish  liquor  from  the
cantons.  In  order  to  induce  his  countrymen  to
follow  his  precepts,  Garakonthie  had  adopted  many
European  customs,  and  had  learned  to  read  and
write,  although  advanced  in  years.

GARAY,  Francisco  de,  Spanish  explorer,  d.  in
Mexico  in  1523.  He  was  a  companion  of  Colum-
bus on  his  second  voyage,  was  afterward  famed  for
his  opulence,  and  became  governor  of  Jamaica.  In
1519  Alvaro  Alonso  de  Pineda  commanded  a  fleet
of  four  ships  which  were  sent  out  by  Garay  to
Yucatan.  The  ostensible  object  of  the  voyage  was
to  search  for  a  strait  west  of  Florida,  but  pecuniary
gain  was  the  real  purpose.  The  strait  was  not
found,  and  the  ships,  turning  toward  the  west,
explored  rivers  and  ports,  and  communicated  with
the  inhabitants.  They  finally  reached  Vera  Cruz,
and  a  pillar  was  set  up  between  that  place  and
Tampico  to  commemorate  the  discoveries  of  Garay.
After  eight  months  of  exploration,  the  navigators
took  possession  of  the  region  for  300  leagues  along
the  coast  in  the  name  of  the  crown  of  Castile.  The
Mississippi,  then  called  "  Espiritu  Santo,"  was  shown
distinctly  on  the  maps  of  Garay's  pilots.  When
Charles  V.  examined  the  account  of  the  explorer,  a
royal  edict  was  issued  in  1521  granting  Garay  the
privilege  of  colonizing  at  his  own  cost  the  region
he  had  discovered,  the  limits  of  the  grant  being  to  a
point  south  of  Tampico  and  the  extreme  discovert
of  Ponce  de  Leon,  near  the  Alabama  coast.  This
did  not  satisfy  Garay,  and  in  1523  he  lost  fortune
and  life  in  a  personal  dispute  with  Cortes  for  the
control  of  the  region  on  the  river  Panuco.

GARAY,  Juan  de,  Spanish  soldier,  h.  in  the
Basque  provinces  in  1541 ;  d.  in  South  America  in
1584.  He  was  born  of  an  illustrious  but  poor
family,  and.  in  the  hope  of  bettering  his  fortunes.
embarked  with  other adventurers for America.


9ABd  I


m


The  governor  of  Paraguay  Appointed  him  his  sec-

.! hi'  -hiii bSOainc dissatisfied with his

linn, nml unsuccessfully requested *-ni|

• in tin- army. Shortly  afterward he

[hut  the  Indians  were  about  to  attack  the

i.  unci  with  forty  Spaniards  put  to  tli^rJit  sev-

hundred  "f the  ravages, lie  was  then  ap-

potnted  captain,  and  tent  with  eightj  Span Utm

til  up  thi-  Parana.  After  undergoing  numer-
ous dangers  and  discovering  an  immense  country,

lunded,  li-iir  I ln»  river,  in  July,  1578,  the  city
Fe  dc  Vera-Cruz,  but before  finishing  it

ras  oblige*!  to  hasten  to  the  aid  of  his  govern-
Bent  against  the  Charruas  Indians.  He  gave  but-
t  he  river  Uruguay,  and  defeated  them
OOtnpletely.  As  a  reward  for  these  services  he  whs
named  lieutenant-general  by  Philip  II.,  and  was
afterward  appointed  governor  <>f  Assuncion  in
1578.  1 1  *t  \  i  r  i  l:  visited  the  old  site  of  Buenos  Ay  res,
he  founded  thai  city  anew  in  1580  on  the  ruins  of

tin-  old,  and  surrounded  it  with  fortifications.  8

tag  that  he  was  obliged  to  meet  frequent  attacks
by  the  Indians,  he  thought  the  best  wav  to  spare
the  effusion  of  I>1<mk1  was  to  try  to  civilize  them.

iii|Minie<l  by  missionaries,  he  travelled  over  the
different  countries  of  his  government  with  t hi-
t.  He  formed  the  Indians  into  colonies,  built
villages,  cave  thein  laws  and  established  MBOOg
them  chiefs  who,  by  their  conduct,  made  the  Span-
ish name  loved  among  the  natives.  The  latter
looked  on  the  Spanish  governor  as  their  protector,
and  were  always  ready  to  arm  in  his  defence.  He
then  sailed  up  the  Parana  in  order  to  reach  As-

ion,  but,  meeting  with  a  storm,  he  was  obliged
to  land  in  an  unknown  country  about  the  80th
degree  of  latitude.  Here,  during  the  night,  he  was
surprised  by  savages  who  massacred  himjind  thirty-
nine  of  his  companions.

BABCE8,  Julian  (gar'-thes),  Mexican  K.  ('.
bishop,  1).  in  Muncbrega,  Aragon.  in  1457;  d.  in
Puelila.  Mexico,  U  Dec.,  1-147.  He  belonged  to  a
distinguished  family,  ami  in  his  youth  entered  the
Dominican  order  in  San  Pedro  de  <  'alatayud.  His
superiors  sent  him  to  France  to  perfect  his  studies,
and  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  theology  of  the
Borbonne  in  1488.  In  1497  he  was  appointed  by
IsaU'lla  I.  professor  at  Alcala,  and  at  the  same  time
acquired  fame  as  one  of  the  principal  pulpit  orators
of  the  kingdom.  Charies  V.  made  him  his  chap-
lain and  court-preacher,  and  in  1519  appointed
him  to  the  bishopric  of  Yucatan,  but,  owing  to
continuous  warfare  with  the  Indians,  that  see  was
Dot  constituted  till  many  years  afterward,  and  in
•  (Jarces  was  assigned'  to  the  newly  watted
bishopric  of  Tlaxcala,  the  third  in  the  New  World
i  he  discovery.  He  was  consecrated  at  Badajoz
in  L527,  and  in  February.  1529,  took  possession  of
the  see.  He  converted  and  baptized  many  thou-
sand Indians,  and  from  the  beginning  constituted
himself  a  zealous  defender  of  the  race,  represent-
ing to  the  emperor  the  unhappy  condition  of  the
aborigines,  and  even  trying  to  interest  the  pope  in
their  favor  by  Ins  open  letter  of  1586,  of  which  a

-lotion has  U-eii  published  by Davila  in his

tv.  This  letter  was  much  commented  on,
as  it  revealed  for  the  first  time  in  Europe  the  true
State  of  affairs  in  the  New  World,  and  excited  the
apprehension  of  the  government,  so  that  Charl<
wrote  an  autograph  letter  to  Garces,  admonishing
him  to  avoid for  the  future  public  discussion  Of

rican  affairs, Qarces,  however,  continued  h,s
course  in  favor  of  the  Indians,  although  with
publicity,  and  to  his  endeavors  with  the  authorities
was  probably  due  the more  merciful  policy  that
was  observed  toward  the  Indians  of  Mexico,  and


their  liberty  fr«>m  the  servitude  imposed  on
ruvian  Indians.  I  hiring  (Jarces's  administration
the  city  i.f  Puebla  de  \,,s  Angeles  WSJ  founded,  to
which  he  transferred  tin-  SSSH  Of  the  bishopric  lb-
wrote  a  nommsntirj  on  the  works  ol  St  Augustiu,
the  manuscript  of  which  existed  in  1894  En  the

library  of  Tlaxcala.  According  to  the  historian,
Ferdinand  Denis,  there  exi«ts  also  at  tin-  lihran  01
the  Kscorial  (Madrid)  a  manuscript  MstOfJof  the
cmiqiicst of  Mexico  by  (iaroes,

(.  Mf<  1A,  Alexo  (gur-thc-uh).  Portuguese  ex-
plorer.!), in  <)|«irto  in  I486;  d.  in  [pare,  Uruguay,
in  ISM  He  came  to  Siuth  America  with  tie
|H-diti<.n  of  Diaz  de  Solis  in  1510,  and  when  that
explorer  was  killed,  Garcia  SSSaned,  married  an  In-
dian woman,  and  BOOS)  gained  intluence  with  the
neighboring  tribes.  With  their  help  he  explored
the  country  watered  by  the  rivers  Plate.  1'ruguav,
and  Parana,  and  in  1524  ascended  the  Paraguay
river  nearly  to  its  sources.  In  the  next  year  he
psjMtrated  M  far  M  the  Andes,  mid  acquired  from
ths  Indians  some  bars  of  .silver,  which  subsequently
fell  into  the  hands  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  and  caused
the  latter  to  name  the  river  Plate.  In  1520  Garcia
resolved  t<>  reach  the  kingdom  of  the  Incas,  of
which  he  had  heard.  He  carried  with  him  his  wife
and  son,  but  was  attacked  by  hostile  Indians,  and
assassinated.  His  son  was  carried  into  captivitv,
but  liberated  in  1548  by  Alvar  Nunez  OahSSn  de
Vaea,  and  became  one  of  the  most  useful  inter-
preters of^the  colonial  government.

(■ARC  I  A,  Diego,  Portuguese  navigator,  b.  in
Lisbon  in  1471:  d.  in  Madrid  in  1889  (according
to  Sala,  about  1535).  He  entered  the  Spanish  SST*
vice  in  his  youth,  and  undertook  in  1511  an  expedi-
tion to  South  America,  the  accounts  of  which  have
Inch  lost.  Garcia  was  at  Palos  de  Moguer  when
Charles  V.  resolved  to  send  an  expedition  to  ex-
plore the  southern  seas  under  Sebastian  Cal>ot,and
at  the  same  time  the  mercantile  company,  formed
for  the  spice-trade  at  Corufta,  fitted  out  an  expedi-
tion, of  which  the  command  was  given  to  Garcia.
He  sailed  with  three  vessels,  15  Jan.,  1520,  from
Cape  Finisterre,  and.  after  a  long  and  stormv  pas-
sage, anchored  in  Sun  Vicente.  1 1  Jan.,  1527.  There
he  found  a  Portuguese  settler,  Joao  Hmnalho,  who
had  been  abandoned  on  the  coast  bv  the  fust  dis-
coverer of  Brazil,  Pedro  Alvarez  Cabral.  and  from
him  obtained  provisions.  After  exploring  the
Uruguay  river,  and  sailing  up  the  Parana  as  far  as
27°  S.,  he  met,  in  July,  1527,  a  launch,  manned  by
Europeans,  from  whom  he  learned  that  Sebastian
('abut,  whose  expedition  hail  left  Spain  after  him,
was  besieged  by  Indians  farther  down  the  river.
Garcia  sailed  immediately  to  his  aid,  and.  after  de-
feating the  Indians  in  several  battles,  continued  to
explore  the  upper  course  of  the  river,  and,  leaving
his  ships  at  the  mouth  of  the  Paraguay.  a><  ended
that  river  in  his  boats  as  far  as  18°  S.  He  fought
continuous  battles  with  the  Indians,  and.  not  find-
ing any  precious  metals,  abandoned  his  explora-
tion, and  in  October,  1888*  sailed  for  Spain.  Ib-
is said  to  have  made,  about  1582,  a  voyage  to  the
RssJ  Indies,  in  which  he  discovered  the  fertile  isl-
and named  after  him.  situated  about  400  miles
from  Mauritius.  Gun  ia's  narrative  of  his  exjndi-
tion.  with  a  map,  was  published  in  the  15th  vol-
ume of  ths  "  Kevista  do  instituto  historieo  e  geo-
graphico  do  Hrasil."  Bes  also  Adolpho  de  Varn-
hagen's  "  Historia  GetsJ  do  Hrasil,"  and  Ferdinand

Denis's  "  I.e  BresQ."
GARCIA,  Manuel,  Chiliun  soldier,  b.  in  Sun-
1808 d.  near  Santiago,  4  March,  1878, In
. ho  became  a  cadet  in  the  military  school  es-
tablished by  O'Higgins,  took  part  in  the  battle  of


099


garcIa


Maypu,  5  April,  1818,  and  in  December,  1825,  took

fiart  in  Freire's  second  expedition  against  Cbiloe,
Of  which  he  was  promoted  captain.  In  1827  he
assist. id  in  the  campaign  against  the  Indians  of
Marilnan.  and  in  1828  against  the  bandit  Pincheira,
and  was  afterward  appointed  military  commander
of  Const itucion.  He  participated  in  the  first  and
second  expeditions  against  Peru,  and  for  his  gal-
lantry was  promoted  colonel,  and  obtained  two
gold  medals.  In  1851,  although  retired  from  ser-
vice, he  took  command  of  the  troops  against  the
revolutionists.  In  1854  he  was  promoted  general
of  brigade,  and  in  1857  appointed  secretary  of  war
and  the  navy,  which  place  he  held  till  1862.  In
that  year  he  was  promoted  to  general  of  division,
and  then  retired  to  private  life,  but  for  one  term
was  a  deputy  to  the  national  OOPgTOM.

GARCfA",  Manuel  de  Populo  Vicente,  vo-
calist, b.  in  Seville,  Spain,  22  Jan.,  1775;  d.  in
Paris,  2  June,  1832.  He  began  his  musical  course
at  the  age  of  six  as  a  chorister  in  the  cathedral  of  his
native  city.  Before  attaining  manhood  he  had  be-
come known  throughout  Spain  as  a  tenor  and  a
composer  of  church  music  and  comic  operas.  In
1808  he  appeared  in  Paris  for  the  first  time  in  Ital-
ian opera,  and  for  many  years  continued  a  favor-
ite in  most  European  capitals.  Garcia's  career  is
memorable  for  his  experimental  introduction  of
the  earliest  Italian  opera-company  in  the  United
States.  It  was  in  1825,  when  they  sang  in  the
New  York  Park  theatre.  This  served  to  present
before  the  American  public  his  daughter,  Maria
Felicia,  afterward  Madame  Malibran.  Garcia's
troupe,  continued  in  this  country  nearly  two  years,
singing  occasionally  in  concert  and  oratorio.  The
company  then  departed  for  Mexico,  where  they  re-
mained about  a  year,  and  on  their  way  homeward,
between  the  capital  and  Vera  Cruz,  were  robbed
by  a  party  of  brigands  of  all  their  money  and  valu-
ables. Garcia  soon  again  found  himself  in  the
Italian  opera-company  in  Paris.  The  quality  of
his  voice  was  not  remarkable,  and,  as  it  had  become
worn  and  newer  favorites  attracted  the  public,  he
determined  to  establish  a  school  for  instruction  in
vocal  music.  In  this  he  was  pre-eminently  suc-
cessful. Garcia  wrote,  in  all,  forty-three  operas,
furnishing  the  words  to  most  of  them.  His  daugh-
ters, Maria  and  Paulina,  became  celebrated  singers.
GARClACALDERON,  Francisco,  Peruvian
statesman,  b.  in  Arequipa.  18  April,  1829.  In  1842
he  entered  the  college  of  the  Independencia  in  his
native  city,  where  he  was  graduated  in  law,  and
was  appointed  professor  of  philosophy  and  mathe-
matics in  1849.  In  1850  he  obtained  the  degree  of
LL.  D.,  and  in  1852  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  the
superior  court  of  Arequipa.  being  appointed  in  1854
professor  of  jurisprudence  of  the  university.  He
was  elected  deputy  to  congress  and  president  of
the  chamber  in  18(57,  and  in  1868  was  secretary  of
the  treasury.  After  the  occupation  of  Lima  by' the
Chilians,  16  Jan.,  1881,  the  conquerors  refused  to
treat  for  peace  with  Pierola,  and  the  citizens  started
a  movement  for  the  election  of  a  provisional  gov-
ernment. The  Chilian  governor  favored  the  idea,
and  Garcia-Calderon  was  elected.  He  called  to-
gether the  old  congress,  which  had  been  elected
before  the  war,  but  only  a  few  representatives  an-
swered his  summons.  The  congress  refused  to  au-
thorize the  president  to  consent  to  any  permanent
cession  of  Peruvian  territory,  and  was  dissolved  by
an  order  of  Admiral  Lynch  on  23  Aug.  Mean-
while Garcia  was  buoved  up  with  the  hope  of  an
intervention  by  the  United  States,  and  was  ar-
rested by  order  of  the  Chilian  governor,  on  6  Nov.,
on  the  pretext  that  he  had  solicited  foreign  inter-


GARCfA DE  QUEVEDO

vent  inn.  A  few  days  afterward  they  were  hflM
Ported  to  Chili,  and  kept  prisoners  on  parole  in
Santiago  till  the  end  of  the  year,  when  Garcia  re-
turned to  Lima.  On  the  instalment  of  Y_
government  in  1884,  Garcia  was  elect  ed  to  the  -en-
ate  and  appointed  president  of  that  body,  wh,ich
position  be  still  holds  (1887).  He  is  a  correspond-
ing member  of  the  Spanish  academy,  member  of
man;  South  American  literary  and  scientific  socie-
ties, has  contributed  largely  to  current  literature,
and  has  published  a  "  Diccionario  de  la  Legisla-
tion Peruana"  (1859-'62).

GARCIA-CONDE,  Pedro,  Mexican  soldier,  b.
in  Arispe,  8  Feb.,  1806 ;  d.  there,  19  Dec.,  1851.
His  father  was  Spanish  military  governor  of  the
northwest  inland  provinces.  He  Decame  a  cadet
in  the  regiment  of  Cerro-Gordo  in  Durango  in  1*1 7.
He  was  promoted  until  he  held  the  rank  of  captain,
when  independence  was  declared,  27  Sept.,  1821.
In  1835  he  took  part  in  the  campaign  against
Texas,  and  after  the  defeat  and  capture  of  Santa
Anna,  21  April,  1836,  was  appointed  inspector-
general  of  militia.  On  30  June,  1838,  he  was
promoted  colonel  and  appointed  director  of  the
military  college,  which  post  he  held  till  1844,  in-
troducing many  reforms.  On  23  Oct.,  1841,  he  ob-
tained the  full  rank  of  general.  In  1844  he  was
elected  to  congress  for  the  state  of  Sonora,  but  took
part  in  the  revolution  of  6  Dec.  against  Santa
Anna,  and,  being  appointed  by  Gen.  Herrera  secre-
tary of  war,  resigned  the  direction  of  the  military
college.  As  secretary  he  began  the  reorganization
of  the  army,  but,  before  he  could  conclude  it,  a  new
revolution,  headed  by  Gen.  Paredes,  in  1846,  over-
threw the  government.  While  Garcia  was  in  ban-
ishment in  Chihuahua,  the  war  with  the  United
States  began.  He  offered  his  services  to  the  govern-
ment, was  appointed  commander  of  the  cavalry  on
the  northwestern  frontier,  and  as  such  assisted  in
the  battle  of  Sacramento.  He  was  elected  senator
in  1847,  and  joined  congress  in  November  in
Queretaro,  where  it  was  in  session  during  the  oc-
cupation of  the  capital  by  the  American  forces.
After  the  treaty  of  peace,  Garcia  became  president
of  the  commission  to  fix  the  new  boundary  between
Mexico  and  the United  States. His  death  was

Srobably  hastened  by  the  privations  that  he  en-
ured while  fulfilling  this  duty.
GARCiA-CUBAS,  Antonio,  Mexican  scientist;
b.  in  Mexico  in  1832.  He  studied  in  the  College
of  San  Ildefonso,  and  in  the  Academy  of  mines,
was  commissioned  by  the  government  to  do  impor-
tant geodetical  work  and  explored  the  ruins  of
Mitlatoyuca,  in  the  northern  part  of  the  state  of
Vera  Cruz.  He  was  ordered  to  make  a  design  of
these  ruins  and  plan  a  road  to  be  built  from  Ta-
lancingo  to  Mitlatoyuca.  He  is  a  member  of  sev-
eral scientific  societies  in  America  and  Europe,
and  has  contributed  many  papers  on  archaeology.
He  has  published  "Cuauro  Geografico,  Estadis-
tico,  Descriptivo  e  Historico  de  los  Estados  Unidos
Meiicanos '  (Mexico,  1857;  with  Spanish,  English,
and  French  text,  1885);  "  Mapa  General  de  Mexi-
co "  (1863) ;  "Atlas  Pintoresco  "  (1885) ;  and  many
other  works  of  topographical  drawing ;  arch  a
history,  and  geography.

GARCfA  DE  QUEVEDO,  Jos6  HeriberW,
South  American  author,  b.  in  Coro,  Venezuela,  in
March,  1819;  d.  in  Paris  in  June,  1871.  I
his  parents  removed  to  Porto  Rico,  where  he  re-
ceived his  primary  education.  Later  he  continued
his  studies  in  France  and  Spain.  In  1861  he  re-
moved to  Paris,  and.  on  his  return  from  a  jour-
ney during  the  siege  by  the  troops  of  th<
sailles  government  in  1871,  he  insisted,  agai:


G  \i;<  i  \ I


G  \i;<  ii.aso


m


ii


<  of hi* friend*,  on entering  tin*  city,  was

led hv  »  shot tln-d fr«>in mm  of the  harri-

fiii<l  lii'il  «<miii  afterward. Ili»  poemi  Include

A  la  LilHTla.l."  *A  Fio  i\."  ■•  i».

fhajnnda  Villa,"  ind  ••  ki Proaortto."

so  »T0(«  several dramas,  which  NN rcprc-
1  in  tin-  theatres  of  Madrid,  ami  \\.  r- «•  il
i-d.  and  II  tin-  author  of  tin-  n..\.  I-  ••  Kl  amor
ii  nina."  and  "  Dos  duclos  a 18  afios  de  dis-
A  complete  edition  of  hi*  works  mi  pub*
-Ind  in  Paris  in  |X<
(.  \i;<  I  V  IIKSAN  VICF.NTI.  Sicolu
can  educator,  b. in  Acaxochitlan, 28  Nor.,  I  ?'.»:{;  d.
in  Toluca.28  D  II*-  entered  the  Seminary

of  Puebla  in  1809,  and  then  studied  civil  and  ca-
nonical law  in  the  University  of  Mexico,  where  he
was  graduated  in  Imis.  lb-  was  then  appointed
professor  of  etymology  in  Puebla.  and  in  lsjl  was
ordained  priest  and  obtained  t he  chair  of  grammar
and  geography.  In  1N'J:1  he  was  elected  deputy  for
the  district  of  Tulanciugo  to  t  he  congress  of  I'nebla.
During  1N2M  and  lM2i»  he  was  president  of  the
Society  for  the  protection  of  public  instruction,
which  he  had  founded.  In  1K1U  and  1K40  he  was
professor  of  Latin  and  Spanish  grammar  at  the
College  of  Tiilaucingo.  where  he  eoiitinued  till  his
death.  I  i « -  wrote  a  great  number  of  text-books
for  schools,  nearly  all  in  am  These  include
ttracto  de  Ortografia"  (Mexico.  1880);  "Geo-
ia  de  l«.s  Niflos"  and  "Cosmografia"  (1839):
•grafia  Fisica  y  Politica "  (1840);  "Ortologia
eegun  Sicilia"  (1843);  "  Reglas  de  Etimologis  t
Sintaxis  Uastellana"  (1845).  He  left  unfinished
"  Leceioncs  de  (ieometria,"  and  also  translated
from  the  French  the  Bible  of  Vend,  and  from  the
Italian  the  •■  History  of  California,"  by  Clavijero.

eARCIA-ORANADOS,  Miguel  (garth,  -ah-
grah-nah -dos).  president  of  Guatemala!  I).  alx>ut
:  d.  in  1*78.  In  May,  1S71.  he  headed  a  revo-
lution against  the  reactionary  government  of  Gen.
Vicente  Cerna,  and  on  80  June  was  proclaimed
president,  with  Barrios  as  vice-president.  Garcia
persecuted  no  person  (or  his  political  opinions  and
confiscated  n<>  property,  and  the  country  soon  re-
red  tranquillity.  In  IN?1-'  he  invaded  Hondu-
ras, and  in  the  same  year  decreed  full  liberty  of  the
press,  the  extinction  of  religious  orders,  a  ml  t  he  ex-
pulsion of  the  Jesuits.  In  February,  1873,  there
was  an  attempt  at  reltclliou.  which  was  promptly
put  down.  On  N  May  of  that  year,  (Jarcia  con-
vened the  National  assembly  for  the  election  of  a
constitutional  president,  which  election  resulted  in
favor  of  Gen.  Jose  Uufiuo  Barrios.

fcURClA-MORENO,  Gabriel,  South  Ameri-
can statesman,  h.  in  Guayaquil,  Ecuador,  in  1881  :
d.  in  0,uito,  8  Aug.,  1n7">.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  in  the  University  of  Quito,  and  went  to
Europe  to  finish  his  studies  in  natural  science.  On
his  return  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  and
physics  in  the  University  of  Quito,  and  in  1857
was  elected  its  rector.  In  1H.VJ.  when  the  govern-
ment of  President  Kobles  was  overthrown,  he  be-
came a  member  of  the  provisional  government.
and  in  1801  was  elected  president  for  four  years.
Although  his  character  was  violent,  and  he
mitted  numerous  cruelties,  his  administration
was  iNMieficial  to  the  republic.  The  signing  of  a
ordat  with  Home  in  1804  called  forth  numer-
ous revolutionary  outbreaks,  and.  Ix-ing  invested

h  with  unlimited  power,  be  proclaimed
himself  dictator  on  30  Aug.  In  1865  he  defeated
an  armed  invasion  of  Gen.  Urbina,  near  Tambeli,
and  in  the  elections  of  the  same  year  favored  the

E residency  of  Geronimo  Carrillo,  who  was  installed
i  August,  but  Garcia-Moreno  retained  the  actual

VOL.  II.—


dircetion  of  public  affairs. In  1807  he  was  appoints

ed  minister  to  Chili  ;  but,  after  the  fall  of  the  .
eminent  of  Carrillo  in  1866,  headed  a  revolution,
and again  assumed dictatorial DOWOn. In 1874

he  issued  a  decree,  giving to the |M.pe  the  tell |>cr

cent,  of  the  revenue  which  bclougea  to  the  state.
In  1H7.'»  he  was  again  elected  praanenl  for  another
term  of  six  years.  but  0B  the  eve  of  hi-  reiiistalla-
tion  he  was  attacked  in  the  gallery  of  the  treasury
building l>\ three ptfWfM and fatallv wounded.

».  \i:<  I  \-i:i.\  I  s.  Vntouio.  Chilian  lawyer,  b.
in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1*17:  d.  in  Lima.  Peru.  16
<»(t.,  |s.V».  He  studied  law  in  the  college  of  his
native  city,  and  OS  his  graduation  entered  the  em-
ploy of  the  government.  He  was  appointed  pro-
fessorof  philosophy  and  literature  In  the  National
institute  in  1K{,.  and  founded  in  l*:{s  ■'  Kl  Agri-
cultor."in  1H41  the  "  (Jaceta  dt  lof  Tribune
ami  in  1841  the  f i r- 1  literary  papal  published  in
Chili,  "  Kl  Seinanario,"  of  which  he  remained  a
contributor  for  many  years.  He  had  been  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1*40.  and  in  1848  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  commission  to  form  the  military  code.
In  1847  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  National
congress,  where  he  became  noted  for  his  efojIMOOe,
and  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury.  He
was  a  inemlier  of  the  commission  to  rOYIM  the
civil  code,  and  to  edit  the  criminal  code  in  If
and  in  1855  was  appointed  minister  to  France,
Knglaiid,  Koine,  and  the  United  States,  but  de-
clined on, account  of  failing  health.

CAKC1AS,  Grcgorio,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ooner,
Spain,  in  ISM;  d.  in  Hacza,  Spain,  in  li*-\.'7.  Bfl
holfaifod  to  the  Dominican  order,  was  sent  as  a
missionary  to  America,  and  lived  nine  years  in
Peru,  where  he  was  noted  for  his  success  in  spread-
ing] the  gospel  among  the  Indians.  On  his  return
to  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  the  1 7th  century  ha
was  named  professor  of  moral  theology  in  the  Do-
minican convent  of  Piae/a.  He  published  "  Origcii
de  los  Judios  del  Nuevo  Mundo.  exaniinado  con  un
discurso  sobre  las  Opiniones  Kclativas"  (\  alencia,
1607:  Madrid,  172!*).  of  which  translations  have
appeared  in  Knglish,  French,  and  ( lerman  ;  "  Prvdi-
cacion  del  Kvangclio  an  el  Nuevo  Mundo,  viviendo
loa  Ap6stolesn(fiaesa,  1686);  "  BnsaroCronologioo

para  (a  Historia  general  de  Florida  "(Baeza.  KJ17);
and  "  Historia  <lc  la  Monarquia  de  los  Incas  del
Pert "(8  vols..  Madrid.  1?'J!»>.

9ABCILA80  tor  Gasclib-Laso)  1)E  LA  VE-
GA, Sebastian.  Spanish soldier,  b.  in Bedejos,

Spain,  about  HI*");  d.  in  Cuzco.  Peru,  in  1659.  lb-
was  of  the  same  family  a<  the  Spanish  poet  of  the

same  name. Sebastian  weni  to  Mexico  with  Pedro

de  Alvarado,  and  when  the  latter  returned  to
(iuateinala,  after  the  invasion  of  (^uito.  (iarcilaso
remained  in  Pern,  and  became  a  follower  of  Fran-
cisco Pizarro.  After  Pizarro's  assiLssi nation  he
Joined  the  royal  governor,  and  was  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Chupas.  10  Sept.,  1542.  He  then  joined
Qonaalo  Pizarro,  and  was  forced  by  him.  on  pain
of  death,  to  assist  in  his  insurrection  against  the
viceroy,  Pedro  de  la  (iiis'ti.  In  the  decisive  battle
of  Xa<|iiixaguana.  9  April,  1648.  (iarcilaso  went
over  to  (Jasca's  side  at  the  tunung-poinl  <>f  the
contest,  and  was  afterward  appointed  governor  of
Cuzco.  which  ollice  ha  held  until  his  death.  Ib-
was  noted  for  his  humanity  to  the  Indians,  and
founded  a  hospital  and  other  Ixnevoleiit  institu-
tions for  them.  He  married  an  Indian  princess,
niece  of  Huaina  Capao,  who  was  the  son  of  the
inci,  Tupac-YupatKpti. — Their  son.  stirnauied  The
Inca,  Peruvian  historian,  b.  in  CUBO,  U  April,
1587. The  time  of  his  death  is  uncertain,  but  il  is

■nppnaai  that  bodied  in  Cordova,  Spain,  a  few  years


OM


(iAKDKN


GARDEN


after  1617.  He  wa<  educated  by  a  learned  priot.
wlc  WSJ  Ms  father's  chaplain.  He  hllWMMI  inter-
ested in  the  history  of  his  country  at  an  early  age,
collecting  all  the  'traditions  lie  could  gather  from
the  Indians,  making  journeys  through  every  part  of
ParO, and  transcribing  the  oldest  tODgfl  anil  liyiims

of  th untrv. His mother  SSSJStan him in  his

rest  an  lies,  and  furnished  whatever  details  she  was
■nqnaintfKl  with  concerning  her  unfortunate  family.
A  abort  time  after  the  death  of  his  father  he  em-
barked at  Callao  for  Spain,  21  .Inn.,  1560.  He  served
with  credit,  under  Juan  de  Austria,  in  the  war
against  the  Moors  in  Granada,  and,  after  wasting
tin-  bast  years  of  his  life  in  military  service,  found
himself  poor  and  needy.  In  1584  he  translated
the  "  Dialogues  on  Love"  of  Leon  Abravanel,  and
at  the  same  time  employed  himself  in  writing
the  -  History  of  Florida,  which  he  published  in
Lisbon.  In  1600  he  began  the  first  part  of  the
•M'otueiitariosReales"  (Lisbon,  1009),  and  in  1612
concluded  the  second  part  (Cordova,  1617),  which
forms  a  general  history  of  Peru.  His  works  have
been  translated  into  German.  French,  and  English.
As  a  Peruvian  historian,  he  had  unusual  facilities
for  acquiring  accurate  information.  Many  of  the
conquerors  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  in  his
father's  house  in  Cuzco  and  recounting  their  val-
iant deeds,  and  he  knew  intimately  Gonzalo  Pizarro,
brother  of  the  conqueror.  He  often  exhibits  such
an  ardent  patriotism  and  love  of  liberty  that  it  ap-
pears strange  his  works  should  have  been  allowed
to  be  published  in  any  part  of  the  Spanish  empire
during  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  He  protests  against
the  destruction  of  ancient  buildings  and  records,
and,  although  he  hints  that  he  has  been  compelled
to  restrain  himself  in  his  exposition  of  Spanish
cruelty  in  the  expression  "  No  todo  se  dice '  (all  is
not  told),  his  history  of  the  ancient  Peruvians  is
the  most  thorough  as  well  as  the  most  correct  that
we  have.  He  published  "  La  traduccion  del  Indio
de  los  tres  Dhilogos  de  Amor  de  Leon  Abravanel,
por  Garcilaso  Inca  de  la  Vega,  dirijidos  a  la  sacra
Catolica  Real  Magestad,  Don  Felipe  11° "  (Madrid,
1590) ;  •'  La  Florida  del  Inca,  Historia  del  Adelan-
tado  Hernando  de  Soto,  y  de  otros  heroicos  Cabal-
leros  espafioles  e  indios  '*  (Lisbon,  1605 ;  Madrid,
1723  and  1804).  The  "History  of  Florida"  was
translated  into  French  by  Richelet  (Paris,  1670;
reprinted  in  1707,  with  a  preface  by  the  Abbe
Lenglet-Dufresnoy).  It  was  translated  into  Ger-
man by  H.  L.  Meier  (Zelle,  1753).  "  Primera  Parte
de  los  Comentarios  Reales,  que  tratan  del  origen
de  los  Incas,  Reyes  que  fueron  del  Peru,"  etc.  (Lis-
bon, 1609);  translated  into  French  by  Dabilard
(Paris,  1744).  The  German  translation  by  G.  C.
Bottger  (Nordhausen,  1787)  is  not  complete.  The
second  part,  entitled  "  Historia  General  del  Peru,"
appeared  at  Cordova  in  1617,  and  numerous  edi-
tions have  since  been  published  in  Lisbon  and
Madrid.  An  English  translation  by  Sir  Paul
Ricaut,  knight,  was  published  in  London  in  1688.
It  was  translated  into  French  by  Baudoin  (Paris,
1633,  1650,  1658).  An  Amsterdam  edition  of  this
translation  (1737)  is  very  much  sought  after  on  ac-
count of  its  engravings  by  Bern.

GARDEN,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  Scot-
land al>out  1685  ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  27  Sept..
1756.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  countrv,  and
became  a  clergyman  of  the  church  of  England.  1 1  e
came  to  America  in  1719,  and  shortly  afterward
was  elected  rector  of  St.  Philip's  parish  in  Charles-
ton. S.  ('.,  and  subsequently  he  was  commissary
under  the  bishop  of  London.  Mr.  Garden  began
the  so-called  "annual  meetings  of  the  clergy"
which  was  then  necessitated  by  the  rapid  increase


of  the  Episcopal  church  in  the  province.  The
clergy  were  Ural  convened  <ui  20  Oct.,  1781,  whan
\iiiliitcil  to  the  commissary  their  letters  of
orders  and  license  to  perform  the  ministerial  func-
tions in  the  province.  Mr.  Qardeo  resigned  his
office  in  1748,  but  the  clerical  convocations  con-
tinued. In  1735  he  was  compelled  to  take  a  res-
pite from  his  labors,  and  visited  the  northern
provinces.  The  assembly  in  1736  made  an  appro-
priation for  the  support  of  an  assistant  to  Mr.
Garden,  and  the  Rev.  William  Orr  waselected.  In
1740  he  began  a  controversial  correspondence  with
Rev.  George  Whitefield,  which  attracted  much  at-
tention. Mr.  Garden  was  interested  in  the  instruc-
tion of  the  colored  people.  In  1743  he  solicited
aid  from  the  Society  lor  propagating  the  gospel,  in
behalf  of  the  negro  school  in  Charleston,  which
then  consisted  of  thirty  children.  A  large  contri-
bution of  Bibles,  prayer-books,  and  text-book-  was
at  once  made, and  in  1750  Mr.  Garden  gave  to  the
society  a  favorable  report  of  the  progress  of  the
school.  In  1754  he  resigned  the  rectorship  of
St.  Philip's,  and  was  presented  by  his  vestry  with
a  valuable  set  of  plate.  Shortly  after  this  Mr.
Garden  embarked  for  England,  where  he  intend-
ed to  remain,  but  subsequently  returned  to  Charles-
ton and  died  there.  He  published  "Six  Letters
to  the  Rev.  Geo.  Whitefield,"  the  first,  second,
and  third  of  which  were  on  the  subject  of  "  Jus-
tification" (1740),  and  "Two  Sermons"  (1742).
—  His  son,  Alexander,  naturalist,  b.  in  Kdin-
burgh,  Scotland,  about  1730 ;  d.  in  London.  Eng-
land, 15  April,  1791,  was  graduated  at  the  I'ni-
versity  of  Aberdeen  in  1748,  and,  after  studying
medicine,  settled  as  a  practitioner  in  Charleston.
S.  C,  in  1752.  He  subsequently  rose  to  eminence
as  a  physician  and  botanist,  and  acquired  wealth
during  his  residence  there.  In  1754  he  went  to
New  York,  where  a  professorship  in  the  newly  or-
ganized King's  college  (now  Columbia)  was  offered
him.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  Charleston.  Dr.
Garden  adhered  to  the  royal  cause  in  the  Revolu-
tion. He  was  a  congratulator  of  Cornwallison  his
success  at  Camden  in  1780,  and  went  to  England
in  1783.  His  property  was  confiscated,  but  was
afterward  given  to  his  son  by  the  state  of  South
Carolina.  He  had  been  elected  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  society  of  London,  and  on  his  arrival  there
in  i783  was  appointed  one  of  its  council,  and  sub-
sequently was  one  of  its  vice-presidents.  He  was
eminent  "as  a  botanist  and  zoologist,  and  in  1755
began  a  correspondence  with  Linnaeus,  to  whom
he  furnished  information  on  the  natural  history  of
South  Carolina,  and  who  named  the  genus  "Gar-
denia" in  honor  of  him.  He  introduced  into
medical  use  the  pink-root  as  a  vermifuge,  and  pub-
lished an  account  of  its  properties,  together  with  a
botanical  description  (1764).  He  also  published  ac-
counts of  the  Ilelesia ;  of  the  male  and  female
cochineal  insects;  of  the  mud  iguana,  or  siren  of
South  Carolina,  an  amphibious  animal ;  of  twi  i  new
species  of  tortoises ;  and  of  the  Gymnotus  elect  ri-
cus.  To  extend  his  knowledge  of  natural  historfi
he  accompanied  Gov.  Glen  into  the  Indian  coun-
try, and  discovered  an  earth  which  was  deemed  in
England  equal  to  the  finest  porcelain.  The  knowl-
edge of  the  spot  has  been  lost. — Dr.  Gardi  i
Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('..
1757;  d.  there.  29  Feb.,  1829,  was  edu  cat.- 1  a;
minster  and  the  University  of  Glasgow,  and  trav-
elled on  the  continent  of  Europe.  He  returned  to
South  Carolina  in  July,  1780,  and  joined  the
lutionary  army.  He  was  at  one  time  aide-de-camp
to  (Jen.  Greene,  and  a  lieutenant  in  Lei
February,  1782. His  father's  confiscated  property


GARDINER


gakd


m


bjm  given  him  iift.T  the  war. Be  published  "  An-
olutionary  War,  with  Skeletal
tar  of  Persons  most  Distinguished  In  tta
liern  States  for  Civil  and Military  Srvioes,"
lining much original information (Charles-
ton, I8tt]  BM  <'!-..  IflM  and  181

<.  \i:ihm  I:.  Iddlson,  jurist,  I.,  in  Rim
II..  i;t  March.  1707;  -I.  in  Rochester.  N.  Y..:>  June,
Hi-  was  taken  to  Maiiliu-,  N.  V..  in  hi-  early
years,  and  received his  education  there. After

law,  he removed, in 1822, l<> Rochester,

was  the  first justice  Of  tta peace, lb

iiit«<i  district  attorney  for  Monroe  county  in

■ nml  was  afterward  judge  for  the  eighth  cir-

cuit,  comprising eight counties  in  western  New

York,  luit  resigned  in  1838,  and  resumed  his  p

in  Rochester.  In  1844  and  1846  in-  was  licu-
vernor  of  New  York.  I»ut  resigned  his
office  in  the  latter  year,  having  been  elected  ■  lodge
of  the  court  of  appeals.  He  served  until  lNo.>,  de-
clining a  renotmnation.  An  appeal  from  his  de-
ns, or  a  reversal  of  judgment,  rarely  occurred.
BARDINER,  James  Terry,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Troy,  N.  \  ..  6  May,  1842.  fie  was  educated  at
the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  and  at  the
Sheffield  scientific  school,  after  which  he  became
sub-assistant  engineer  on  the  Brooklyn  waterworks.
In  1861 -'2  he  was  inspector  in  the  U.  S.  ordnance
corps,  and  was  engaged  in  l868-'4  in  tta  construc-
tion of  earthworks  around  the  harbor  of  San  Fran-
cisco. During  the  three  following  years  he  was
graphical  assistant  on  the  geological  survey  of
California,  and  at  this  time  he  made  a  topograph-
ical survey  of  Yosemite  valley  and  laid  out  the
limits  of  the  reservation.  Subsequently  he  was
associated  with  Clarence  King  in  the  U.  S.  geo-
logical survey  of  the  40th  parallel,  and  was  chief  of
the  geographical  and  topographical  departments
until  the  completion  ol  the  work.  In  1*72  he
was  appointed  lT.  S.  geographer  in  charge  of  such
work  on  the  V.  S.  geological  survey  of  the  territo-
ries, under  Ferdinand  V.  Haydeii,  and  conducted
the  field-work  of  the  surveys  until  lH?."j.  From
i  till  1886  he  was  director  of  the  state  survey  of
New  York,  and  from  Ikno  till  1886  a  member  of
the  New  York  state  l>oard  of  health.  He  then  be-
came consulting  engineer  to  the  state  board  of
health,  and  he  also  holds  the  office  of  consulting
engineer  in  all  mining  matters,  esj>ecially  concern-
coal,  to  the  Atchison.  Topeka,  and  Santa  IV.
the  Mexican  Central,  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific,  and
the  Mexican  National  railroads.  Mr.  Gardiner  is
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  was  secretary
in  1*71)  of  the  American  geographical  society.  His
publications  are  principally  reports  of  his  work,
which  have  apjieared  as  public  documents.

I.VKlHNhK. Lion, military engineer, b. in
^fidand  in  1590;  d.  in Kasthampton,  N.  Y„  in
He  was  an  officer  of  the  Knglish  army,  and
served  in  the  Netherlands. While  thus  employed
Mh)Was  persuaded  by  Hugh  IVters.  and  other  Kng-
Ushmen  then  residing  in  that  country,  to  enter  the
service  of  a  company  of  lords  and  gentlemen,  the
proprietors  of  a  tract  of  laud lying  at the  mouth
of  the  Connecticut  river. He  was  to  serve  for  four
-.  and  to  Im-  employed  in  drawing  plans  for  a
us.  ami  forts  in  that  locality,  and  to  have
>dicd  men  under  his  control. On  his  ar-
rival in Boston on 28 Nov.,  1885,  the  authorities
requested  him  to  draft  designs  for  a  fort. This  he
i committee  was  api>ointcd to  mpervfM
>n  of  the  work,  cacti  citizen  l>eing  com-

Elled  t<>  contribute  two  days'  Labor. Gardiner
died for his  destination and proceeded to
i  a  fort,  which  he  named  Say  brook,  after  I»rd


Kay  and  Sal  and  Lord  It  rook.  Hen-  he  remained
for  four  years  during  the  exciting  period  of  the
l'e<|iiot  war.  In  HMO  he  purchased  from  its  Indian
owners  an  island  called  l>\  them  Manchonat,  which
he  renamed  the  [all  of  Wight,  but  which  has  .
Im-cii  known  a*  (ianliner's  Island.  This  was  the
tir-t  BogUtO  settlement  within  the  presSCH  Imhiii-
dariesof  New  York  state.  While  at  Sav brook  I
was  Ix.rn  to  him,  20  April.  HKMi,  which  \*a-  the  tir-t
white  child  lK)rn  in  Connecticut.  Hi-  daughter,
Bfaatata,  lM>rn  in  the  ••  Isle  of  Wight.
to  bo  the  first  white  child  l>orn  in  New  York.
The  original  grant  by  which  (iarditicr  ftffplrfd
proprietary  rights  in  the  i-land  made  it  a  sepa-
rate and  Independent  "plantation."  in  no  way
connected  either  with  New  Kngland  or  New  York.
Ho  WS»  empowered  to  draft  laws  for  chunh  ami
state,  oltserving  the  forms,  -o  ran  the  instrument.
"  agreable  to  (Jod.  to  the  kiim  and  to  the  practices
of  the  country."  Several  other  patents  were  SBD-
sequently  issued,  the  last  by  Gov.  Dongan.  erecting
the  island  into  a  lordship  and  manor  to ta  called
"  C.inliner's  Island,"  giving  (iardiiu-r  full  |»< ■
t<.  hold  "court  leet  and  court  baron,  di-train  for
nuts,  exerci-e  the  rights  of  advowson."  etc.  The
island  is  now  a  part  of  the  township  of  Ka.-thamp-
ton,  Suffolk  co.,  N.  Y..  and  i-  nine  mile-  long  and  a
mile  and  a  half  wide,  containing  alioiit  8*800  W
Lion  Gardiner  was  a man <>f sterling qualities,


•.  -,-*■  •-  ■  ■-''  '•


and  acquired  the  esteem  of  all  with  whom  he  came
in  contact.  In  the  autumn  of  1886  a  recumbent
effigy  wa>  erected  to  his  memory,  and  his  sup-
posed grave  was  opened.  In  it  a  skeleton  was  found
intact.  It  was  that  of  a  man  over  six  feet  in
height,  with  a  broad  forehead  and  strong  ju««.
The  island  was  entailed  on  the  first  male  heirs  of
the  Gardiner  family,  and  was  never  to  Ik-  alienated.
These  conditions  were  observed  up  to  the  close  of
the  last  century,  David  Johnson,  the  eighth  lord
of  the  manor,  who  died  in  182!».  being  the  last
to  receive  the  property  by  entail.  His  brother.
John  Griswold,  succeeded  as  ninth  lord,  but  died,
unmarried  and  intestate,  in  1861.  The  third  broth-
er, Bantm  Bowl,  having  poretaaad  tta  intend
of  his  sister,  Mrs.  Sarah  Diodati  Thompson,  be-
cam-  the  tenth  proprietor.  At  his  death,  in  1882,
the  island  was  left  to  his  oldest  BOB,  Davih  John-
is  eleventh  lord  of  the  manor:  but  it  is  BOW
(1887)  owned  by  tta  letter's  brother,  John  I. von.
This  is  the  only  illustration  of  the  practical  work-
ing of  the  law  of  primogeniture  in  this  country,
covering  so  long  a  |>criod.  Tta  manor-house,  built
in  1T74,  is  shown  in  the  accompanying  illustration.
During  the  life  of  John,  the  third  owner,  the  island
WSJ  visited  by  Cant.  Kidd.  who  depo-itcd  goods  and
treasure  there,  which  were  secured  by  (iov.  Iiello-
mont  after  Kuld's  death,  flea  Kiiin,  William.)
During  the  early  part  of  the  last  century  the  island
was  frequently  vi-itcd  and  pillaged  by  private
men.  smugglers,  and  free-l)ooters,  and  still
greatly  from  their  depredations. The  British  I


5iW


GARDINER


GARDNER


inadeGardincr'shny  a  rendezvous  during  tin

lut  i.  in.  ami  t.Hik  supplies  from  the  bland. The  same

thingoocurred  daring  t  li«  ■  war  of  l  s  1 2-'  1 5  between

thfl  United  States  ami  Kngland.  ami  in  1N<>!>  it  was

■elected  as  the  rallying-jM.int  of  an  expedition  in-
1. 11. led  to  liberate  Cubs  bona  the  S|ianish  yoke.

GARDINER,  Sylvester,  physician,  i>.  in  Booth
Kingston,  K.  L  M  June.  17<>7;  d.  in  Newport, 8
Aug.,  1786. After  studying  medicine  in  London

and  Peris  lie  liecame  a  nraet  it  inner  in  Boston,  a
lecturer  on  anatomy,  and  ■  drug  merchant.  In
the  sale  ut  drugs  he  acquired  a  large  fortune,  and
became  proprietor  of  a  part  of  "Plymouth  Pur-
chase" on  the  Eermebeok  river.  His  efforts  to
settle  this  domain  were  unceasing  from  1753  to  the
Revolution.  Aboul  the  middle  of  the  century  he
colonised  it  with  Germans,  and  settled  the  town  of
Pittston,  from  which  the  present  city  of  Gardiner,
Me.,  was  afterward  sel  off,  annually  furnishing
the  colonists  with  supplies.  He  also  contributed
liberally  to  the  erection  of  King's  chapel,  Boston,
of  which  he  was  a  warden,  and  promoted  the  intro-
duction of  inoculation  for  the  small-pox.  He  was
the  compiler  and  publisher  of  a  praver-book,  built
and  endowed  Christ  church,  the  first  Episcopal
church  in  Pittston,  Me.,  and  presented  that  town
with  a  valuable  library,  which  afterward  became
scattered.  He  was  one  of  those  who  signed  the
address  to  Gov.  Hutchinson  in  1774,  approving
that  officer's  course,  and  in  the  year  following  lie
became  an  active  supporter  of  the  royal  cause.
When  the  British  army  evacuated  Boston  in  177(5,
he  left  that  city  and  went  to  Halifax.  In  1778  his
name  appeared  in  the  proscription  and  banishment
act.  He  removed  to  England  during  the  war,
taking  with  him  but  a  small  proportion  of  his
property,  and  settled  in  Poole.  About  100,000
acres  of  his  great  estate  were  confiscated  and  sold,
but  his  heirs  recovered  it  many  years  afterward.
After  the  war,  in  1785,  Dr.  Gardiner  returned  to
this  country  and  settled  in  Newport,  R.  I.  His
remains  were  interred  under  Trinity  church  in  that
city,  ami  in  the  Episcopal  church  in  Gardiner,  Me.,
there  is  a  cenotaph  to  his  memory. — His  eldest  son,
John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston  in  1731 ;  d.  near  Cape
Ann,  Mass.,  15  Oct.,  1793,  studied  law  at  the  inner
temple,  London,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in
the  courts  of  Westminster  Hall.  He  became  inti-
mate with  Churchill,  the  satirist,  with  Lord  Mans-
field, and  with  John  Wrilkes,  in  whose  cause  he  ap-
peared as  junior  counsel  in  1764.  He  also  appeared
for  Breadmore  and  Meredith,  who,  for  writings  in
support  of  Wilkes,  had  been  imprisoned  on  a  gen-
eral warrant.  He  practised  a  short  time  with  suc-
cess in  the  Welsh  circuit,  and  then  procured  in
170(5  the  appointment  of  attornev-general  in  the
island  of  St.  Christopher,  West  Indies,  where  he
remained  until  after  the  American  Revolution,
when  he  returned,  in  1783,  to  Boston.  A  few  years
later  he  removed  to  Pownalboro',  Me.,  and  repre-
sented that  town  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature
until  his  death.  While  a  member  of  that  body  he
procured  the  abolition  of  the  law  of  primogeniture,

Eromoted  several  legal  reforms,  and  was  earnest
ut  unsuccessful  in  his  arguments  for  the  repeal
of  the  statutes  of  1750  against  theatrical  enter-
tainments. The  law  that  he  sought  to  abolish  re-
mained in  force  until  1793,  when  it  was  repealed.
Mr.  Gardiner  was  one  of  the  most  influential  of
the  early  Unitarians  of  Boston,  and  prominentlv
participated  in  the  transformation  of  King's  chapel,
of  which  his  father  was  one  of  the  founders,  from
an  Episcopal  into  a  Unitarian  Congregational
church.  He  met  his  death  by  drowning  while  on
his  way  to  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts. In


enne.-tinn  with  his  elTorts  to  repeal  tin-  anti-
theatrical  laws  while  he  was  a  mcmlier  of  the  .Mas-
sachusetts legislature,  he  published  a " Dissertation
on  the  Ancient  Poetry  of  the  Romans,"  with  inci-
dental observations  on  certain  superstitions.  ||,.
also  wrote  a  Political  tract  in  verse  entitled  MJfla>
binial,"  a  satire  on  the  republican  clubs  of  Boston,
a  revision  of  which  by  the  author  was  published
in  Boston  in  1795.  —  His  son,  John  Syh ftfteff
John,  clergyman  and  scholar,  b.  in  Raretfotd
West,  South"  Wales,  in  June,  17<*>5:  d.  in  Harrow-
gate,  England,  29  July,  1830.  At  an  early  age,
alK)iit  1770,  he  was  sent  to  his  grandfather,  Dr.
Svlvester  Gardiner,  in  Boston,  for  education.
Shortly  after  the  opening  of  the  Revolution,  and
after  visiting  his  father  in  the  West  Indies,  he  was
removed  to  England,  and  placed  in  1776  under  the
care  of  Dr.  Samuel  Parr,  by  whom  he  was  in-
structed until  1782.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1783  by  way  of  the  West  Indies,  and  was
accompanied  by  his  father  to  Boston,  where  he
began  the  study  of  law.  Subsequently,  in  1787,  he
was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  by  Bishop  Provoost,  in  St.  Paul's  church,
New  York.  He  then  became  pastor  of  the  parish
of  St.  Helena,  near  Beaufort,  S.  C.  He  took
priest's  orders  in  1791,  became  assistant  rector
of  Trinitv  church,  Boston,  in  1792,  and  on  the
death  of  Bishop  Parker,  in  1805,  succeeded  him  as
rector,  continuing  to  hold  that  post  until  his
death.  While  assistant  rector,  he  taught  a  large
classical  school,  and  afterward  instructed  a  few
pupils  in  his  own  house.  He  died  while  on  a  for-
eign tour  for  his  health.  He  received  the  degree
of  A.  M.  from  Harvard  in  1803,  and  that  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1813.  In
1805-'ll  he  was  president  of  the  Anthology  club,
which  was  organized  at  his  house,  and  for  several
vears  conducted  the  "Anthology  and  Boston
Monthly  Review,"  which  was  one  of  the  ablest  lit-
erary periodicals  in  the  United  States,  and  assisted
greatly  in  elevating  the  standard  of  letters  in  this
country.  It  was  the  remote  precursor  of  the
"  North  American  Review,"  to  which  Dr.  Gardiner
was  a  contributor.  To  the  Anthology  club  belongs
the  honor  of  founding  the  Boston  athenamm.  Dr.
Gardiner  was  a  classical  scholar  of  eminence  and
an  eloquent  preacher,  and  exerted  a  wide  influence.
He  published  numerous  sermons,  delivered  before
various  societies  (1802-'23). — Another  grands,  m  of
Sylvester,  Robert  Hallowell,  b.  in  Bristol.  Eng-
land, about  1782;  d.  in  Gardiner.  Me.,  22  Match,
1864.  came  to  this  country  in  1792.  He  was  the
son  of  Dr.  Sylvester  Gardiner's  daughter  Hannah,
and  Robert  Hallowell,  but  took  the  surname  of
Gardiner  in  1802,  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  his
uncle,  on  inheriting  the  latter's  estate.  He  w
fitted  for  college  in  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1801,  after  which  he
travelled  abroad  for  sixteen  months,  and  in  1803
returned  and  settled  on  his  estate,  giving  much  of
his  time  to  its  cultivation  and  to  advancing  the  in-
terests of  the  town  of  Gardiner,  to  which  he  gave
a  church,  a  lyceum,  and  a  public  library.  He  was
an  active  member  of  the  Maine  historical  society,
and  was  its  president  from  1846  till  1855.

GARDNER,  Caleb,  sea-captain,  b.  in  Newport.
R.  I.,  in  1739:  d.  there,  24  Dec.,  1806.  Living
near  the  harl>or  and  owning  a  boat,  he  was  in  boy-
hood familiar  with  the  waters  and  islands  of  Nar-
ragansetl  bay,  and  as  a  young  man  becami
captain,  sailing  his  own  ship  to  China,  to  the  East
Indies,  and  made  other  long  voyages.  Before  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  had  retired  from
the  sea  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  his


»;  vim


(i  \KI'


507


-•  town. Tin-  war  found  liim  it  strong  Whig.
He raised h  company,  was  assigned  with it t'>
iriment,  of  which  he  prcscntl)

ii.iitiiiiiiit-<(i!iiini,  an. i  was  inter  ii  member

of  the  ooaooil  "f  war  and  of tin- Rhode Islam!

atate  government. He  wus  residing  in  Newport  in

when the French squadron under  < 'mint

taing  wee  blockaded  there  by  the  greatly  mi-

Sr  British  fleet  under  Admiral Howe. A  ■.ml-
iii  and  denae  fog  proven te<]  an  immediate  attack
by  the  English;  but  they  occupied  I « «t li  antral
to  the  harbor,  and  waited for  daylight Oapt,
Iner  had  noted  from  his  housetop,  through  a

_lass,  the  disposition  of  the  hostile  Meets,  ami,
aa  soon  as  it  was  dark,  rowed  himself  to  the  ship
Of  the  French  admiral,  offered  to  pilot  him  to  I
safe  position,  and  with  his  own  hand  steered  the
admiral's  ship  through  a  channel  which  he  had
known  from  boyhood,  the  other  vessels,  with  all
lights  extinguished,  following  singly  in  his  wake.

Hi!,'  piloted  the  French  beyond  the  enemy  and

to  dear  water,  he  returned U)  the island,  reached

his  own  house  before  daylight,  and  was  among  the

Soups  along  the  water-front  who  marvelled,  when
e  log  lifted,  at  the  disapjtoarance  of  the  French
fleet.  Count  d'Estaing'fl  rc|«>rt  of  the  affair  to
lioiiis  XVI.  was  confidential,  since  its  disclosure
would  have  exposed  his  guide  to  the  dangerous
displeasure  of  the  English  government,  and  of  the
Ton  element  in  Rhode  Island;  but  the  king,
through  his  amliassador  in  the  United  States,  the
Chevalier  de  la  Luzerne,  sent  to  the  amateur  pilot
a  sum  of  money,  with  which  the  latter  bought  an
estate  near  Newport,  and  built  upon  it  a  house,

tortious  of  which  still  remain  in  the  cottage
nown  to  the  visitor  of  to-day  as  "Batsman's."
Throughout  the  war  ('apt.  Gardner  wee  ■  trusted
adviser  of  the  French  officers  in  Rhode  Island,
and  of  Gen.  Washington,  who  was  his  friend
and  correspondent.  After  peace  was  declared
he  was  made  French  consul  at  Newport,  where
he  resided  until  his  death,  being  president  of  a
bank,  warden  of  Trinity  church,  and  head  of
the  volunteer  fire  department  of  the  town. — His
great-grandson,  Horsey,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  1
An:;.,  l^f^,  is  a  grandson  of  Dr.  John  Syng  Dor-
noticed  elsewhere.  He  removed  to  Trenton,
N.  .1..  in  1854,  and  entered  Vale  in  I860,  but  was
not  graduated.  In  1864-'5  he  published  the
"  Daily  Monitor,"  a  journal  established  at  Trenton
in  support  of  the  Lincoln  administration  in  the
Conduct  of  the  war.  and  with  the  s|H>eial  purpose
of  creating  public  sentiment  through  New  Jersey
against  the  extension  of  the  exclusive  privilege  of
transportation  between  New  York  and  Philadelphia,
which  was  then  |>ossessed  by  the  Camden  and  Aniboy
railroad  company.  In  lHOO-'H  he  was  one  of  the
editors  and  proprietors  of  the  "  Round  Table."  a
weekly  literary  anil  critical  journal  published  in
New  Vork.  After  spending  several  months  in
Europe,  he  held  editorial  positions  on  the  "Com-
mercial Advertiser"  and  the  -Christian  Union,"
of  New  Vork.  until  he  removed  to  Florida  in  I860.
Returning  thence  to  Philadelphia  in  1872,  he  be-
came one  of  the  secretaries  of  the  V.  S.  centennial
Commission,  and  was  charged  with  the  publication
of  all  the  official  documents  relating  to  the  Inter-
national exhibition  of  1876,  including  its  catalogue
and  eleven  volumes  of  final  reports.  Subsequently
misted,  in  the  state  department  at  Washington.
in  the  preparation  of  the  official  rei-.rt  on  tin
-  international  exhibition  of  1881  by  the  I  .  9,
imisaioner-general,  Richard  C.  McCormick.  He
published  " Quatre  Bras,  Ljgny.  and  Waterloo:
a  Narrative  of the  Campaign in Belgium,  1815"


'  'ii and I/mdon, IfiHi and "A Condensed

tological Dictionary of the Bnglhh Lon-

seerrangement,  on  an  etymological  l>a*is,

of  the  **  American  Dictionary  of  the  English  l*an-

•  "  of  l»r.  Noah Webster  (Springfield,  Mans.,

and  Men  York,  1884;  London,  1886).

QARDNER,  Charles  K.,  soldier,  b.  in  Morris
county,  n.  .1..  in  i>?:  d.  m  TTnatilngton.  1'
I  Nov~  1869. He  entered  the  arnn  n  in

tin-  lith  U.  S.  infantry  in  May,  1WW.  In  the  war
of  1H12  he  was  ptomoted  captain  of  the  Id  in-
fantry, and  was  aiijutaiit-gencral  of  the  division  of
the  north,  under  (Jen.  .Ia<  oli  Brown,  lb-  partici-
pated in  the  battles  of  Chrystler's  Field,  Chipp
and  Niagara,  was  at  the  siege  of  Fort  Frie,  and in

February,  i*io,  was  promoted  Ueutenant<colooaJ

for  distinguished  s»r\  i<c.  At  the  battle  of  Niagara,
in  which  (ien.  Winficld  Scott  was  severely  wound-
ed, Col.  Gardner  carried  him  off  the  field.  In  lHftf
he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of  the  northern
division  OX  the  army,  which  |«ist  he  resigned  in
1867.  Durfalg  l*>th  terms  of  BOB.  JacfcfOn'l  ad-
ministration he  was  first  assistant  p>st master-gen-
eral, and  he  was  auditor  of  the  treasury  in  the  post-
offtoe  department  under  President  Van  Bunn  from
1886  till  1S41.  During  the  administration  of
President  Polk  he  was  |  Mist  master  of  the  city  of
Washington.  In  1850  he  was  transferred  to  the
treasury  department,  where  he  remained  until  ad-
vanced age  compelled  his  resignation  in  1867,  Ib-
is the  author  of  "A  Dictionary  of  Commissioned

Officer!  who  have  served  in  the  Artnv  of  the  Unit-
ed States  from  17M!t  to  1868 "(New  Vork.  181
-A  Compendium  of  Military  Tactics";  and  "A
Permanent  Designation  of  Companies,  and  Com-
pany Hooks,  by  the  First  Letters  of  the  Alphabet."
<;  ARRNER,  Elisabeth  Jane,  artist,  b.  in  foo-
ter, N.  II.,  in  \*4'1.  She  has  s|ient  most  of  her
{irofessional  life  in  Paris,  studying  under  Merle,
lougoerean,  and  Lefebre,  Miss  Qardner*i  irtttfiial-
ty  is  ideal  figure-pieces.  Among  her  importajrf
works  arc  "Cornelia  and  her  Jewels'*;  •"Cin-
derella," exhibit ed  at  the  Paris  salon  (l^T'J):  '•  ('<>-
rinne"  (Paris,  1H74);  "Moses  in  the  Bulrushes"
(Paris,  1878):  and  "Maud  Mullcr"  (187»>  The
"  Fortune  Teller  "and  "Corinne  "  received  a  medal
at  the  Philadelphia  exhibition  of  1876,

GARDNER,  George.  British  botanist,  b.  in

(Jlasgow.  Sot  land,  in  1H12;  d.  in  Ceylon  in  184ft.
In  l&W  be  visited  Brazil  and  other  parts  of  South
America,  and  explored  the  interior  as  far  as  the
tributaries  of  the  Amazon,  and  from  near  the
equator  to  the  twenty-third  degree  of  south  lati-
tude. Some  of  this  region  had  never  been  visited
by  a  European.  During  his  travels  be  ooUeoted
nia nv  rare  botanical  spivimens.  with  which  he  rc-
tuned  to  England  in  1H41.  In  l*4x  he  w.-nt  to
Oaykm  m  search  of  iMitanical  s|K'ciinens,  and  died
tlu-re  the  next  year.  Be  was  the  BUthorof  "Trav-
el- in  the  Interior  of  Brazil  "  (London,  1840).

GARDNER.  George  Warren,  clergyman,  b,  in
Pom  fret.  Vt..  8  Oct.,  lS'JS. He  was  graduated  at

Dartmouth  in  186ft, and  in  1888  became  principal

of  the  New  London,  N.  II. ,  institution,  continuing
in  that  relation  until  1861  He  was  ordained  as  a
minister  of  thegospel  in  1866,  and  in  November,

1861.  installed  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
in  CharlsatOWn,  Mass. He  left this  place  in

to  become  iwni»im1lng  secretary  «>f  the  Ameri-
can Beptilt  missionary  Onion.  From  !*?<>  till
lie  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in
Cleveland.  Ohio,  and  from  1SS1  till  1KK">  president
of  the  Central university  of  Iowa. During Is?"

In-  visited  Europe,  extending  his  travels  to  Egypt.

Palestine,  and  UISSOC. He  has  pcifuHUod  editorial


Fus


GARDNER


GARDNER


service  in  connection  with  1 1 1  *  -  "Missionary  Maga-
zine" and  the  "  Watchman "  newspaper,  besides
writing  tracts  and  review  articles.  He  n<<i\ <<l
tin-  degree  of  D.  D,  from  Dartmouth  in  1H07.

GARDNER,  Henry,  statesman,  1).  in  Stowe,
Middlesex  '■,,..  Ma—.,  about  1780;  a.  in  Boston  in
lie  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1750,  and
was  a  strong  LU>eral  throughout  the  Revolution,  en-
tering into  politics  in  1775,  and  continuing  in  pob-
Uo  life  until  his  death.  Mr.  Gardner  was  a  mem
berof  the  Middlesex  convention  of  February,  1774,
which  met  to  consult  for  the  common  defence  and
welfare  of  the  country.  This  and  several  other  as-
semblies, held  during  the  same  month  in  the  New
England  states,  recommended  a  provincial  con-
gress, which  accordingly  convened  in  Salem  in  Oc-
tober,  1774,  and  the  next  day  adjourned  to  Con-
cord. N.  BL  He  served  in  this  and  in  the  congresses
of  February  and  May,  177.").  which  met  in  Water-
town.  Mass.,  and  was  chosen  treasurer  of  the  prov-
ince by  the  1st  congress.  In  after-life  he  was  a
member  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in
Boston,  and  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  literary
and  scientific  pursuits  in  that  city.

GARDNER,  John  Lane,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass..  l  Aug..  1798;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  19
Feb.,  lstl'.t.  lie  entered  the  army  in  1812  as
lieutenant  of  infantry,  saw  his  first  active  service
in  Canada,  and  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  La
Colle  Mill,  30  March,  1814,  while  serving  under
Gen.  James  Wilkinson.  After  the  war  he  was
transferred  to  the  artillery.  In  1820-'80  he  was
assistant  quartermaster-general,  with  the  rank  of
captain,  and  in  1838  was  brevetted  major  of  artil-
lery for  ten  years'  faithful  service.  He  served  with
his  regiment  during  the  Florida  war,  and  was  re-
ported to  the  department  as  having  shown  "the
utmost  activity,  skill,  and  intrepidity"  at  the  bat-
tle of  Wahoo  Swamp,  21  Nov.,  1832.  He  was  pro-
moted major  in  1845,  commanded  his  regiment
throughout  the  Mexican  war,  was  brevetted  lieu-
tenant-colonel for  service  at  the  battle  of  Cerro
Gordo,  18  April,  1847,  and  colonel  at  Contreras  on
20  Aug..  where  he  commanded  the  right  column
of  attack.  From  1842  till  1850  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  district  of  Florida,  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel in  1852,  and  some  years  later  was
stationed  at  Charleston  harbor,  where  he  was  in
command  in  1800.  Though  mustering  fewer  than
fifty  men  at  Fort  Moultrie,  he  effected  an  arrange-
ment with  Col.  Joseph  P.  Taylor,  commissary-gen-
eral, for  six  months'  provisions,  and  announced  his
intention  to  defend  the  fort  to  the  last  extremity
against  the  secessionists.  Secretary  of  War  John
B.  Floyd  thereupon  relieved  him  from  command,
and  ordered  him  to  report  to  Gen.  David  E.  Twiggs,
in  Texas.  Maj.  Robert  Anderson  succeeded  to
the  command  at  Fort  Moultrie,  and  on  Christmas
eve  removed  the  garrison  to  Fort  Sumter.  In
1801  he  was  promoted  colonel  of  the  2d  artillery,
and  the  next  year  was,  by  his  own  request,  placed
on  the  retired  list,  and  employed  in  recruiting
service.  In  1865  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral "  for  long  and  faithful  service."

GARDNER,  Joseph,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Boneybrook  township,  Chester  co.,
Pa.,  in  1752;  d.  in*Elkton,  Md.,  in  1794.  He
studied  medicine,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  attend
the  lectures  given  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  after  which  -  he
settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  his  na-
tive place.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution-
ary war  he  raised  a  company  of  volunteers,  and
afterward  was  given  command  of  the  4th  battalion
of  Chester  county  militia. He  also  served  on  the


feneral  committee  of  safety  from  July,  1770.  till
lecember.  1 777.  and  was  appointed  in  July.  1770.
one  of  the  board  of  commissioners  of  Chester
county  by  the  Pennsylvania  constitutional  conven-
tion, also  iK'coming  in  November,  1777,  one  of  tin;
commissioners  to  collect  clothing  for  the  army.
Dr.  Gardner  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
assembly  in  1776-'8,  and  in  1779  was  chosen  a
member  of  the  supreme  executive  council.  In
1784  he  was  electee!  to  the  Continental  congress,
and  served  for  one  year.  Subsequently,  until  1792,
he  resided  in  Philadelphia,  and  there  followed  his
profession.  He  then  removed  to  Elkton,  Md.,
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.

GARDNER,  Samuel  Jackson,  editor,  b.  in
Brookline,  Mass.,  in  1788;  d.  in  the  White  Moun-
tains, N.  II.,  14  July,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1809,  and  afterward  practised  law  for
many  years  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  where  he  held  sev-
eral county  and  state  offices.  In  1838  he  removed
to  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  in  the  succeeding  year  edited
the  "  Advertiser,"  a  daily  paper,  which  failing
health  compelled  him  to  resign  in  1861.  Many  of
his  easays,  under  the  signature  of  "Decius,"  were
collected  and  published  under  the  title  of  "  Autumn
Leaves"  (New  York,  1859). —  His  son,  Augustus
Kingsley,  physician,  born  in  Roxburv,  Mass.,  13
July,  1812;  d*.  in  New  York  city,  7  April  1876,
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Harvard  in  1844.
He  then  visited  Europe,  and  studied  three  vears.
Returning  to  the  United  States,  he  established
himself  in  New  York,  and  was  elected  professor  of
diseases  of  women  and  children,  and  of  midwifery,
in  the  New  York  medical  college.  Dr.  Gardner
gave  special  attention  to  the  importation  of  foreign
birds,  as  destroyers  of  insect  larva? ;  to  the  establish-
ment of  drinking-fountains  in  New  York  city ;  to
the  reformation  of  the  established  code  of  medical
ethics;  and  the  investigation  of  the  swill-milk
business.  He  was  the  first  physician  in  the  United
States  that  gave  chloroform  in  labor,  and  practised
it  successfully  while  professor  of  midwifery  in  the
New  York  medical  college.  In  consequence  of  a
consultation  with  a  homoeopathic  physician,  he  had
a  rupture  with  the  Academy  of  physicians,  and
resigned.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Hours  of  a  Medi-
cal Student  in  Paris  "  (New  York,  1848) ;  "  Causes
and  Treatment  of  Sterility"  (1850):  "Our  Chil-
dren" (Hartford,  1872);  and  "Translation  of
Scanzoni's  Diseases  of  Females."  He  edited  Tyler
Smith's  "Lectures,"  and  contributed  many  pro-
fessional and  scientific  papers  to  current  literature.
GARDNER,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  in  1724;  d.  in  Boston,  18  June,  1775.  He
ranked  among  the  most  zealous  sons  of  liberty,
ami  was  a  member  of  the  convention  of  Middlesex
county,  in  1774.  held  to  consult  on  measures  for
public  safety  and  defence,  and  of  the  Provincial
congress  of  Massachusetts  of  October,  1774,  and
February,  1775.  By  this  congress  he  was  ap-
pointed one  of  the  committee  of  safety  chosen  to
act  instead  of  the  council  and  governor,  who  were
believed  to  lie  mere  tools  of  the  British.  In  May,
177").  he  raised  a  regiment  according  to  the  in-
structions of  the  Provincial  congress,  and  was  com-
missioned its  colonel.  At  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill,  17  June,  1775,  while  hastening  with  a  part  of
his  regiment  to  the  redoubt,  and  in  the  act  of  de-
scending the  hill,  he  received  a  mortal  wound,  of
which  lie  died  the  next  dav.

GARDNER.  William  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.
in Marvlaiid  in  1800;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  18
1870. He  entered  the  navy  in  1814  as  a  midship-
man,  was  commissioned  lieutenant  in  1825,  set
I  on  the  "Vandalia,"  of  the  Bri^sh  squadron,  in


-&9*ty  jrs.H£i  •*!£*»*


D.  Appleton  3c  Co


Q  \i;i:>i  in.


«.  iRFIKLI)


000


l889-'80,  was  commissioned  <•< >mumiirI<T  in IH41,

•nan. led  the  receiving-ship  "  Norfolk  "  in
and  "f  the" Vandalia," in  the  Pacific  squadron,  be-
ln  September,  1855,  he  wh
missioned  captain,  commanded  t In-  steam  frig-
ate "<  Jolorado," of  ili.-  home  squadron,  ii:
BUB  commandant  at Man-  Island,  CaL,  in  IMtil.and

on  special  tarries  in  18881  In  July  of  that  year  hi
was  commissioned  commodore,  ami  retired.  Be
was  light-house  inspector  from  1  x « i- 1  till  i-

(.  vKrlSCIIti.  Julius  |»,m.  wldier,  h.  in  Cuba

in  1881  ;  .1.  near  SI Blrer,  Teniu,  :il  I'

WfJ  graduated  at  tin-  l'.  S.  military  academy
in  1841,  ami  entered  the  army  as  8d  lieutenant  of
the  4tii  artillery.  From  1841  till  1840  he  ■erred  on
front  ier  and  garrison  duty,  ami  afterward  with  dis-
tinction  in  tin-  Mexican  war.  lie  was  appointed
assistant  adjutant-general  in  1H.V5.  At  tin-  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  applied  for  aofcfo
an. I  was  appointed  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  William
S.  Itosecrans,  nf  the  Army  of  the  <  'uinU-rland.
He  had  previously  declined  the  commission  ..f
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and  remained  a
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  regular  armv.  At  the
battle  of  Stone  River,  in  Tennessee,  81  Deo.  1908,
in  a  gallant  attempt  to  regain  the  day  which  then
appeared  to  be  lost,  CoL  Gareaohi  dashed  forward
at  the  head  of  his  column,  but  was  struck  in  the
head  by  a  cannon-ball  and  instantly  killed.  He
was  a  founder  and  liberal  benefknarj  of  the  Society
of  St.  Vincent  de  Paul,  at  Washington.

)•  V  I:  I  I  l.l.h.  James  A  brain,  twentieth  presi-
dent of  the  United  States.  I>.  in  Orange,  Cuvahoga
co..  Ohio,  19  Nov..  ls;U;  d..  in  KlUron,  N".  J.,  19
Sept.,  1881.  His  father,  Abram  Oarficld.  was  a  na-
tive of  New  York,  but  of  Massachusetts  ancestry,
descended  from  Edward  (iarficld.  an  English  Puri-
tan, who  in  1680 was  one  of  the  founders  of  Water-
town.  His  mother,  Eliza  Ballon,  was  born  in  New
Hampshire,  of  a  Huguenot  family  that  fled  from
France  to  N.-w  England  after  the  revocation  of  the
Edict  of  Nantes,  in  108&  Garfield,  therefore,  was
from  lineage  well  represented  in  the  struggles  for
civil  and  religious  liberty.  l»oth  in  the  Old  and  in


the  N'.w  World.  Aliram  (oilfield,  his  father,  moved
to  Ohio  in  1*:M>.  and  settled  in  what  was  then
known  u  ■•  The  Wilderness,"  now  as  the  "  Western
Reserve."  which  was  occupied  by  Connecticut  peo»
ple.  Abram  Uarfield  made  a  proaparoM  bagh>
ning  in  his  new  home,  hut  died,  after  a  sudden  ill-
Bees,  at  the  age  of  thirty-three,  leaving  a  widow
with  four  small  children,  of  whom  James  waa the
-t.  In  bringing  up  her  family,  unaided  in
a  lonely  cabin  (see  accompanying  illustration),  and
sing  on  them  a  high  standard  of  moral  and
intellectuaJ  worth,  Mr-.  Garfield  displayed  an  al-
most heroic  courage.  It  was  a  life  of  struggle  and
f»rivntion;  but  tin-  poverty  of  her  home  differed
rom  that  of  cities  or  settled  communities — it  was


the  |  he frontier,  all  shared it.  and  all

were  bound  aloaaly  together  in  a  common  strug-
gle, where  there  were  no  humiliatii  ta  in
neighboring  wealth.  At  three  years  <>f  age  James
irfiew  a*anl  to  school  in  a  log  hut.  learned  to
ratjd,  and  began  that  habit  of  omnivorous  reading
which  ended  only  with  his  life.  At  t«i
age  he  was  accustomed  to  manual  labor,  helping
out  his  mother's  meagre  income  by  work  at  home
or  on  the  farms  of  the  neighbors. I^idtor  was  play

t<>  i he  healthy  boy;  he  did  it  cheerfully,  ah

with  enthiiMUMii,  for  his  mother  was  a  staunch
Oampbellite.  whose  hymns  and  loagsaant  her  chil-
dren to  their  tasks  with  a  feeling  that  the  work
was  consecrated ;  but  work  in  winter  always  yielded

its  claims  to  those  of  the  district  school,  where  he
made  good  progress,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his
assiduity,  ny  the  time  he  was  fourteen,  young
(iarlield  had  a  fair  knowledge  of  arithmetic  and
'  grammar,  and  was  particularly  apt  in  the  fact-  of
j  American  history,  which  he  had  eagerly  gathered
from  the  meagre  treatises  that  circulated  in  that
remote  section.  Indeed,  he  read  ami  re-read  every
I  book  the  scanty  libraries  of  that  part  of  the  wil-
derness supplied,  and  many  he  learned  by  heart,
Mr.  Blaine  attributes  the  dignity  and  earnestness
of  his  style  to  his  familiarity  with  the  Bible  and
its  literature,  of  which  he  was  a  constant  student.
His  imagination  was  especially  kindled  by  the  tales
of  the  sea;  a  love  for  adventure  took  strong  pos-
BBBttOfl  of  him.  He  so  far  yielded  to  it  that  in
1846  he  w.nt  to  Cleveland  and  proposed  to  ship  as
a  sailor  on  board  a  lake  schooner.  Hut  a  glance
showed  him  that  the  life  was  not  the  romance  he
had  conceived.  He  turned  promptly  from  the
shore,  but,  loath  to  return  home  without  adventure
and  without  nionev,  drove  some  months  for  a  boat
j  on  the  Ohio  canal.  Little  is  known  of  this  axpe*
I  rience.  except  that  he  secured  promotion  from  the
tow-path  to  the  boat,  and  a  story  that  he  was
strong  enough  and  brave  enough  to  hold  his  own
against  his  companions,  who  were  naturally  a
rough  set.  During  the  winter  of  1H49-T»0  he  at-
tended the  Geauga  seminary  at  Chester.  Ohio,
about  ten  miles  from  his  home  In  the  vacations
he  learned  and  practised  the  trade  of  a  carpenter.
heljKKl  at  harvest,  taught,  did  anything  and  every*
thing  to  get  money  to  pay  for  his  schooling.  After
the  first  term,  he  asked  and  needed  no  aid
from  home;  he  had  readied  the  point  where  he
could  support  himself.  At  Chester  be  met  Miss
Lucietia  Kudolph,  his  future  wife.  Attracted  at
first  by  her  interest  in  the  ssjM  intellectual  pur-
suits, he  quickly  discovered  sympathy  in  other
ta-stes, anil a  congeniality  of disposition, which

Bived  the  way  for  the  one  great  tan  of  his  life.
e  was  himself  attractive  at  this  time,  exhibited
many  signs  of  intellectual  superiority,  and  was
physically  a  splendid  specimen  of  vigorous  young
manhood.  He  studied  hard,  worked  hard,  cheer-
fully ready  for  any  emergency,  even  that  of  the
prize-ring;  lor,  finding  it  a  necessity,  he  one  day
thrashed  the  bully  of  the  school  in  a  stand-up
fight.  His  nature,  always  religious,  was  at  this  jK--
riod  profoundly  stirred  in  that  direction.  He  was
converted  under  the  instructions  of  a  CampUllite
preacher,  was  baptized  and  received  into  that  de-
nomination. They  called  themselves  "The  Disci-
ples," contemned  all  doct lines  ami  forms,  ami
sought  to  direct  their  lives  by  the  Scriptures,  sjm-
jilv  interpreted  asanv  plain  man  would  read  them.
This  sanction  to  independent  thinking,  given  by
religion  itself,  must  ha\e  had  great  influence  in
creating  that  broad  and  catholic  spirit  in  this
young  disciple  which  kept his  earnest  nature  out


600


OAEFIELD


GARFIELD


of  the  ruts  of  moral  ami  intellectual  bigotry. I-V-m

tlii-  bdobmhI  his  nd  t<>  geA  tin-  best  education

{;rew  wanner;  lie  Ugan  to  take  wider  view-.  to
Ix.k  lievond  the  present  into  the  future.  \
M  lie  finished  his  studies  in  Chester,  he  entered
(1851)  the  Hiram  eclectic  institute  (DOW  Hiram  OOl-
it  Hiram,  Portage  co..  Ohio,  the  principal
educational  institution  of  his  sect.  He  was  not
verv  (|uick  of  acquisition,  hut  his  perseverance  VM
indomitable,  and  he  BOOS  had  an  excellent  knowl-
edgeof  Latin  and  a  fair  acquaintance  with  algebra,
naiuial  philosophy,  and  Itotaiiy.  He  read  Xctio-
ptton,  Osar.  and  Virgil  with  appreciation;  hut  his
superiority was  more easily recognized in the

(trayer-meetings  and  debating  societies  of  the  col-
ege.  where  he  was  assiduous  and  conspicuous.
Living  here  was  inexpensive,  and  he  readily  made
his  expenses  by  teaching  in  the  English  depart-
ments, and  also  gave  instruction  in  the  ancient
languages.  After  three  years  he  was  well  prepared
to  enter  the  junior  class  of  any  eastern  college,  and
hail  saved  $850  toward  the  expenses  of  such  an
undertaking  out  of  his  salary.  He  hesitated  be-
tween Yale,  Brown,  and  Williams  colleges,  finally
choosing  Williams  on  the  kindly  promise  of  en-
couragement sent  him  by  its  president,  Mark  Hop-
kins. It  was  natural  to  expect  he  would  choose
Bethany  college,  in  West  Virginia,  an  institution
largely  controlled  and  patronized  by  the  "  Disci-
ples of  Christ."  Garfield  himself  seems  to  have
thought  some  explanation  for  his  neglect  to  do  so
necessary,  and  with  particularity  assigns  as  rea-
sons that  the  course  of  instruction  at  Bethany
was  not  so  extended  as  in  the  old  New  England
colleges;  that  Bethany  was  too  friendly  in  opinion
to  slavery;  and — most  significant  of  all  the  reasons
he  gave — that,  as  he  had  inherited  by  birth  and  as-
sociation a  strong  bias  toward  the  religious  views
there  inculcated,  he  ought  especially  to  examine
other  faiths.  Entering  Williams  in  the  autumn  of
1854,  he  was  duly  graduated  with  the  highest
honors  in  the  class  of  1856.  His  classmates  unite
with  President  Hopkins  in  testifying  that  in  col-
lege he  was  warm-hearted,  large-minded,  and  pos-
sessed of  great  earnestness  of  purpose  and  a  singu-
lar poise  of  judgment.  All  speak,  too,  of  Ids
modest  and  unassuming  manners.  But,  outside
of  these  and  other  like  qualities,  such  as  industry,
perseverance,  courage,  and  conscientiousness,  Gar-
field had  exhibited  up  to  this  time  no  signs  of  the
superiority  that  was  to  make  him  a  conspicuous
figure.  But  the  effects  of  twenty-five  years  of
most  varied  discipline,  cheerfully  accepted  and
faithfully  used,  begin  now  to  show  themselves,
and  to  give  to  history  one  of  its  most  striking  ex-
amples of  what  education — the  education  of  books
ana  of  circumstances — can  accomplish.  Garfield
was  not  born,  but  made ;  and  he  made  himself  by
persistent,  strenuous,  conscientious  study  and  work.
In  the  next  six  years  he  was  a  college  president,
a  state  senator,  a  major-general  in  the  National
army,  and  a  representative-elect  to  the  National
congress.  American  annals  reveal  no  other  pro-
motion so  rapid  and  so  varied.

On  his  return  to  Ohio,  in  1856,  he  resumed  his
place  as  a  teacher  of  Latin  and  Greek  at  Hiram
institute,  and  the  next  year  (1857),  being  then  only
twenty-six  years  of  age,  he  was  made  its  president.
He  was  a  successful  officer,  and  ambitious,  as  usual,
beyond  his  allotted  task.  He  discussed  before  his
interested  classes  almost  every  subject  of  current
interest  in  scholarship,  science,  religion,  and  art.
The  story  spread,  and  his  influence  with  it  ;  he  be-
came an  intellectual  and  moral  force  in  the  West-
ern Reserve. It  was  greatest,  however,  over  the


young. They  keenly  felt  the  contagion  of  his  man
! 1 1 1« — .  hi-  sympathy,  his  thirst  for  knowledge,  and

hi-  veneration  for  the  truth  when  it  was  found.
As  an  educator,  he  was.  and  always  would  have
been,  eminently  successful;  he  had  the  knowledge,
the  art  to  impart  it.  and  the  personal  magnetism
that  Impressed  his  love  for  it  upon  his  pupils.
His  intellectual  activity  at  this  time  was  intense.
The  canons  of  his  church  permitted  him  to  preach.
and  he  used  the  permission.  He  also  pursued  the
study  of  law,  entering  his  name,  in  1858,  as  a  stu-
dent in  a  law-office  in  Cleveland,  but  studying  in
Hiram.  To  one  ignorant  of  the  slow  development
that  was  characteristic  of  Garfield  in  all  direct  ions,
it  would  seem  incredible  that  he  now  for  the
first  time  began  to  show  any  noticeable  intend  in
polities.  He  seems  never  to  have  even  voted  In-fore
the  autumn  of  1856.  No  one  who  knew  the  man
could  doubt  that  he  would  then  cast  it,  as  he  did,
for  John  C.  Fremont,  the  first  Republican  candi-
date for  the  presidency.  As  moral  questions  en-
tered more  and  more  into  politics,  Garfield's  inter-
est grew  apace,  and  he  sought  frequent  occasions
to  discuss  these  questions  in  debate.  In  advo-
cating the  cause  of  freedom  against  slavery,  he
showed  for  the  first  time  a  skill  in  discussion,
which  afterward  bore  good  fruit  in  the  house  of
representatives.  Without  solicitation  or  thought
on  his  part,  in  1859  he  was  sent  to  represent  the
counties  of  Summit  and  Portage  in  the  senate  of
Ohio.  Again  in  this  new  field  his  versatility  and
industry  are  conspicuous.  He  makes  exhaustive
investigations  and  reports  on  such  widely  different
topics  as  geology,  education,  finance,  and  parlia-
mentary law.  Always  looking  to  the  future,  and
apprehensive  that  the  impending  contest  might
leave  the  halls  of  legislation  and  seek  the  arbitra-
ment of  war,  he  gave  especial  study  to  the  militia
system  of  the  state,  and  the  best  methods  of  equip-
ping and  disciplining  it.

The  war  came,  and  Garfield,  who  had  been  farm-
er, carpenter,  student,  teacher,  lawyer,  preacher,
and  legislator,  was  to  show  himself  an  excellent
soldier.  In  August,  1861,  Gov.  William  Dennison
commissioned  him  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  42d
regiment  of  Ohio  volunteers.  The  men  were  his
old  pupils  at  Hiram  college,  whom  he  had  persuaded
to  enlist.  Promoted  to  the  command  of  this  regi-
ment, he  drilled  it  into  military  efficiency  while
waiting  orders  to  the  front,  and  in  December,  1861,
reported  to  Gen.  Buell,  in  Louisville,  Ky.  Gen.
Buell  was  so  impressed  by  the  soldierly  condition
of  the  regiment  that  he  gave  Col.  Garfield  a  bri-
gade, and  assigned  him  the  difficult  task  of
driving  the  Confederate  general  Humphrey  Mar-
shall from  eastern  Kentucky.  His  confidence  was
such  that  he  allowed  the  young  soldier  to  lay  his
own  plans,  though  on  their  success  hung  the  fate
of  Kentucky.  The  undertaking  itself  was  difficult.
Gen.  Marshall  had  5,000  men,  while  Garfield  had
but  half  that  number,  and  must  march  through  a
state  where  the  majority  of  the  people  were  hos-
tile, to  attack  an  enemy  strongly  intrenched  in  a
mountainous  country.  Garfield,  nothing  daunted,
concentrated  his  little  force,  and  moved  it  with
such  rapidity,  sometimes  here  and  sometimes  there,
that  Gen.  Marshall,  deceived  by  these  feints,  and
still  more  by  false  reports,  which  were  skilfully
prepared  for  him,  abandoned  his  position  and
many  supplies  at  Paintville,  and  was  caught  in
retreat  by  Garfield,  who  charged  the  full  force  of
the  enemy,  and  maintained  a  hand-to-hand  fight
with  it  for  five  hours.  The  enemy  had  o.(HM)  men
and  twelve  cannon  ;  Garfield  had  no  artillery,  and
but  1,100  men. But  he  held  his  own  until  re-


QAKFIKLD


G  \i;ni:u>


m


reed b\ SOW Granger alld Sheldon, when

iti>;  Garfield  the  rid

10 .lllll., l^i'J,  0JM l.f tile MK»I llll-

portent  of  the  minor  bottle*  of  the  aw. Shortly

• afterward  Zollicoffi  f>-ui<-«l  and  slain  by

u  Thomas  at  Mill  Spring,  an-l  the  Confed<
•  the -tail- <>f  Kentucky. Coming  after  ti.

Bethel,  Hull  Run,  and  the  dissetroai
failures  in  Hissoui  rneld'i  trinmpfa

tin-  Oonfedarati  forces  at  Middle  Creek  had  an
fad  "ii  the  entire  north.  Marshall
was  »  graduate  of  West  Point,  and  had  every  ad-
vantage in  numbers  and  pusitiou,  yet  seems  to  have
-gcueralcd  at  every  |M.int.  He  was  driven
from  two  fortified  positions,  and  finally completely
rooted — all  within  a  period  of  less  than  a  fortnight
in  the  month  of  January,  1862. In  recognition  of

these  services,  esi>ccially  acknowledged  !>v  (Jan.
Huell  in  his  General  Order  No.  40  (20  Jan.,  I

-uleiit  Lincoln  promptly  made  the  young  colo-
nel a  brigadier -general,  dating  his  oommisrioa
from  the  battle  of  Middle  Creek. During  his  earn*

_-n  of  the  Hig  Sandy,  while  Garfield  wai  an-
gaged  in  breaking  up  some  scattered  Confederate
encampments,  his  supplies  gave  out,  and  ho  was
threatened  with  starvation.  Going  himself  to  the
Ohio  river,  he  seized  a  steamer,  loaded  it  with  pro-
visions, and.  on  the  refusal  of  any  pilot  to  under-
take the  perilous  voyage,  because  or  a  freshet  that
had  swelled  the  ri\er,  he  stood  at  the  helm  for
forty-eight  hours  and  piloted  the  craft  through  the
dangerous  channel.  In  order  to  surprise  Marshall,
then  intrenched  in  Cumberland  Gap,  Garfield
marched  his  soldiers  HMi  miles  in  four  days  through
a  blinding  snow-storm.  Returning  to  Louisville,
he  found  that  Gen.  Huell  was  away,  overtook  him
assigned  to  the  oo

He  reached  Sliiloh
time  to  take  part  in  the  second  day's  fight,  was  en-
gaged in  all  Qw  operations  in  froni  of  Corinth,  and
in  .June.  1862,  rebuilt  the  bridges  on  the  Memphis
and  Charleston  railroad,  and  exhibited  noticeable
engineering  skill  in  repairing  the  fortifications  of
Bnntsville.  The  unhealthfulness  of  the  region
told  upon  him,  and  on  30  July,  18(52,  under  leave
if  absence,  he  returned  to  Hiram,  where  he  lay  ill
for  two  months.  On  25  Sept.,  IW2,  he  went  to
Washington,  unci  whs  ordered  on  court-martial
duty,  and  gained  such  reputation  in  this  practice
that,  on  -J.*!  Nov..  he  was  assigned  to  the  case  of
Gen.  Fits-John  Porter.  In  February,  ihm.  he  re-
ined to  duty  under  (Jen.  Kosecrans*  then  in  com-
mand of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  Rosecrans
made  him  his  chief-of-stalT,  with  responsibilities
beyond  those  usually  given  to  this  office.  In  this
field,  Garfield's  influence  on  the  campaign  in  Mid-
dle Tennessee  was  most  important.  One  famil-
iar incident  -hows  and  justifies  the  great  Influence

he  wielded in its  counsels. Before  the battle  of

ObJckamauga (24 June, 1868),  Gen. Rosecrans

asked  the  written  opinion  of  seventeen  of  his  gen-
eral- on  the  advisability  of  an  immediate  advance.
All  others  opposed  it,  but  Garfield  advised  it.  and

itiients  were  so  convincing,  though  pressed

without  passion  or  prejudice,  that  flnsaHBIM  lletaf

Mined  to  s.-.k  an  engagement Gen.  Garfield  wrote

out  nil  the  orders  of  that  fateful  day  (19  Sept.).  cx-

and  that  one  was  the  blunder  that

■  day.  Garfield  volunteered  to  take  the
I  the  defeat  on  the  right  to  Gen.  George  II.
Thomas,  who  held  the  left  of  the  line.  It  was  a
bold  ride,  under  constant  lire,  but  he  reached
Tlioinns  and  gave  the  information  that  Hived  the
Army  of  the  Cumberland.  For  this  action  be
was  made  a  major-general,  19  Sept.,  iw>,  pro*


at  Columbia,  Tenn.,  and  W8S assigned  to  the  com

maud  of  the  90th  brigade. He  reached  SnOofa  in


inoted  for  gallantry  on  a  field  that  was  IoM. With

a  military  future  so  bright  beJon  him,  Garfield.

always  unselfish,  yielded  his  own  ambition  to  Mr.
Lincoln's  urgent  request,  and  on  (18,  re-

inmisMon,  and  hastened  to  Washing-
ton to  s|i  in  congress, to  which  he  had  beta  chosen

fifteen  months before,  as  t  he  successor  of  Joshua  H.

GiddingS,  In  the  mean  time  Thomas  had  received
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  had  re-
organized it,  and  had  h  Held  to  take  a
division.  Mis  inclination  was  to  accept  and  con-
tinue the  military  career,  which  had  MperiOf  at-
tractions; but  be  yielded  to  the  representations  of

the  PresJdanl and  BeO.  Stanton,  that he  Would U-

llloie  Ils4*flll in the  boon  <>f  representatives.

ii.  Garfield  e«f  thirty-two  read  old  when  In-
entered  congress.  He  found  in  the  house,  which
\sas  to  be  the  theatre  of  his  lasting  faun-,  many
with whom his name was for the next twenty

n  Intimately  aasnrsatod Sohnylar  Gbtfu  was

its  ■paakar,  and  Oonkling,  Hlaine.  Washburne.
Stevens,  Ponton,  Bchenok,  Henry  Winter  Davie,
William  H.  Allison,  and  William  1{.  Morrison  were
among  its  immUrs.  His  military  reputation  had
preceded  him.  and  secured  for  him  I  place  in  the
committee  on  military  affairs,  then  the  most  im-
portant in  congress.  His  first  speech  (14  Jan.,
1MI>4),  upon  a  motion  to  print  extra  copies  of  (l.n.
Rosecraus's  official  re|M»rt.  was  listened  to  with  at-
tention ;  and.  indeed,  whenever  he  spoke  npou  army
matters,  this  was  the  case.  Hut  the  attention  was
given  to  the  man  for  the  information  he  |>ossesscd
and  imparted  rather  than  to  the  orator;  for  in
effective  ■ponrh  as  in  every  other  matter  in  which
Garfield  succeeded,  be  oases  to  excellence  only  by
labor  and  practice,  lie  was  soon  regarded  as  an
authority  on  military  matters,  and  his  opinion  was
sought  as  an  exiiert,  exjierienccd  and  careful.  To
these  fjiiestions  lie  gave  all  necessary  attention,  but
they  did  not  exhaust  his  capacity.  He  began  at
this  time,  and  ever  afterward  continued,  a  thorough
Mudy  of  constitutional  and  financial  problems,  and
to  aid  him  in  these  researches  he  labored  to  in-
crease his  familiarity  with  the  German  and  French
languages.  In  this,  his  first  session,  he  had  to
stand  almost  alone  in  opposition  to  the  bill  that
increased  the  bounty  paid  for  enlistment.  He  ad-
vocated libera]  bounties  to  the  veterans  that  re-
enlisted,  but  would  use  the  draft  to  secure  raw
recruits.  History  vindicated  his  judgment.  In  the
same  session  he  spoke  on  the  subject  of  seizure
and  confiscation  of  rebel  property,  and  on  tree
Bommeree  between  the  states.  On  VI  Jan..  1868,  he
discussed  exhaustively  the  constitutional  amend-
nient  toaboUsfa  slavery.

In  the  :>!Mh  congress  (lNu."i)  he  was  changed,
at  his  own  reipiest,  from  the  committee  on  mili-
tary affairs  to  the  wavs  and  means  committee,
which  then  included  Messrs.  Morrison,  of  Illinois,
Brooks  and  Conkling,  of  New  York,  and  Allison,
of  b.wa.  His  reason  for  choosing  this  new  field
was  that,  the  war  being  ended,  financial  Ques-
tions would  have  supreme  ini|>ortance,  ami  he
wished  to  have  his  part  in  their  solution.  In  the
40th  eongrees  ilso?)  he  was  restored  to  his  old
committee  on  military  affairs,  and  made  its  chair-
man. In  March,  1884  be  made  his  first  ipeaofa  <>n

the  question  Of  the  public  debt,  foreshadowing,  in
the  course  of  his  remarks,  that  republican  pOOOJ
which  resulted  in  the  resumption  of  -pecie  pay-
ment. 1  Jan.,  1N7!».  From  this  moment  until  the
treasury  note  was  worth  its  face  in  gold,  he  never
failed,  on  every  prOfJSf  occasion,  in  the  house  and
out,  to  discuss  every  phase  of  the  financial  cjues-
tion,  and  to  urge  upon  the  National  conscience  the


609


QARPIKLD


<..\i;  field


demands  of  financial  honor.  In  May,  1868,  he
■poke  ■gain  on  the  currency,  dealing  ■  staggering

I, |,,w  to  the  adherents  of  (forge  II.  Pendleton,
who.  under  the  stress  of  a  money  panic,  were
clamoring  for  the  government  to  "make  the
money-market  easier.  It  may  be  said  that  he
was  at  this,  as  at  later  times,  the  representative
jukI  i •liiiinpion  of  the  sound-money  men  in  con-
gress, and  first  and  last  did  more  than  any  one  elea,
probably,  in  settling  the  issues  <>f  this  monentoae
question.  In  is??  ami  1878  he  was  again  active  in
Stemming  >  fresh  tide  of  financial  fallacies.  Be
treated  the  matter  this  time  with  elementary  sim-
plicity, and  gave  in  detail  reasons  for  a  hard-money
policy,  based  not  so  much  upon  opinion  and  theory
as  upon  the  teachings  of  history.

In  the  41st  congress  a  new  committee — that  on
banking  and  currency — was  created,  and  Garfield
was  very  properly  made  its  chairman.  This  gave
him  new  opportunities  to  serve  the  cause  in  which
he  was  heartily  enlisted,  and  no  one  now  seeks
to  diminish  the  value  of  that  service.  The  most
noticed  and  most  widely  read  of  these  discussions
was  a  speech  on  the  National  finances,  which  he
deliverea  in  1878,  at  Paneuil  hall,  Boston.  It  was
circulated  as  a  campaign  document  by  thousands,
and  served  to  win  a  victory  in  Massachusetts  and
to  subdue  for  a  while  the  frantic  appeals  from  the

west  f  or  more  pa-
per money.  He
served  also  on  the
select  committee
on  the  census  (a
tribute  to  his  skill
in  statistics)  and
on  the  committee
on  rules,  as  an
appreciation  of
his  practical  and
thorough  knowl-
edge of  parlia-
mentary law.  In
the  42d  and  43d
congresses  he  was
chairman  of  the
committee  on  ap-
propriations. In
the  44th,  45th,
and  46th  con-
gresses (the  house
being  Democrat-
ic) he  was  as-
signed a  place  on
the  committee  of  ways  and  means.  In  reconstruc-
tion times,  Garfield  was  earnest  and  aggressive  in
opposition  to  the  theories  advocated  by  President
Johnson.  He  was  a  kind  man,  and  not  lacking
in  sympathy  for  those  who,  from  mistaken  motives,
had  attempted  to  sever  their  connection  with  the
Federal  Union;  but  he  was  not  a  sentimentalist,
and  had  too  earnest  convictions  not  to  insist  that
the  results  won  by  so  much  treasure  and  blood
should  be  secured  to  the  victors.  An  old  soldier,
he  would  not  see  Union  victories  neutralized  by
evasions  of  the  constitution.  On  these  topics  no
one  was  his  superior  in  either  branch  of  congress,
and  no  opponent,  however  able,  encountered  him
here  without  regretting  the  contest.

In  1876,  Gen.  Garfield  went  to  New  Orleans,  at
President  Grant's  request,  in  company  with  Sena-
tors Sherman  and  Matthews  and  other  Republi-
cans, to  watch  the  counting  of  the  Louisiana  vote.
He  made  a  special  study  of  the  West  Feliciana
parish  case,  and  embodied  his  views  in  a  brief  but
significant report. On his return,  ho made, in


January,  1877,  two  notable  speeches  in  the  house
00  the  duly  of  oongreas  in  B  presidential  election,

and  claimed  thai  the  vice-president  had  a  ''in-
stitutional right  to  count  the  electoral  rota  He
was  opposed  to  an  electoral  commission;  yet,  when
the  commission  was  ordered,  Gen.  Garfield  was
chosen  by  acclamation  to  fill  one  of  the  two  seats
allotted  to  Republican  representatives.  His  col-
league was  George  F.  Hoar,  of  Massachusetts.
Garfield  discussed  before  the  commission  the  Flor-
ida and  Louisiana  returns,  on  9  and  16  Feb..  1877«
Mr.  Blaine  left  the  house  in  1877  for  the  senate.
and  this  made  Garfield  the  undisputed  leader  of
the  Republican  party  in  the  house.  He  was  at  this
timefand  subsequently,  its  candidate  for  speaker.

The  struggle  begun  in  the  second  session  of  the
45th  congress  (1879),  when  the  Democratic  major-
ity sought  to  control  the  president  through  the
appropriations,  gave  Garfield  a  fine  opportunity  to
display  his  powers  as  a  leader  in  opposition.  The
Democratic  members  added  to  two  general  appro-
priation bills,  in  the  shape  of  amendments,  legisla-
tion intended  to  restrain  the  use  of  the  army  as  a
posse  to  keep  the  peace  at  elections,  to  repeal  the  law
authorizing  the  employment  of  deputy  U.  S.  mar-
shals at  the  elections  of  members  of  congress,  and
to  relieve  jurors  in  the  U.  S.  courts  from  the  ob-
ligation of  the  test  oath.  The  senate,  which  was
Republican,  refused  to  concur  in  these  amendments,
and  so  the  session  ended.  An  extra  session  was
promptly  called,  which  continued  into  midsummer.
Contemporary  criticism  claims  that,  in  this  contest,
Gen.  Garfield  reached,  perhaps,  the  climax  of  his  con-
gressional career.  A  conservative  man  by  nature,
he  revolted  at  such  high-handed  measures,  and  in
his  speech  of  29  March,  1879,  characterized  them
as  a  "  revolution  in  congress."  Against  this  insult
to  the  spirit  of  the  law  he  protested  with  unwont-
ed vigor.  Like  Webster  in  1832,  he  stood  the  de-
fender of  the  constitution,  and  his  splendid  elo-
quence and  resistless  logic  upheld  the  prerogatives
of  the  executive,  and  denounced  these  attempts  by
the  legislature  to  prevent  or  control  elections,  how-
ever disguised,  as  an  attack  upon  the  constitution.
He  warned  the  house  that  its  course  would  end  in
nullification,  and  protested  that  its  principle  was
the  "revived  doctrine  of  state  sovereignty. '  (See
speeches  of  26  April,  10  and  11  June,  and  19  and  27
June,  1879.)  The  result  of  it  was  that  the  Demo-
crats finally  voted  $44,600,000  of  the  $45,000,000
of  appropriations  originally  asked — a  great  party
victory,  to  which  Gen.  Garfield  largely  contribw
uted.  His  arguments  had  the  more  weight  because
not  partisan,  but  supported  by  a  clear  analysis  and
statement  of  the  relations  between  the  different
branches  of  the  government.  His  last  speech  to
the  house  was  made  on  the  appointment  of  special
deputy  marshals.  2:i  April,  1880.  At  the  same
time  he  made  a  report  of  the  tariff  commission,
which  showed  that  ne  was  still  a  sincere  friend  to
protection.  He  was  already  United  States  senator*
elect  from  Ohio,  chosen  after  a  nomination  of  sin-
gular unanimity,  13  Jan.,  1880.

Where  there  is  government  by  party,  no  leader
can  escape  calumny ;  hence  it  assailed  Garfield  with
great  venom. In  the  presidential  canvass  of  1872,
he, with other Republican representatives
charged  with  having  bought  stock in the  I
Mobilier.  sold  to  them  at  less  than  its  value  to  influ-
ence their  action  in  legislation  affecting  the  Unioa
Pacific railroad. A congressional investigation.
reporting  13  Feb..  1875,  seemed  to  establish  these
facts  so  tar  as  Garfield  was  concerned. He  knew
nothing  of  any  connection  between  the  t"'
panics, much less  that the Credit Mobilier  on-


GARFIELD


GARFIELD


608


troll,  d  the  railway, (iartield  .Inunl that he  over

■  i  tii.-  stock,  iiml  mm  vaguely  oootradieted  by
Oakes  Ames,  who  had  no  evidenoa  of  hi.**  alleged
sale  of  $|,( too  worth  of  tha  Mook  to  Garfield,

i  memorandum  in  his  diary,  which  did not

with Ames's oral testimony that In- paid

•  Id |899 M  dividend  00 1 1n-  stock, (iartield

admitted  that  he  had  received  £W>o  in  June,

from Anns,  luit rlaiinol that it was  a loan,  and
he  paid it in  the  winter  of I860. It  was  no-
re  claimed  that  Garfield  ever  received  oertifl-
or receipt,  or  other  dividends,  to  which,  if

the owner  of the  stock, he was  entitled,  or that

wr  ask.d  for  them.  The  innocence  of  Gen.
(iartield  was  generally  recognized,  and,  after  the
circumstances  liecamc  known,  he  was  not  weak-
ened in  his  district  Another  investigation  in
the  same  congress  (48d)  gave  calumny  a  second
op|x»rt unity.  This  was  the  investigation  into  the
conduct  of  the  government  of  tin-  District  of
Columbia.  It  revealed  startling  frauds  in  a  De
Golyer  contract,  ami  Garfield's  name  was  found
to  Ik'  in  Mime  way  connected  with  it.  The  facts,
oorrolKirated  in  an  open  letter  by  .lames  M.  Wil-
son, chairman  of  the  committee,  were: In May,

:.  Richard  C.  Parsons,  a  Cleveland  attorney,
then  marshal  of  the  supreme  court  in  Washington,
having  the  interests  of  the  patents  owned  liy  De
Golyer  in  charge,  was  called!  awav.  He  brought
all  (lis  material  to  (iartield.  and  asked  him  to  pre-
pare the  brief.  The  brief  was  to  show  the  superi-
ority of  the  pavement  (the  subject  of  patent)  over
forty  other  kinds,  and  did  not  otherwise  concern
the  contract  or  have  anything  to  do  with  its  terms.
The  fraud,  as  is  generally  understood,  was  in  the
contract,  not  in  the  quality  of  the  pavement.,  Gar-
field prepared  the  brief  and  delivered  it  to  Par-
sons; but  did  not  himself  make  the  argument.
Parsons  sent  (iartield  subsequently  $.5,000,  which
was  a  part  of  the  fee  Parsons  had  received  for  his
own  services.  As  thoughtful  people  reviewed  the
case,  there  was  do  harsher  criticism  than  that  sug-

ted  by  Gen.  Garfield's  own  lofty  standard  of
■voiding  even  the  appearance  of  evil — that  he  had
not  shown  his  usual  prudence  in  avoiding  any  con-
nection, even  the  most  honest,  in  any  way.  with
any  matter  that  could  in  any  shape  come  up  for
congressional  review.  It  was  the  cruel  and  unjust
charges  made  in  connection  with  these  calumnies
which  sent  the  iron  into  his  soul,  and  made  wounds
which  he  forgave  but  never  forgot.

In  June,  [880,  the  Republican  convention  to
nominate  a  successor  to  President  Hayes  was  held
in  Chicago,  and  to  it  came  (iartield.  naturally,  at
the  head  of  the  Ohio  delegation.  He  sympathized
heartily  with  the  wish  of  that  delegation  to  secure
the  nomination  for  John  Sherman,  and  lalxired
loyally  for  that  end.  There  could  In'  no  criticism
of  his  action,  nor  could  then-  l>e  any  just  criticism
of  his  loyalty  to  his  candidate,  except  (and  that  he
never  concealed)  that  he  wished  more  to  defeat  the
nomination  of  Grant  than  to  secure  that  of  Sena-
tor Sherman.  He  believed  a  third  term  such  a  ca-
lamity that  patriotism  required  the  sacrifice  of  all
other  considerations  to  prevent  it.  That  view  he
shared  with  Mr.  Blaine,  also  a  candidate  in  this
eiitioii.  whos,.  instructions  to  his  friends  were.
'•  Defeat  a  third  term  first,  and  then  struggle  for  the
prise  of  office  afterwards. Success  in  the  one  case  is

J  ;  success  in  the  other  is  of  minor  importance."
On  the  thirty-third  ballot  (Irant  had  906  votes,  the
remaining  4»ni  being  divided  between  Blaine,  Kd-
munds,  and  Washburn.-.  The  Iioih-  of  the  (irant
men  or  the  (Maine  men  t.>  secure  the  prize  faltered,
and  in  the  thirty-fourth  tmllot Wisconsin broke


the  in..iiotonv  by  announcing  thirty-eix  votes  f<>r
.lames  A.  (iartield.  This  put  the  spark  to  fuel
that  had  l»c-n  UMOOOSjowtj  prepared  for  it  by  the
events  of  the  long  struggle, in  all  the  tin  K-ccdi  hits.


(MHUiliar  fitm-ss  had  put  (iartield  t<>  the  front  as
the  counsellor  and  leader  of  the  anti-(iraiit  major-
ity, and  tin-  exhibition  "f  his  spl.-ndid  qualifications
won  increasing  admiration  and  trust.  His  tact
and  readiness  in  casual  debate,  and  tin-  bOBtttj
and  force  of  the  more  elaborate  effort  in  which  he
nominated  Sherman,  won  the  wavering  conven-
tion. On  the  thirty-sixth  ballot  the  delegates
broke  their  ranks  and  rushed  t<>  him.  lb-  received
•tes.  ami  then  his  nomination  (HJune.  1880)
was  made  unanimous,  (i.-n.  (iartield  left  tin
vcntioii  baton  the  result  was  announced,  and
accepted  the  nomination  by  letter.  This  was  a
thoughtful  document,  and  acceptable  to  the  Re-
publican voters.  Disregarding  precedent,  he  spoke
in  his  own  behalf  in  Ohio.  New  York,  and  other
Mates.  He  spoke  sens j|,ly  and  with  great  discretion,
and  his  public  appearance  is  thought to  have  in-

nd  his  popularity. He  was  elected  fj  Hot.

1880)  over  his  OOUpetttor,  Gen.  Winfield  Scott
llanc.H-k,  by  the  votes  of  every  northern  state  ex-
cept New  Jersey.  Nevada,  and  California.  His  in-
augural addr.-ss,  .}  March.  1881,  was  eatdaffJOtOty  M
the  people  generally,  and  his  administration  liegan
with  only  one  cloud  in  the  sky.  His  cabinet  was
made  up  as  follows:  James  (i.  Plain.-,  of  Maine,
secretary  of  state:  William  Windom.  of  Minnesota,
tary  of  the  treasury;  Wayne  MacYeagh.  of
Pennsylvania,  attorney-general  :  Thomas  L.James,
of  New  York.  |H>stinastcr-general :  Samuel  J.  Kirk-
wood,  of  Iowa,  secretary  Of  the  interior;  Robert  T.
Lincoln,  of  Illinois,  secretary  of  war;  William  II.
Hunt,  of  Louisiana,  secretary  of  the  navv.  There
was  bitter  dissension  in  the  party  in  New  York,  and
Garfield  gave  much  consideration  to  his  duty  in  the
premises.  He  was  willing  to  do  anvthing  except
yield  the  inde|>endeiice  of  the  executive  in  his  own
constitutional  sphere.  He  would  give  to  the  New-
York  senators,  Conkling  and  Piatt,  more  than  their
share  of  offices;  but  they  should  not  be  allowed  to
interfere  with  or  control  the  presidential  right  of
nomination.  He  made  nominations  to  the  senate —
as  many,  it  is  said,  as  twelve — in  that  interest,  and
then  (23  March.  1SH1)  sent  in  the  name  of  William
EL  Roliertson.  a  leader  in  the  other  faction,  as  col-
lector of  the  |>ort  of  New  York.  Senator  Conkling
protested,  and  then  openly  resisted  his  confirma-
tion. Yielding  to  him  in  the  interest  of  senatorial
courtesy,  his  Republican  colleagues,  in  cain
May.  1KN1.  agreed  t>>  let  contested  nominations
lie  over  practically  until  the  following  December.
Tnis  was  a  substantial  victory  for  Mr.  Conkling ;
but  it  was  promptly  met  by  the  president,  who,  a
few  days  afterward  (.">  May),  withdrew  all  the  nomi-
nations that  were  pleasing  to  the  New  York  sena-
tor. This  brought  the  other  senators  to  terms.
Mr.  Conkling,  recognizing  defeat,  and  Mr.  Piatt
with  him.  resigned  their  offices.  Hi  May.  1881.  On
1H  May.  Collector  KoU-rtson  was  confirmed.  The
early  summer  came,  and  peace  ami  happiness  and
the  growing  strength  and  popularity  of  his  ad-
ministration cheered  the  heart  of  its  chief.  At  a
moment  <>f  snontal  exaltation,  on  the  morning  of
2  July,  1881,  lie  was  shot  liv  a  disappointed  ofnoe-
sceker.  The  avowed  obj.-ct  was  to  promote  to  the
presidential  chair  Vice-President  Arthur,  who
represented  the  (irant  or  "  stalwart  '  wing  of  the
party.  The  president  was  setting  out  on  a  trip  to
New  KngSand.  anticipating  espeetal  pleasure  in  wit-
nessing the  commencement  exercises  of  id.,  alma
neater  at  Williematown. lb- was  passing  through


.-,(14


GARFIELD


GARFIELD


the  waiting-room  of  Um  Baltimore  tad  Potomac
depot,  at  rune  o'olook  thai  morning,  leaning  on  the
arm  of  Mr.  Blaine,  whan  the  aamfnn  fired  at  Um
with  n  pistoL  The  tir-t  hall  paawd  through  bieooat-
sleeve;  tin-  second  entered  by  the  back,  fractured
a  rib,  mi'l  lodged  deep  in  the  body.  The  presidenl
u,i-  oarriad  to  the  White  House,  where,  ondar  the
higheal  medioal  skill,  and  with  every  oomforl  that
monej  ■',l"1  devotion  could  bring,  be  lingered  for
mora  than  ten  weeks  balweeu  life  ami  death.  The
country  ami  the  world  ware  moved  by  the  dastard-
ly deed;  ami  the  fortitude  and  cheerfulness  with

which  the  president  i>ore  his  raftering  added  to

the  universal  grief.  Daily  bulletins  of  his  con-
dition were  published  in  every  city  in  the  United
States  and  in  all  the  European  capitals.  Many  of
the  crowned  heads  of  Europe  sought  by  telegraphic
Inquiry  more  particular  news,  and  repeated  their
wishes'  for  his  recovery.  A  day  of  national  suppli-
cation was  set  apart  and  sacredly  observed,  and
the  prayers  at  first  seemed  answered.  His  phy-
sicians were  hopeful,  and  gave  expression  to  their
hope.  1 1  is  condition  seemed  to  improve  ;  but  when
midsummer  came,  the  patient  tailed  so  perceptibly
that  a  removal  was  hazarded.  On  6  Sept.,  1881,
he  was  taken  to  Elberon,  N.  J.,  by  a  s]K>cial  train.
He  bore  the  journey  well,  and  for  a  while,  under
the  inspiration  of  the  invigorating  sea-breezes,
seemed  to  rally.  Hut  on  15  Sept..  1881,  symptoms
of  blood-poisoning  appeared.  He  lingered  tdl  the
19th.  when,  after  a  few  hours  of  unconsciousness.
he  died  peacefully.  A  special  train  (21  Sept.)  car-
ried the  body  to  Washington,  through  a  countrv
draped  with  emblems  of  mourning,  and  through
crowds  of  reverent  spectators,  to  lie  in  state  in
the  rotunda  of  the  capitol  two  days,  22  and  23
Sept.  The  final  services  held  here  were  never
surpassed  in  solemnity  and  dignity,  except  on  27
Feb.,  1882,  when,  in  the  hall  of  representatives,  at

the  request  of  both
houses  of  congress,
his  friend,  James
(!.  Blaine,  then  sec-
retary of  state,  de-
livered a  memo-
rial address,  in
the  presence  of  the
president  and  the
heads  of  all  the
great  departments
of  the  government,
so  perfect  that  the
criticism  of  two
continents  was  un-

?ualified  praise,
n  a  long  train,
crowded  with  the
most  illustrious  of
his  countrymen,
which  in  its  pas-
sage, day  or  night,
was  never  out  of
the  silent  watch  of  mourning  citizens,  who  stood  in
city,  field,  and  forest,  to  see  it  pass,  Garfield's  re-
mains were  borne  to  Cleveland  and  placed  (^(i
Sept.,  1882)  in  a  beautiful  cemetery,  which  over-
looks the  waters  of  Lake  Erie.  The  accompany"
ing  illustration  represents  the  imposing  monument
that  is  to  mark  his  last  resting-place.

His  tragic  death  assures  to  Garfield  the  attention
of  history.  It  will  credit  him  with  great  services
rendered  in  various  fields,  and  with  a  character
formed  by  a  singular  union  of  the  best  qualities
— industry,  perseverance]  truthfulness,  honesty.
courage — all  acting  as  faithful  servants  to  a  lofty


ami  unselfish  ambition.  Without  genius,  which
can  rarely  do  more  than  produce  extraordinary
results  in  one  direction,  his  powers  were  so  many
and  well-trained  that  he  produced  excellent  results
in  many.  It  history  shall  call  Garfield  great,  it
will  be  because  the  development  of  tin-
was  so  complete  and  harmonious.  It  has  no  chfl
but  to  record  that,  by  the  wise  use  of  them,  he  won
distinction  in  many  fields:  a  teacher  so  gifted  that
his  students  compare  him  with  Arnold  of  Rugby;
a  soldier,  rising  by  merit  in  rapid  promotion  to
highest  rank:  a  lawyer  heard  with  profit  and  ap-
probation in  the  supreme  court:  an  eloquent  ora-
tor, whose  own  anient  faith  kindled  his  heal
speaking  after  thorough  preparation  and  with
practised  skill,  but  refusing  always  to  win  vic-
tory by  forensic  trick  or  device;  a  party  leader,
failing  in  pre-eminence  only  because  his  moral
honesty  would  not  let  him  always  represent  a  party
victory  as  a  necessity  of  national  well-being.  In
all  these  characters  he  was  the  friend  of  learning
and  of  virtue,  and  would  probably  ask  no  other
epitaph  than  the  tribute  of  a  friend",  who  said  that,
"among  the  public  men  of  his  era,  none  had  higher
qualities  of  statesmanship  and  greater  culture  than
James  A.  Garfield."

Garfield's  speeches  are  almost  a  compendium  of
the  political  history  of  the  stirring  era  between
1864  and  1880.  Among  those  worthy  of  special
mention,  on  account  of  the  importance  of  the  sul>-
jects  or  the  attractive  and  forcible  presentation  of
them,  are  the  following:  On  the  Enrolling  and
calling  out  of  the  National  Forces  (25  Jan..  1N(>4);
on  the  Reconstruction  of  the  Southern  States  (Feb-
ruary, 1806);  on  Civil-Service  Reform,  in  the  con-
gress of  1870  and  other  congresses :  on  the  Currency
and  the  Public  Faith  (April,  1874);  on  the  Demo-
cratic Party  and  the  South  (4  Aug.,  1876),  of  which
a  million  copies  were  distributed  as  a  campaign
document ;  the  speech  in  opposition  to  the  Wood
bill,  which  was  framed  to  break  down  the  protect-
ive tariff  (4  June,  1878);  the  speeches  on  Revolu-
tion in  Congress  (4  March  and  4  April,  1879);  on
Congressional  Nullification  (10  June,  1879) ;  on
Treason  at  the  Polls  (11  June.  1879);  and  on  the
Democratic  Party  and  Public  Opinion  (11  Oct,
1879).  Among  his  speeches  in  congress,  less  politi-
cal in  character,  were  that  on  the  ^National  Bureau
of  Education  (8  June,  1866);  a  series  on  Indian
Affairs,  covering  a  period  of  several  years:  one  on
the  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  Rebellion
(2  March,  1869) ;  two  on  the  Census  (6  April  and
16  Dec.,  1879);  one  on  Civil-Service  Reform  ;  many
addresses  on  the  silver  question ;  and  one  on  Na-
tional aid  to  education  (6  Feb.,  1872).  He  found
time  to  make  frequent  orations  and  addresses  be-
fore societies  and  gatherings  outside  of  congress.
His  address  on  College  Education,  delivered  before
the  literary  societies  of  Hiram  college  (14  June,
1867),  is  an  admirable  plea  for  a  liberal  education,
and  on  a  subject  in  which  the  author  was  always
deeply  interested.  On  30  May,  1868,  he  delivered
an  address  on  the  Union  Soldiers,  at  the  first  me-
morial service  held  at  Arlington,  Va.  A  eulogy
of  Gen.  Thomas,  delivered  before  the  Army  of  the
Cumberland,  25  Nov.,  1870,  is  one  of  the  hap
of  his  oratorical  efforts.  On  the  reception  by  the
house  of  the  statues  of  John  Winthrop  and  Samuel
Adams,  he  spoke  with  a  great  wealth  of  historical
allusion,  and  all  his  memorial  addresses,  especially
those  on  his  predecessor  in  congress,  Joshu
Giddings,  Lincoln,  and  Profs.  Morse  and  Henry,
are  worthy  of  study.  But  in  all  this  series  nothing
will  live  longer  than  the  simple  words  with  which,
from  the  balcony  of  the  New  York  custom-h<


GARLAND


<i.\UL\M»


OOfl


t  md the BOb  frenzied  at the  news  of Lin-

'  loud*  and  dark-
Pf—  mn>  around  him ;  His  |xtvili<>n  it  .lurk  water*
nml  thick  clouds;  justice  and  judgment  are  1 1 »« -
establishment  "f  his  throne;  mercj  ami  truth  shall

ire  In-  farrl Fellow-citi
iukI  the  Government  at  Washington  i:

tin-  death  uf  President  Garfield,  a  pODVaV
|itnni  fur  his  willow  ami  children  realized

i.u.ihxi. The  ii ie  of  this  fund  i-  t<>  !*•

(mill  t"  Mr*.  Garfield  daring  her  life,  after  which
ncipal  i-  t<»  \h>  divided  among  the  children
— four  x>ns  ami  a  daughter.  More  than  forty  of
Garfield's  s|M«cehes  in  congress  have  Urn  published
in  pamphlet-form,  as  has  also  his  oration  on  the  life
of  (Jen.  George  II.  Thomas.  A  volume  of  brief  se-
lections, entitled  "Garfield's  Word*,*1  ws
Bid  by  William  R.  Balofa  (Boston,  i**h. His

work-  have  U-eii  edited  t»y Burke  A.  llin-dale  ("J

Vols., BOStfln, 1888V '  '"' ,M"M ''""M'lete life of

President Garfield  is  that bv James K.  (iilmore
. IHNO).
A  monument  to  President  (lurfleld.  designed  by
John  l^.  A.  Ward,  was  erected  in  Washington,  I ». <'..
by  the  Society  of  the  army  nf  the  ( 'unilx-rlantl,  and
dedicated  mi  12  May.  1887. It  consists  of  a  bronze
statue  of  (iarlield,  10$  feel  Ugh.  standing  on  a  cir-
cular |>cdfstal.  1*  feet
in  height,  with but-
tresses, "ii  which are

three  reclining  fig-
ures, representing  a

student,  a  warrior,
and  a  statesman.
The  I'.S.  government
gave  the  site  and  the
granite  |>cdestaJ,  be-
sides contributing  to

the  cost  of  the  statues.

and  furnishing  can-
non to  be  used  in  their
casting.  (See  page
602.)  The  unusual  at-
titude of  the  arms  is
explained  by  the  fact
that Oen.  Garfield  wits
left-handed.— His  wife,  Lncretia  Rudolph,  b.  in
Hiram.  Portage  co.,  Ohio,  19  April  ls:!-,\  was  the
daughter  of  a  farmer  named  Rudolph.  She  first
nut  her  husband  when  Im.i h  were  students  at  Hi-
ram, Ohio,  and  was  married  11  Nov.,  lHoH,  in  Hud-
son, Ohio,  soon  after  his  accession  to  the  presidency
Of  the  col  lege.  Seven  children  were  born  to  them,  of
whom  four  sons  and  oue  daughter  are  living  (1881

GARLAND,  Augustus  Hill,  oabinei  officer,  h.
in  Tipton  county.  Tenn.,  11  June,  1882.  His  par-
ents removed  to  Arkansas  before  he  was  a  year  old.
He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Lebanon.
Ky.,  and  St.  Joseph's  college,  IJardstown,  Ky..  read
law  there  and  in  Arkansas,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Washington.  Ark.,  in  1868.  Alter  prac-
tising in  that  place  for  three  year-,  he  removed  to
Little  Hook,  lb-  was  a  Whig  in  politics, and  in
1880  was  an  elector  on  the  Bell  and  Everett  ticket.
II-  was  an  op|K>nent  of  The  secession  ordinance  in
the  State  convention,  but  after  its  passage  he
i-ed  the  southern  cause,  ami  was  a  member  of
the  Provisional  congress  that  met  in  Montgomery,
.  in  May.  1861.  Be  was  chosen  a  delegate  to
-t  Confederate  congress,  and  afterward  served
in  the  senate,  in  which  he  had  a  seat  when  the
Confederacy  fell. In  1885  be  petitioned  the  I

me  curt  for  the  right  to  practise  without
taking  the  "iron-clad"  oath,  presenting  an  argu-
ment on which  the  question  was  decided  in  his


y£±6C


^^


He  wa  r.  8.

senator  for  the  term  beginning  on  4  March.  It

but  was  not  permitted  to  taki

after  serving
a  short  I  ime
as  acting  seo-
r-Iaryof  state,
he  Was  elected
by  a  large  ma-
jority govern-
or of  Arkan-
sas under  the
new  stale  con-
stitution. In
January,  1*7(1,
he  was  sent  to

the I'. 9

illg  Powell

Clayton,  a  Re-
publican, and
re-elected  in
erving
from  5  March,
1877,  t.»  5
March,  IHHTt,  when  he  took  his  seat  in  the  cabinet,
having  In'cii  appointed  by  President  Cleveland  at-
torney-general of  the  United  States.  His  success-
ful test -oath  case  is  re{>orted  in  Wallace's  "Su-
preme Court  Reports,"  vol.  iv.

CVRLAND,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1768;  d.  in  New  York  city.  ."»  June.  1861.  He  was
appointed  1st  lieutenant  of  infantry  on 31 March.

1818,  served  through  the  war  with  Great  Britain.

became  a  captain  on  T  May.  1*17,  was  made  major
by  brevet  in  1*27,  attained  the  full  rank  of  major
on  :{(»  Oct..  |s:jt;.  and  that  of  lieutenant-colonel  on
27  Nov..  1n:{<i.  He  won  distinction  in  the  Florida
war  under  (ien.  Worth,  and  served  through  the
Mexican  war,  distinguishing  himself  in  six  bat-
tle-, and  commanding  a  brigade  at  Monterey  and
through  Gen.  Scott's  subsequent  campaign.  He
was  seve rely  wounded  at  the  taking d  the  city  of
Mexico.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  for  gallantry
at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma.  and  briga-
dier-general for  meritorious  and  gallant  conduct  at
Contrerasand  Churubusco.  He  was  promoted  colo-
nel on  9  May,  1861. —  His  cousin.  Hugh  A.,  lawyer,
b.  in  Nelson  county.  Va..  1  June.  1806;  d.  in  St.
Look.  Mo..  16  Oct..  1864,  was  graduated  at  Hamp-
den Sidney  oollege  in  1823,  was  professor  of  Greek
there  for  the  next  live  yean. and  became  afterward
a  successful  lawyer,  practising  in  Mecklenburg
county,  Va.  He  sat  in  the  Virginia  assembly  for
five  years,  and  was  chosen  clerk  of  the  National
house  of  representatives  in  \K\H.  At  the  opening
ingresj  in  I*:!'.'  he  called  the  roll,  as  clerk  of
the  lust  house,  but  omitted  five  Whigs,  elected  from
New  Jersey,  whose  seats  were  contested,  thus  se-
curing a  Democratic  majority.  A  scene  of  uproar
resulted,  which  was  continued  on  succeeding  days,
until  John  t^.  Adams  was  elected  chairman  nro
feSMWre.  In  1K41  he  settled  OB  a  farm  near  Pe-
tersburg, anil  engaged  in  mercantile  bnsVMsa,  by
which  In-  lost  his  property.  In  1841  he  removed
to  St.  Louis,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  the  law.
He  was  the  author  of  a  M  Life  of  John  Randolph  "
(New  York.  I860).— The  son  of  Hugh  A..  Huirh  \..
lawyer,  d.  al  Franklin.  Tenn..  :!<>  Nov..  1K<;4.  stud-
ied ami  practised  law  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  He  joined
the  Confederate  armv,  was  made  a  colonel,  par-
ticipated in  the  actions  between  the  forces  of

(Jens.  Mood  and  Thomas  in  middle  Tennessee,  and
fell  at  Franklin.  Tenn..  while  leading  his  command.
— The  brother  of  Hugh  A..  Lund  on  (ubell,  edu-


600


GARMAN


GARNET


cator.  b.  in  Nelson  county,  Va.,  21  .March,  1810;
was  graduated  at  Hampden  Sidney  college  in  1829.

Kn mi  1880  to  l*3:i  he  was  professor  <>f  eheraistry
in  Washington  oollege,  Va  In  1888  he  became
raofiiwoT  ox  phvsies.  and  in  1888  pwadenl  of  Ran-
dolph Macon  college,  which  i>ost  ne  held  till  1847.

Ki-Mtn  1K47  till  lsiill  he  filled  the  chair  of  math*
matics  and  physics  in  the  I'nivcrsity  of  Alabama,
of  which  he  became  president  in  1855.  11<-  MM
next  professor  of  physics  and  astronomy  in  the
University  of  Mississippi  till  1878,  when  he  was
chosen  chancellor  and  professor  of  physics  in  Van-
derbilt  university,  Nashville,  Tenn.  In  1878  he  trav-
elled through  Europe  to  purchase  the  physical  ami
astronomical  apparatus  of  that  university.  He  has
contributed  largely  to  the  magazines  of  the  south-
ern Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  has  published
a  treatise  on  "  Trigonometry,  Plane  and  Spherical "
(Philadelphia.  1841).— Hugh  A. 's  nephew,  Samuel,
soldier,  b.  in  Lynchburg,  Va.,  10  Dec,  1830;  d.  at
South  Mountain,  Mil..  14  Sept..  1802,  was  educated
at  the  Virginia  military  institute,  was  graduated
in  law  from  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1851,
and  practised  with  success  in  Lynchburg.  He  was
chosen  captain  of  a  volunteer  company  that  was
organized  in  1859,  after  John  Brown's  raid,  was
commissioned  a  colonel  by  the  governor  of  Vir-
ginia on  the  secession  of  the  state,  and  was  en-
gaged at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  at  Drains-
ville,  and  at  the  battle  of  Williamsburg,  where  he
was  wounded.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  when  he  had  recovered  from  his  wound
sufficiently  to  take  the  field,  was  given  the  com-
mand of  a  North  Carolina  brigade,  which  formed
part  ot  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill's  division.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  battle  of  Seven  Pines,  the  battles
around  Richmond,  especially  that  of  Gaines's  Mill,
the  battle  of  Manassas,  and  led  the  van  of  Lee's
army  in  the  Maryland  campaign,  where  he  fell  in
the  battle  of  South  Mountain.

(J ARM  AN,  Samuel,  naturalist,  b.  in  Indiana
county.  Pa.,  5  June,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Illinois  state  normal  university  in  1870,  and
for  the  following  year  was  principal  of  the  Missis-
sippi state  normal  school.  In  1871  he  became  pro-
fessor of  natural  sciences  in  Ferry  Hall  seminary,
Lake  Forest,  111.,  and  a  year  later  became  a  special
pupil  of  Louis  Agassiz  in  natural  history.  lie  was
appointed  in  1873  assistant  in  herpetology  and
ichthyology  in  the  museum  of  comparative  zofllogy
in  Cambridge,  and  still  holds  that  office.  In  con-
nection with  his  work  he  has  made  various  explo-
rations to  South  and  Central  America,  and  also
feological  expeditions  to  the  Rocky  and  Sierra
[evada  mountains.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  has
been  president  of  the  Boston  scientific  society.  His
publications,  besides  many  monographs  on  the  no-
menclature, anatomy,  classification  of  new  species
of  fishes,  selachians,  batrachians,  reptiles,  and  simi-
lar topics,  include  "The  Reptiles  and  Batrachians
of  North  America "  (Cambridge,  1883)  ;  "  Check
List  of  the  North  American  Reptiles  and  Batra-
chians "  (Salem,  1884) ;  "  The  Reptiles  of  Bermu-
da" (Washington,  1884);  and  "A  Living  Species
of  Cladodont  Shark  "  (Cambridge,  1885).

GARNEAU,  Francois  Xavier,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  Quebec,  15  June,  1809 ;  d.  3  Feb.,  1800.
He  was  educated  at  Quebec  seminary,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  as  a  notary  in  1830.  Sabse-
quently  he  became  clerk  of  the  legislative  assem-
bly, member  of  the  council  of  public  instruction,
and  city  clerk  of  Quebec,  which  office  he  held  from
1845  till  his  death.  He  was  an  honorary  member
of  literary  and  historical  societies  in  the  United


States  and  Canada,  and  for  several  years  president
of  the  Institut  Canadieii  of  Quebec.  He  wrote
"Histoire  da  Canada,  depuis  sa  decouverte  jusou'

a DOS  jours"  (8 Vols.. Qlleliec, 8d e<l.. lN.Y..', also

translated  into  English);  and  "  Voyage  en  Angle-
terre  et  en  France  aans  lea  annees  1881,  "'•-

GARNEA1',  Pierre,  Canadian  capitalist,  b. -in
Can  Santa,  Quebec,  8  May.  \*1:'>.  Be  was  educated
in  his  native  place,  and  became  a  merchant.  Be  is
a  director  of  the  Quebec  and  Gulf  ports  steamship
company,  and  of  La  banque  nationale ;  is  presi-
dent of  the  Quebec  street  railway  companv,  and  a
member  of  the  Quebec  board  of  trade.  He  was  a
government  director  of  the  North  Shore  railway,
was  mayor  of  the  city  of  Quebec  in  1870-'3.  and  a
member  of  the  canal  commission  in  1870.  Be  was
appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and
commissioner  of  agriculture  and  public  works  for
the  province  of  Quebec  in  September,  1874,  and  of
crown  lands  in  January,  1870.  He  was  elected  to
the  legislative  assembly  in  March,  1873,  re-elected
in  1875,  and  again  in  1882.

GARNER,  Peter  M.,  abolitionist,  b.  in  Lan-
caster county,  Pa.,  4  Dec.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  12  June,  1868.  He  removed  to  Fairview,
Guernsey  co.,  Ohio,  with  his  parents,  became  a
teacher,  and  was  a  pioneer  in  the  anti-slavery  move-
ment in  Ohio.  In  1845,  with  two  other  citizens,
he  was  seized  by  Virginians  and  taken  to  Parkers-
burg  and  thence  to  Richmond,  and  held  in  confine-
ment six  months,  on  a  charge  of  assisting  slaves  to
escape,  but  was  finally  released  on  his  own  recogni-
zance. From  1847  till  1800  he  taught  in  the  Ohio
penitentiary  at  Columbus,  and  during  the  war  had
charge  of  the  military  prisoners.

GARNET,  Henry  Highland,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  Market,  Md.,  23  Dec,  1815 ;  d.  in  Monrovia,
Liberia,  13  Feb.,  1882.  He  was  a  pure-blooded  ne-
gro of  the  Mendigo  tribe,  of  the  Slave  Coast,
and  born  in  slavery.  His  parents  escaped  with
him  to  Bucks  county,  Pa.,  where  they  remained  a
year,  and  in  1820  settled  in  New  York  city.  He
was  educated  in  Canaan  academy,  N.  II.,  and  the
Oneida  institute,  near  Utica,  N.  V.,  where  he  was
graduated  with  honor  in  1840.  He  taught  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  studied  theology  under  Dr.  Nathaniel  S.  S.
Beman,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1842,  and  was
pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Troy  for  nearly
ten  years.  For  a  short  time  he  also  published
"  The  Clarion,"  a  newspaper.  In  1846  he  was  em-
ployed by  Gerrit  Smith  to  distribute  a  gift  of  land
among  colored  people.  He  went  to  Europe  in
1850  in  the  interest  of  the  free-labor  movement,
and  lectured  in  Great  Britain  on  slavery  for  three
years.  In  1851  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  peace
congress  at  Frankfort.  He  went  to  Jamaica  as
a  missionary  for  the  United  Presbyterian  church
of  Scotland  in  1853,  but  returned  to  the  United
States  on  account  of  failing  health,  and  in  1855
entered  on  the  pastorate  of  Shiloh  Presbyterian
church  in  New  York  city.  In  1805  he  accepted  a
call  to  a  church  in  Washington,  D.  C.  After  a
successful  pastorate  of  four  years  he  resigned  to
become  president  of  Avery  college,  but  gave  up
that  post  soon  afterward;  and  returned  to  Shi-
loh church.  President  Garfield  offered  him  the
appointment  of  minister  and  consul-general  to
Liberia,  and  after  the  accession  of  President  Arthur
the  nomination  was  made  and  confirmed  by  the
senate.  He  arrived  at  Monrovia  on  23  Dec.,
and  entered  auspiciously  upon  his  diplomatic  dul  iet>
but  soon  succumbed  to  the  climate.  A  memorial
school,  organized  by  his  daughter,  Mrs.  M.  II.  Har-
riet Barboza,  was  endowed  in  honor  of  him  at
Brewersville,  Liberia.


sktt


\n:i:


607


BABN1  ii.  Inmn  Better,  sgriottttni

politician,  b,  in  Basfl  Bounty,  Va*,  *  Jim

II- Was  it  founder Itlld the

first  pr>  -i>l«nt  of  t  in-  V.  s.  agricultural  moiety,  and
on  rural  economy, lb- was  also
••el in educational progress, maintained  it
seminary  in  his  own  house  f>»r  twelve  years.
In  Introducing  Into  Virginia  im-
proved sssthodi  "f  Instruction. 1 1 «-  acted  with  the
Democratic  party,  and  engaged  in  ■  •'••in
with  Matthew  Carey,  the  protectionist. He  was
an  Intimate  Mend  <»f  his  colleague  in  congress,
John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke. After  lerving  f<»r
several  yean  in  the  Virginia  legislate!*,  he  Ms
I  to  the  National  house  of  rcprescnta-
tires,  ami  tarred  from  2  Dec,  1806.  to  3  March,
180M. In 1N20  he  was  a  mcmlier  of  the  Virginia
constitutional  oon  rent  ion. — His  youngest  brother,
Robert  Selden.  h.  in  Essex  county,  Va.,  was  edu-
asjted  at  Princeton,  studied  law,  began  practice  at

Lloyds,  and  was  elected  Rs  a  Democrat  to  COOgreSS,
and  (bur  times  re-elected,  earring  from  l  Dec.,
1H17.  to  3  March,  1887.  On  the  question  of  recog-
nizing the  South  American  republics  he  Voted
alone.  He  was  a  political  supporter  and  personal
friend  of  Andrew  Jackson. — His  nephew,  Richard
Brooke,  soldier,  l>.  in  Virginia  in  1818;  d.  near
Gettysburg,  l'a..  3  .Inly.  lsttt,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1*41,  entered  the  army
as  lieutenant  of  infantry,  served  in  the  Florida  war
and  on  the  Texas  frontier,  became  a  captain  OB  !»
May.  1858,  was  engaged  in  Kansas  in  1856-'7,  and
in  the  Utah  expedition  of  1858,  and  resigned  on  17
May,  1881,  to  join  the  Confederate  army.  Be  WSJ
engaged  in  many  of  the  battles  in  Virginia,  wii*
aft.rward  attached  to  Gen.  Lee'fl  iirmv,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  fell  in  the  battle  <>f
Gettysburg.  —  Another  nephew,  Robert  Seidell,
s<>n  <>f  Robert  EL, soldier,  b.  in  Essex  oonnty,  Va..  18
L818;  d.  at  Carrick's  Ford,  Va..  18  Julr,  188L
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1841, appointed  3d  lieutenant  of  artillery,  and  from
Julv,  1K4.'{,  to  October.  1844,  was  assistant  instructor
of  infantry  tactics  at  the  military  academy.  Be
was  aide-de-camp  t<>  (Jen.  Wool  in  1M4~»,  distin-
guished himself  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and
Resaca  de  la  I'alina,  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant
in  1848,  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Taylor  through
dean  war,  and  was  brevettcd  captain  and
major  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Mon-
terey and  Buena  Vista.  He  was  transferred  to  the
infantry  in  1*4*.  and  promoted  captain  in  1851.
From  JH.VJ  till  1854  he  was  commandant  of  the
corps  of  cadets  and  instructor  in  infantry  tactics
at  West  Point.  He  was  commissioned  as  major  on
27  March.  1858,  was  the  commander  in  the  opcra-

_-ainst  the  Indians  on  Puget's  sound,  Wash-
ington territory,  in  lHoti.  and  commanded  the
Yakima  expedition  in  1858. At  the  beginning  of

;l  war  he  returned  from  Europe*  where  he
had  been  travelling  on  sick  leare,  rnsignnd  las
commission  in  the  l\  S.  army  on  30  April,  1861.
and  was  appointed  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank
onel,  to  organize  the  Virginia  troops.  <>n  6
•June. 1881, he  was  commissioned  as hrigadier-

I  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  sent  t<>  com-
mand the  forces  in  the  western  part  of  the  state.
He  found  himself  confronted  by  Gen.  McClellan
with  a  much  superior  force,  consisting  of  U.  S,
regulars  and  Indiana  riflemen.  After  Gen.  Pegram,
with  a  part  of  his  command,  had  been  surrounded.
he  attempted  to  retreat  with  the  remainder  on
When  the  National  troops  overtook  him

•iek's  Ford,  on  Cheat  river,  he  took  com-
mand of  the  detachment  with  which  he  attempted


to  eover  the  p-treat.  His  army  was  routed, and  he
was  kilh-d in  the  engagement.— Another  nephew,

Alexander  folTertoi  Peyton,  physician,  b,  in

\  county,  \  t»t..  1820;  d.  in  Rehoboth

'i.  I>.|.,  11  July.  1K.KM,  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at the Qnirersity  "f Pennsylvania in 1H41,

then  entered  the  c.s.  nai  noted  nrg

in 1H4M,  and resigned  on  81 <><t.,  1*.V>.
the  professorship  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  Na-
tional medical  ooUegc  si  Washington,  D.  C. Be
married  in  1K4n  the  eldest  daughter  of  flenrj
Wis*-. In 1H<>1  he  left  Washington,  and  baSjBJBJI  »
iih'ihIkt  of  the  examining  I x »« n I  of  surgeons  for
the  Confederate  army,  and  afterward  surgeon  in
oharga  of  the  two  military  hospitals  in  Richmond.
He was the  family phvsieian  of  JeflanOO Davis
and  of  all  hiseabinet  oflh-crs,  and  accompanied  Mr.
Davis  after  the  evacuation  of Richmond. After-
ward  he returned  to  Washington,  and was  again
elected  a  professor  in  the  medical  college  in  !  -
but resigned  in 1N?0.  and  was  made  an emeritus
professor. He  was elected a  vice-president  of the

American  medical  association  in  1KN.">.  He  con-
tributed to  medical  literature  papers  <>n  the  claims

•  •f  "Coudtirango  as  a  Cure  for  Cancer,"  "The
Potomac  Marshes  and  their  Influence  as  a  Patho-
genic Agent,"  "Epidemic  Jaundice  mi ^  Chil-
dren," "The  Sorghum  Vnlgare  <>r  BcoonvOoni
Seed  In  cystitis."  "Nelatons  Probe  in  Gnnahot

Wound-."  and  "Coloproct  it  is  treated  by  Hot -Water
Donohe  and  Dilatation  or  Division  of  the  Sphinc-
i«r-." — lames  Mercer's  grandson,  Miiscnc  Russell
Hunter,  potttieian,  b.  in  Bssex  county.  Va.:  d.  in
Virginia  about  1863,  was  graduated  at  the  I'niver-
sity  of  Virginia,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  at  Ixiretto,  Va.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  State  convention  for  revising  the  con-
stitution in  1850,  and  a  member  of  the  Virginia
house  of  delegates  from  1853  till  1850.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  conventions
of  1852  and  1856,  and  elected  to  congress  to  serve
out  an  unexpired  term,  and  twice  re-elected,  serv-
ing from  1  Dec,  1856.  to  :{  March,  1861.  After  the
formation  of  the  southern  confederacy  he  was
elected  to  the  1st  congress  at  Richmond.

6 ARNIER,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Paris  in
1605;  d.  in  Canada,  7  Sept,*  1649.  He  entered
the  Society  of  Jesus,  7  Dec,  1624,  and  was  sent
to  Canada  in  1630.  The  raft  <>f  his  life  was  spent
on  the  Huron  mission.  He  was  stationed  at
Etharita,  a  settlement  of  the  Tontiate  Hurons,
when  an  attack  was  made  on  it.  7  Sept.,  1641),  by
the  Iroquois.  The  town  was  defenceless,  as  the
Tontiate  braves  had  gone  in  another  direction  to
meet  the  enemy.  The  Iroquois  set  lire  t<>  it  and
slaughtered  every  one  they  met.  Meanwhile,  Fa-
ther Gamier  was  everywhen1  exhorting  and  liaptiz-
ing  the  wounded,  regardless  of  danger.  At  last  he
fell  mortally  wounded,  but,  seeing  a  wounded  Ton-
tiate some  paces  from  him,  he  rallied  his  strength,
dragged  himself  to  the  wounded  man,  and,  while
giving  him  absolution,  fell  dead  on  his  body.  As
a  Huron  scholar  Father  Gamier  had  BO  su|>erior
among  the  whole  body  "f  his  f,l low-missionaries,
with  the  exception  of  Brcl>cuf.

GARMKR.  Julien,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cnnerai,
France,  about  1643:  d.  in  Canada  after  1988  He
entered  the  Sxiety  of  Jesus,  and  came  to  Canada,
while  still  a  scholastic,  in  October,  1602.  He  taught
for  some  years,  and.  after  finishing  his  studies,  was
ordained  in  April.  1  »►<»«;.  being  the  tir>t  Jesuit  or-

•  lained  in  Canada.  He  then  prepared  himself  for
missionary  work  among  the  Indians,  and,  after
passim;  his  examination  successfully,  was  sent
among  the  ( ineidas  in  1667. After  a  few  months'


<;n,K


GARONHIAGUE


CAltKKTSOX


stav  In'  was  ordered  to  pass  on  to  the  Onondagas
t..  a-.-.Tt.iin  whether  there  was  any  proapeot  of  re-
building the  church  of  St.  Mary's.'  which  hail  been
destroyed.  1 1  •  -  was  reocrred  with  anthiariaetn  by
this  t n i ►« - . end  especially  by  their  chief,  QamconthM
fa  r.i.  They  begged  him  to  remain  among  them,
and  on  liis  declaring  thai  he  could  aoi  do  so  except
a  church  should  In-  built,  they  at  once  acceded  to

bit  < i •  ■  1 1 1 .< 1 1 1 *  1 . II<'  mat  with  great  aaooaai  m  ooa>

verting  the  Onondagas,  and  on  the  arrival  of  two
other  missionaries  he  set  out  to  evangelize  the
Bononaa  He  did  not  meet  with  much  success  in
his  labors,  and  returned  to  Canada  in  1683.  In
1708  the  Senecas  petitioned  for  the  return  of  the
missionaries,  and  Father  Gamier  was  one  of  those
wlm  returned.  He  remained  some  years  among
them,  but,  being  at  length  exhausted  by  his  labors,
he  went  back  to  Canada.  He  was  the  last  mission-
ary who  preached  among  the  Senecas.

GARONHIAGUE,  Louis,  styled  Hot  Cinders  by
the  l'i en.  h,  Oneida  chief,  d.  in  New  York  state  in
1687.  He  took  part  in  the  torture  and  murder  of
Father  de  Brebeui  in  1649.  Afterward,  having
quarrelled  with  another  Oneida  sachem,  he  went  to
Canada,  and,  on  hearing  of  his  brother's  death,  re-
solved never  to  return  to  his  tribe.  He  stopped  on
his  journev  at  the  Christian  Indian  village  of  La
Prairie.  I J  ere  his  wife  was  converted,  and  soon
persuaded  her  husband  to  become  a  Christian.
After  his  baptism  he  was  elected  fourth  chief  of
the  mission,  and,  although  the  youngest,  soon  be-
came head-chief.  His  eloquence  and  fervor  pro-
duced such  effect  in  the  village  that  he  was  made
catechist.  He  then  went  among  the  heathen  tribes,
and.  with  the  aid  of  religious  pictures,  made  nu-
merous converts.  .  He  frequently  visited  his  peo-
ple, and  persuaded  many  of  his  old  adherents  to
follow  him  to  La  Prairie.  In  1677  he  rescued  the
famous  convert  Catharine  Tegakonita  from  the
persecution  of  her  uncle,  and  brought  her  from
Gandawague  to  La  Prairie. In  1687  he  accom-

eanied  Denonville,  at  the  head  of  fifty  braves  from
aughnawaga,  in  his  invasion  of  the  Seneca  coun-
try. The  t  rench  army,  while  passing  through  a
defile,  fell  into  an  ambuscade  of  800  Senecas.  The
Christian  Indians  bore  the  brunt  of  the  attack,  and
Garonhiague  fell  mortally  wounded.

GARRARD,  James,  governor  of  Kentucky,  b.
in  Stafford  county,  Va.,  14  Jan.,  1749;  d.  in  Bour-
bon county,  Ky.,  9  Jan.,  1822.  While  engaged  as
a  militia  officer  in  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was
called  from  the  army  to  a  seat  in  the  Virginia
legislature.  Here  he  was  a  zealous  advocate  of  the
bill  for  the  establishment  of  religious  liberty.  Hav-
ing removed  with  the  early  settlers  to  Kentucky,
in  1783,  and  settled  on  Stoner  river,  near  Paris,
he  became  there  a  political  leader,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  convention  which  framed  the  first  con-
st it  ution  of  the  state.  Here  he  was  ordained  to  the
Baptist  ministry.  In  1791,  pending  the  convention
just  named,  he  was  chairman  of  a  committee  that
reported  to  the  Elkhorn  Baptist  association  a  me-
morial and  remonstrance  in  favor  of  excluding
slavery  from  the  commonwealth  by  constitution-
al enactment.  He  was  elected  governor  in  1796,
and  re-elected  in  1800,  serving  eight  vears. — His
grandson,  Theophilus  Toulmin,  soldier,  b.  near
Manchester,  Ky.,  7  June,  1812.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  lower  house  of  the  Kentucky  legislat-
ure in  1843-'4,  served  through  the  Mexican  war
as  a  captain  in  the  16th  U.  S.  infantry,  went  to
California,  on  the  discovery  of  gold  in  1849,  by  the
overland  route,  remained  in  the  mines  fifteen
months,  and  then  returned  by  wav  of  Panama  to
Kentucky. He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate


in 1887,  resigned  to  became  ■  candidate  for  con-

f.nd  elected  ■  state  Benator  again  in 1861.
I. was  appointed  ■  oolone]  of  the  Bd  Kentucky

l'.  S.  volunteer  infantry,  promoted  brigadii
oral  in  March,  1863,  and  mustered  out  on  4  April,
1H(>4.—  A  great-grandson,  Kenner,  soldier,  b,  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1830;  d.  there.  15  Ma'.
was  graduated  at  the  l\  S.  military  academy  in
1851,  entered  the  dragoons,  became  a  captain  on  3
March,  1855,  was  engaged  in  frontier  service  in
Texas,  and  captured  by  the  Confederates  <>n  U
April,  1861,  being  placed  on  parole  until  exel
as  a  prisoner  of  war  on  27  Aug.,  1862.  He
meanwhile  as  instructor  and  commandant  of  cadets
at  West  Point.  He  was  commissioned  on  87  Sent,
1862,  as  colonel  of  the  146th  regiment  of  New
York  volunteers,  and  engaged  in  the  principal  bat-
tles of  the  Rappahannock  and  Pennsylvania  cam-
§  signs.  On  23  July,  1863,  he  was  promoted  briga-
ier-general  of  volunteers,  took  part  at  Rappa-
hannock Station  and  in  the  Mine  Run  operations,
and  in  1864  commanded  a  cavalry  division  xA  the
Army  of  the  Cumberland,  and  participated  in  the
operations  around  Chattanooga  and  the  invasion
of  Georgia,  being  constantly  engaged  in  detached
expeditions.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the  U.
S.  army  for  services  in  the  expedition  to  Coving-
ton, Ga.  From  December,  1864,  till  the  end  of
hostilities  he  commanded  the  2d  division  of  the
16th  army  corps.  He  distinguished  himself  at  the
battle  of  Nashville,  earning  the  brevets  of  major-
general  of  volunteers  and  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army,  participated  in  the  operations  against
Mobile,  led  the  storming  column  that  captured
Blakely,  and  was  in  command  of  the  district  of
Mobile  until  after  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  vol-
unteer service  on  24  Aug.,  1865.  He  received  the
brevet  of  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  Servian]
during  the  war.  On  9  Nov.,  1866,  he  resigned  his
commission  in  the  regular  army.

GARRETSON,  Freeborn,  clergyman,  b.  n
Maryland,  15  Aug.,  1752;  d.  in  New  York,  26
Sept.,  1827.  In  1775  he  became  a  minister  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  in  December,
1784,  he  was  ordained  an  elder,  and  volunteered
as  a  missionary  to  Nova  Scotia.  In  1788,  with
twelve  young  ministers,  he  began  the  work  of  evan-
gelizing eastern  New  York  and  western  New  Eng-
land. He  married  Miss  Catherine  Livingston,  of
Rhinebeck,  in  1791,  and  henceforth  his  labors  were
confined  to  New  York  city.  He  was  eminently
successful  as  a  minister,  and  preached  in  almost
all  the  eastern  states  from  Nova  Scotia  to  the  Gulf
of  Mexico.  He  emancipated  several  slaves  belong-
ing to  him,  and  made  provisions  in  his  will  for  the
perpetual  support  of  a  missionary.  See  Bang's
"Life  of  F.  Garretson"  (New  Yofk,  1832).— His
daughter,  Mary  Rutherford,  b.  in  1783;  d.  near
Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  7  March,  1879,  was  of  marked
intellectual  ability,  and  was  noted  for  her  works
of  benevolence  and  smallness  of  stature.

GARRETSON,  James  Edmund,  author,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Del.,  4  Oct.,  1828.  He  was  educated
at  Mantua  classical  institute,  and  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine in  1859.  He  afterward  established  himself  in
practice  in  Philadelphia,  making  a  specialty  of  oral
surgery.  He  successfully  introduced  many  new
operations  and  appliances,  and  was  the  first  to  use
the  surgical  engine,  and  to  introduce  it  into  gen-
eral practice.  Dr.  Garretson  was  a  lecturer  in  the
Philadelphia  school  of  anatomy  in  1861-'3,  and  on
oral  surgery  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1866-'9,  and  has  been  dean  of  the  Philadelphia
dental  college  since  1879. He  became  president  m


<-  \i:i;


(i  \i;i;i«,


608


the  medical  ami  ehinwiotl  society  in  1K83.  is  pro-
fessor of  general  clinical  surgery  in  Um  nicdico-
ohirurgieal college, and  u-chief of the

hospital  of  oral  surgery.  In  addition  to  «lini<-ul
discourses  "it  rargioal  subjects,  which  I

K'nted  in  t in-  United  states  and  in  Baropo,  ha
,  pohUahad  "Sfttta  of  <»ml  Surgery"  (Phihv-

■mi and London. lHtJ5>>; -* « »« i«  1 Hours of a
'hiladelphia. 1*73); ■•  Thinkers and
Thinking"  (1878);  "Two  Thousand  Yean  After"
I  lours  with. John  Darbv  "  (1H77):  "  Brush-
land  and  "Nineteenth Century  Sense"
;>;  and  has  contributed  largely  to  general  lil-
ire. Hi-  iion-nicdical  lx.ok*  were  w  ritlen  under
the  pen-name  of  "John  Darbv."

(.  \  KKKTT,  Alexander  Charles  P.  B.  bishop,
b.  in  Ballyniot.  Count  J  Sliu'o,  Ireland.  4  Nov.,  180,
He  was  graduated  ai Trinity  college. Dublin,  in
i.  and took the Divinity testimonium  on  19
of  the  same  year. He  was  ordained  deacon
by  the  bishop  of  Winchester  in  the  chapel  of  Para-
ham  castle,  Surrer,  England,  6  July,  1858,  and  priori
by  the  same  bishop,  7  July,  18o7. He  was  aj>-
pointed  to  the  curacy  of  Kast  Worldham,  in  Hamp-
shire, and  held  this place till September,  1859.
lb'  then  sailed  as  missionary  to  British  Columbia,
where  he  remained  for  ten  years,  engaged  in  active
service  among  the  Indians  and  the  white  popula-
tion. In Decemlier.  1N<5J».  he  went to  California,
and  became  rector  of  St,  James's  church.  San  Fran-
cisco. Here  he  remained  until  1878,  when  he  ac-
cepted the  rectorship  of  Trinity  cathedral  and  dean
Of  the  cathedral chapter.  Omaha,  Nebraska. He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Nebraska  college
in  1872.  and  from  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  in  1MM-J.
and  that  of  LL.  I),  from  the  University  of  Missis-
sippi in  187(1. Dr.  Garrett  was  elected  missionary
iisnop  of  northern  Texas  by  both  houses  of  the
leral  convention  in  1874,  and  was  consecrated  in
inity  cathedral,  Omaha,  20  Dec.,  1874 He  en-
•red  on  his  new  duties  at  once,  and  has  since  con-
lued  them  with  zeal  and  diligence. Bishop  Gar-
ett  has  published  several  occasional  sermons,  a
'Charge  to  the Clergy  and Laity  of Northern
Texas"  (1875),  and  "  Historical  Continuity,  a  Series
jf  Sketches  on  the  Church  "  (1875).

ii  A  KKKTT,  John  Work,  railroad  president,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  81  Julv.  1820;  d.  in  Deer
?ark,  Garrett  co.,  Md..  2<>  Sept,  1884.  His  father,
"  >bert  Garrett,  an  enterprising  merchant,  from  a
small  beginning  had
amassed  a  large  for-
tune. The  son  en-
tered Latavette  in
1834,  but  left  in  the
following  year.  He
then  entered  his
father's  counting-
room,  and  in  1h;{!»
became  a  partner  in
the  linn  of  Robert
Garrett  and  BOM.
Mr.  (iarrett t<M>k  a

Sreat  interest  in  the
e\e lop m e| it of tile

Baltimore  and  Ohio

railroad. He was

elected  one  of  it«  di-

rtOtatl  in  1887,  and

was its president

from 1858 till his

death. When  he  took  charge  of  the  road,  it  was

in  an  emtarrassed  condition,  but  during  the  first

year  of  his  presidency  the  increase  in  its  net  gain

bed  $788*885;  for  the  first  time  since  its  ex-

vol.  ii. — 89


€=~%r&i^#!/£arreZZ:r


istencc  the  company  paid  a  dividend,  and  has  con-
tinued to  i  .ay  a  semi-annual  dividend  ever  since. In
another  year  the  entire  Moating  doM  wa-  rem
During the  civil war th  iv  at

the  mercy  of  Confederate  raiders,  and  parts  of
it  sji  ntly  destroyed. But  the  lo*.-

the  main  stem  were  more  than  made  up  by  tin-
large  business  done  by  the  WiiHhiugtou  branch  in
carrying  troops  and  provision*.  After  the  war  nu-
merous branches  and  connecting  roads  were  built
or  Manfred,  forming  the  present  Baltimore  and
Ohio  system.  Mr.  (iarrett  was  also  active  m  secur-
ing a  regular  line  of  steamers  between  BoltfanON
and  Bremen,  and  botvsjssj  [ilOfpool  and  Balti-
niorc.  Shortly  btfOM  hi-  death  the  Baltimore  and
Ohio  express  company  and  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
district  telegraph  MMjmf  were  organized.  Mr.
(iarrett  was  one  of  the  most  active  trustees  of  the
Johns  Hopkins  university,  and  I  lil<cral  contribu-
tor to  the  funds  of  the  Baltimore  young  nun's
Christian  association. — His  sou,  Robert,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md..  9  April,  1M47.  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1W57,  travelled  in  Buopo.  ami.  after
receiving  a  business  training  in  the  lian king-house
of  his  father,  DOOMM  in  18?1  president  of  the  Val-
ley railroad  of  Virginia.  He  was  made  third  vice-
DMsJdaul  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  in  1879,  and
in  1881  first  vice-president.  In  1KK.J  he  succeeded
his  father  as  president,  having  for  some  time  dis-
charged the  functions  of  that  office  during  his
father's  absence.  Under  his  management  the  busi-
ness and  prosperity  of  the  railroad  have  largely
increased.  He  has  directed  several  memorable
contests  with  rival  corporations.  Since  his  ac-
cession the  extension  of  the  railroad  to  New
York,  and  the  extension  of  the  Baltimore  and
Ohio  telegraph  and  express  business  throughout
all  sections  of  the  country,  have  been  accomplished.
He  resides  in  Baltimore,  where  he  has  built  one  of
the  largest  and  most  luxurious  residences  in  the
country,  and  is  identified  with  many  commercial,
lienevoleiit,  and  artistic  undertakings  in  that  city.


ii  A  KKKTT,  Thomas,  ibolitio&Ist,  b.  in  Upper
narbv,  Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1783;  d.  in  Wilmington.  Del..
28 Jan., 1871. lie was of  Quaker parentage.


learned  his  father's  trade,  that  of  an  edge-tool
maker,  removed  to  Wilmington  in  1820.  and  be-
came a  wealthy  iron  merchant.  He  was  devoted
to  the  cause  of  emancipation  from  the  time  when
a  colored  female  servant  was  kidnapped  from  his
father's  house,  in  1807,  and  for  forty  years  gave  aid
and  succor  to  fugitive  slaves,  and  concealed  their
flight  so  skilfully  that  slave-owners  usually  gave
up  the  chase  when  they  learned  that  their  run-
aways had  fallen  into  his  hands.  As  many  as  3,000
fugitives  from  Delaware,  Maryland,  and  Virginia
owed  their  liberty  to  him.  He  never  enticed  ne-
groes to  escape,  and  shrewdly  avoided  any  breach
of  the  law  that  could  In-  proved  against  him.  In
May,  184H,  however,  he  was  comiu'lled  to  jiay  heavy
damages  to  owners  of  esca|>ed  slaves,  and.  after  the
passage of the fugitive -slave law.  incurred the

(>enalty  of  |  flue  that  swept  away  the  remainder  of
lis  fortune.  In  answer  to  the  reprimand  of  the
I*.  S.  district  judge  In-fore  whom  lie  was  tried,  he
said  that  he  had  always  heliH-d  a  fellow-U'ing  to
lil>ertv  when  he  could,  and  should  continue  to  do
so.  His  fellow-townsmen  tvadilv  advanced  him
the  capital  to  In-gin  business  again,  and  bofloVl  lie
died  he  had  again  acquired  a  competence.  In  ac-
cordance with  his  dying  instructions,  his  body  was
bOfM  to  the  grave  bv  colored  men  of  Wilmington.
<.\i:i:i(.l  Is.  Henrv  Jacques.  physi<  ian.  b.
in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  (i  June.  1881.  He  was
graduated at the L'niversity  of Copenhagen in


610


GARRISON


GARRISON


1850,  and  then  studied  medicine  for  four  years,
until  sickness  forcnl  liim  to  discontinue  his  studies.
During  the  next  four  years  he  travelled  in  F.urope
and  America,  and  on  his  return  to  his  native  coun-
try he  was  appointed  professor  of  French  in  the
military  academy  of  Copenhagen.  In  1869  he  was
graduated  in  medicine  and  practised  in  Copen-
hagen until  1875,  when  he  came  again  to  the  United
States,  and  has  since  remained  here.  He  first  set-
tled in  Brooklyn,  but  in  1879  removed  to  New
York  city.  He  was  appointed  physician  to  the
gynecological  department  of  the  German  dispen-
sary in  1879,  obstetric  surgeon  to  the  Maternity
hospital  in  1881,  obstetrician  to  the  Infant  asylum
in  1884,  gynecologist  to  the  German  hospital  in
1885.  and  In  188(5  professor  of  practical  obstetrics
in  the  Post-graduate  medical  school  and  hospital.
Dr.  Garrigues  is  a  member  of  numerous  medical
societies,  and  has  taken  an  active  part  in  their  pro-
ceedings. Besides  numerous  papers  on  gynecology
in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Obstetrics"  and  the
"Transactions  of  the  Gynecological  Society,"  he
has  published  "  Gastro-Elytrotomy  "  (New  York,
1878) ;  M  Diagnosis  of  Ovarian  Cysts  by  means  of
the  Examination  of  the  Contents"  (1882);  "Prac-
tical Guide  in  Antiseptic  Midwifery"  (Detroit);
and  part  of  the  "  System  of  Gynecology  by  Ameri-
can Authors"  (Philadelphia,  1887).

GARRISON,  Cornelius  Kingsland,  capitalist,
b.  in  Fort  Montgomery,  near  West  Point,  N.  Y..  1
March.  1809;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1  May,  1885.
lie  studied  architecture  and  civil  engineering  while
working  on  his  father's  schooner,  and  also  acquired
a  taste  for  navigation.  In  1830  he  removed  to
Buffalo,  where  he  was  employed  as  a  builder,  and
in  1834  went  to  Canada,  and  while  there  was  prin-
cipally engaged  in  building  bridges  and  in  marine
architecture.  In  1839  he  settled  in  St.  Louis  and
acquired  a  fortune  from  the  boats  that  he  built,
owned,  and  commanded.  In  1852  he  went  to  Pana-
ma and  established  the  banking-house  of  Garri-
son, Fritz,  and  Kalston,  and  at  the  same  time  be-
came agent  of  the  Nicaragua  steamship  company.
In  L858  he  was  elected  mayor  of  San  Francisco,  and
while  there  originated  the  movement  that  led  to
the  organization  of  the  Pacific  mail  steamship  com-
pany. At  the  end  of  his  term  as  mayor  ne  was
presented  by  the  citizens  with  a  service  of  forty

Sieces  of  California  gold.  In  1859  he  removed  to
ew  York  and  became  a  financier  and  speculator.
During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Garrison  placed  many  of
his  ships  at  the  disposal  of  the  government.  He
was  largely  interested  in  the  Pacific  railroad  of
Missouri,  which,  becoming  involved,  was  sold  under
foreclosure  in  1870.  Mr.  Garrison  was  elected
president  of  the  reorganized  road  (now  the  Mis-
souri Pacific),  and  out  of  this  reorganization  arose
the  Marie-Garrison  suit  for  $5,000,000,  which,  after
ten  years,  was  decided  adversely  to  Mr.  Garrison.
In  June,  1884,  he  made  an  assignment,  but  his
assets  were  largely  in  excess  of  his  liabilities.

GARRISON,  Joseph  Fithian,  clergyman,  b.  in
Fairton,  Cumberland  co.,  N.  J.,  20  Jan.,  1823.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1842,  and  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1845.
He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episco-

fal  church  in  1855,  and  became  rector  of  St.
aul's,  Camden,  N.  J.,  which  he  resigned  on  being
appointed  professor  of  liturgies  and  canon  law  in
the  Philadelphia  divinity-school,  which  chair  he
still  holds  (1887).  He  has  contributed  largely  to
periodical  literature,  and  has  published  separately,
besides  numerous  discourses,  "The  Formation  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United
States"  (1885),  and  the  Bohlen  lectures  for  1887  on


"The  American  Praver-Book:  its  Principles  and
the  Law  of  its  Use  "  (1887).  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Princeton.

GARRISON,  William  Lloyd,  journalist,  b.  in
Niwliiirvporl.  Mass..  10  Dec.,  1805;  d.  it
York  city,  24  May.  1879.  His  father,  Abijah  Har-
rison, was  a  sea-captain,  a  man  of  generous. na-
ture, sanguine  temperament,  and  good  intellect-
ual capacity,  who  ruined  himself  by  intemper-
ance. His  mother,  Fanny  Lloyd,  was  a  woman
of  exceptional  beauty  of  person  and  high  charac-
ter, and  remarkable  for  inflexible  fidelity  to  her
moral  convictions.  They  emigrated  from  N.va
Scotia  to  Newburyport  a  short  time  before  the
birth  of  Lloyd,  and  not  long  afterward  the  father
left  his  family  and  was  never  again  seen  by  them.
At  fourteen  years  of  age  Lloyd  was  apprenticed  to
the  printing  business  in  the  office  of  the  Newbury-
port "  Herald,"  where  he  served  until  he  was  of
age,  becoming  foreman  at  an  early  day,  and  dis-
playing a  strong  natural  taste  and  capacity  for
editorship.  From  the  first  he  was  remarkable  for
his  firmness  of  moral  principle,  his  quick  apprecia-
tion of  ethical  distinctions,  and  an  inflexible  ad-
herence to  his  convictions  at  whatever  cost  to  him-
self. His  aims  and  purposes  were  of  the  highest,
and  those  who
knew  him  best
foresaw  for  him
an  honorable  ca-
reer. His  ap-
prenticeship end-
ed, he  became
editor  for  a  time
of  the  Newbury-
port "Free  Press,"
which  he  made
too  reformatory
for  the  popular
taste  at  that  day.
To  this  paper
John  G.  Whittier,
then  unknown  to
fame, sent  some  of
his  earliest  poems
anonymously,  but
the  editor,discov-
ering  his  genius,
penetrated  his  incognito,  and  they  formed  a  friend-
ship that  was  broken  only  by  death.  Mr.  Garri-
son's next  experiment  in  editorship  was  with  the
"National  Philanthropist"  in  Boston,  a  journal
devoted  to  the  cause  of  temperance.  We  next
hear  of  him  in  Bennington,  V  t.,  whither  he  went
in  1828  to  conduct  the  "Journal  of  the  Times,""
established  to  support  John  Quincy  Adams  for  re-
election as  president.  Before  leaving  Boston,  he
formed  an  acquaintance  with  Benjamin  Lundy,
the  Quaker  abolitionist,  then  of  Baltimore,  where
he  was  publishing  the  "  Genius  of  Universal  Eman-
cipation," a  journal  that  had  for  its  object  the
abolition  of  American  slavery.  Going  t<
England  with  the  distinct  purpose  of  enlisting
the  clergy  in  his  cause,  Lundy  was  bitterly  dis-
appointed by  his  want  of  success;  but  he  mightily
stirred  the  heart  of  young  Garrison,  who  I
his  ally,  and  two  years  later  his  partner,  in  the
conduct  of  the  "Genius  of  Universal  Emancipa-
tion." This  journal,  up  to  that  time,  had
sented  the  form  of  abolition  sentiment  known  as
gradualism,  which  had  distinguished  the  anti-sla-
very societies  of  the  times  of  Franklin  and  Jay.  and
fully  answered  the  moral  demands  of  the  period.
These  societies  were  at  this  time  either  dead  or  in-
active, and, since  the  Missouri  contest  of  lb.


*fi~Je


(.  UUUBOK

people  of  tli>-  north  had  generally  ceased  to

for  emancipation,  or  even  t..  **— —  Am  HUb-

With  the  exception  of bandy's earnest

feeble  protest,  mOCOttsd  mainly  by  U,uak-
ie  general  silence  Hid  indifference  Wtn  un-
it. The  whole  nation  had  apparent!)  DOOM
to  the  sett  led  conclusion  that  slavery  was  intrenched
by  the  constitution,  and  all  discussion  of  the  sub-
ject a  menace  to  the  Union.  The  emanci|>ation  of
slaves  in  any  considerable  numbers,  at  any  time  Of
place,  being  universally  regarded  as  dangerous  to
the  public  peace,  the  masters  were  held  excusable
for  continuing  to  hold  them  in  bondage.  Mr.  Gar-
rison saw  this  state  of  thing!  with  dismay,  and  it
dear  to  him  that  the  apathy  which  tended
ii  slavery  |>ermanently  upon  the  country  as
an  incurable  evil  could  be  broken  onlv  by  heroic
measures.  The  rights  of  the  slaves  and  the  duties
of  the  masters,  as  measured  by  sound  moral  prin-
ciples, must  tie  unflinchingly  affirmed  and  insisted
Boo.  Slavery  being  wrong,  every  slave  had  a
right  to  instant  freedom,  and  therefore  immediate
emancipation  was  the  duty  of  the  masters  ami  of
the  state.  What  was  in  itself  right  could  never  bf.
daiiu''  rous  to  society,  but  must  be  safe  for  all  con-
cerned :  and  therefore  there  could  be  no  other
than  selfish  reasons  for  continuing  slavery  for  a
single  day.  In  joining  Lundy,  Garrison  at  once
took  this  high  ground,  creating  therebv  a  strong
excitement  throughout  the  country.  1 1  *  —  denun-
ciation- of  the  domestic  slave-trade,  then  rife  in
Baltimore,  subjected  him  to  the  penalties  of  Mary-
land law,  and  no  was  thrust  into  jail.  When  re-
leased npon  the  payment  of  his  fine  by  Arthur
Tappan,  of  New  York,  he  immediately  resinned
the  work  of  agitation  by  means  of  popular  lectures,
ami  on  1  Jan.,  1831,  founded  "Tne  Liberator,"  a
weekly  journal,  in  Boston,  which  he  continued  for
thirtv-five  years,  until  slavery  was  finally  abol-
ished. It  was  small  at  first,  but  after  a  few  years
was  enlarged  to  the  usual  size  of  the  DOWSUOpen
of  that  day.  The  spirit  of  the  paper  was  indicated
by  this  announcement  in  the  first  number:  "  I  am
aware  that  many  object  to  the  severity  of  my  lan-
guage, but  is  there  not  cause  for  severity?  I  will
be  as  harsh  as  truth,  and  as  uncompromising  as
justice.  On  this  subject  1  do  not  wish  to  think,
or  speak,  or  write  with  moderation.  No!  no!  Tell
a  man  whose  house  is  on  fire  to  give  a  moderate
alarm  ;  tell  him  moderately  to  rescue  his  wife  from
the  hands  of  the  ravisher;  tell  the  mother  to  grad-
ually extricate  her  babe  from  the  fire  into  which  it
has  fallen  :  but  urge  me  not  to  use  moderation  in
a  cans*;  like  the  present.  1  am  in  earnest— I  will
not  equivocate — I  will  not  excuse—  1  will  not  re-
treat a  single  inch — and  I  will  be  heard."  It  was
a  purely  moral  and  pacific  warfare  that  he  avowed.
No  appeal  was  made  to  the  passions  of  the  slaves,
but  to  the  consciences  of  the  masters,  and  especial-
ly of  the  citizens  of  the  free  states,  involved  by  the
constitution  in  the  guilt  of  slavery.  But  he  was
1  with  a  design  to  promote  slave  insurrec-

ind  held  up  to  public  scorn  as  a  fanatic  and
incendiary.  The  state  of  Georgia  offered  $.').( MNJ
reward  for  his  apprehension,  and  the  mails  from

it h  brought  him  hundreds  of  letters  threat-
ening him  with  death  if  he  did  not  abandon  his

warfare. The  whole  land  wee  speedily  filled

with  excitement,  the  apathy  of  years  was  broken,

and  the  new  dispensation  of  immediatism  justified

•  its  results. In  1832  the  first  society  under

ispensation  was  organised  in  Boston;  within
irs  the  American  anti-slavi
rmed  in  Philadelphia, upon  a  platform
of  principles  formulated by Mr.  Garrison; and


<;.\i;i;


611


fr<>m  tins  time  the  movement,  in  spite  of  powerful
efforts  to  crush  it.jfn-w  with  great  rapiditv.
ernors  of  states  hinted  that  the  societies  were  ille-
gal, and  judges  affirmed  that  the  agitators  were
liable  to  arrest  M  c  -rimimd-.  under  the  common
law.  Mr.  Garrison  aggravated  his  offence,  in  the
eyes  of  many.  i>\  his  opposition  to  the  BshoBoaf
African  colonization,  which,  under  the  prstSBOl  of
unfriendliness  to  slavery,  had  gained  public  confi-
dence at  the  north,  while  in  truth  it  fostered  the
idea  that  the  slaves  were  unfit  for  freedom.  His
"Thoughts  on  African  Colonization,"  in  which  be
fudged  the  society  out  of  its  own  mouth,  was  a
most  effective  piece  of  work,  defying  every  attempt
at  an  answer.  From  1K13  till  1N40  sntl  shusil
societies  on  Mr.  Garrison's  model  were  multiplied
in  the  free  states,  many  lecturers  wen-  sent  forth,
and  an  extensive  anti-slavery  literature  was  creat-
ed. The  agitation  assumed  proitort ions  that  great-
ly encouraged  its  promoters  ami  alarmed  its  opno-
neiits.  Attempts  were  made  to  suppress  it  In  tin-
terror  of  molis;  Elijah  I*.  LofOJOT,  in  1X57,  at
Alton,  111.,  was  slain  while  defending  his  press,
and  in  1818  Garrison  was  dragged  through  the
streets  of  Boston  with  a  rope  around  his  ImmIv,  his
life  bsJng  Sived  With  great  difficulty  by  lodging
him  in  jail.  Marius  Robinson,  an  anti-slavi  r\  lec-
turer, in  Mahoning  county,  Ohio,  was  tarred'  and
feathered  in  a  cruel  way;  Amos  Dresser,  a  theo-
logical student,  while  selling  cottage  Bibles  at
Nashville.  Tenn.,  was  flogged  in  the  public  square
because  it  happened  that,  without  his  knowledge,
some  of  his  Bibles  were  wrapped  in  cast-off  anti-
slavery  papers;  and  in  Charleston,  S.  ('.,  the  post-
office  was  broken  open  by  a  mob,  which  made  a
Inuifire  of  anti  -  slavery  papers  and  trad
through  the  mails  to  citi/ens of  that  city.  In  1840
the  abolition  body  was  rent  in  twain,  mainly  by-
two  questions,  viz.. :  1.  Whether  they  should  form
an  anti-slavery  |>olitical  jtarty.  2.  Whether  women
should  be  allowed  to  speak  and  vote  in  their  socie-
ties. On  the  first  of  these  questions  Mr.  Garrison
took  the  negative,  on  the  ground  that  such  a  party
would  prolwbly  tend  todelay  rather  than  hasten  t  he
desired  action  in  respect  to  slavery.  On  the  second
he  took  the  affirmative,  on  the  ground  that  the
constitutions  of  the  societies  admitted  "persons"
to  membership  without  discrimination  as  to  sex.
This  division  was  never  healed,  and  thenceforth
Mr.  Garrison  was  recognized  chiefly  as  the  leader
of  the  party  agreeing  with  him  upon  these  two
questions.  Personally  he  was  a  non-resistant,  and
therefore  a  non-voter:  but  the  great  body  of  his
friends  had  no  such  scruples,  anil  held  it  to  be  a
duty  to  exercise  the  elective  franchise  in  opposi-
tion to  slavery.  In  1844  Mr.  Garrison  became
OOBVinced  that  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  was  itself  the  main  MppOft  of  shivery,  and
as  such  was  to  be  repudiated.  Borrowing  the
words  of  Isaiah,  he  characterized  it  as  "a  covenant
with  death  and  an  agreement  with  lull."  His  influ-
ence carried  the  anti-slavery  societies  over  to  this
ground,  which  they  firmly  held  to  the  end  of  the
conflict.  Few  of  the  inemU'is  had  any  scruples
as  to  forceful  government.  They  simply  declared
that  they  could  not  conscientiously  take  part  in
a  government  that  bound  them  by  oath,  in  certain
contingencies,  to  mppOfl  slavery.  The  |>olitical
party  anti-slavery  nun  went  their  way,  leaving
the  work  of  moral  agitation  to  Garrison  and  his
associates,  who  were  still  a  powerful  Ixxlv,  with
large  resources  in  character,  argument,  and  influ-
Thc  two  classes,  though  working  by  diver-
gent methods,  had  yet  a  common  pUpOSB,  and,
though  controversy  DStWSSn  them  at  times  waxed


612


GARTH


GARZA


warm, their  agreements wen- broad ami deep

enough  i"  insure  mutual  respeet  »m<l  a  m>  inconsid-
erable degree  <>f  co-operation.  The  political  anti-
>ln\.rv  leaders  recognized  the  value  of  the  moral

agitation  as  a  mmni  for  the  regeneration  of  pub-
lic sentiment,  ami  for  keeping  their  own  party  up
to  its  work;  and  the  agitators  bote  glau  witness
to  the  sincerity  of  men  who,  though  they  could
m>t  eee  their  way  clear  to  a  repudiation  of  the
constitution,  were  bent  upon  doing  all  that  they
could  under  it  to  baffle  the  designs  of  the  slave-
power.  Thousands  of  the  political  aboRtionistS
made  regular  and  lil>eral  contributions  to  sustain
the  work  of  moral  agitation,  and  the  agitators  re-
joiced in  every  display  of  courage  on  the  part  of
their  voting  friends,  and  in  whatever  good  they
could  accomplish.  The  civil  war  brought  the  sin-
cere opponents  of  slavery,  of  whatever  class,  into
more  fraternal  relations.  Mr.  Garrison  was  quick
to  see  that  the  pro-slavery  Union  was  destroyed  by
the  first  gun  fired  at  Sumter,  and  could  never  be
restored.  Thenceforth  he  and  his  associates  la-
bored to  induce  the  government  to  place  the  war
openly  and  avowedly  on  an  anti-slavcrv  basis,  and
to  beiid  all  its  efforts  to  the  establishment  of  a
new  Union  from  which  slavery  should  be  forever
excluded.  In  this  they  had  the  co-operation  of
the  most  enlightened  and  earnest  leaders  and
members  of  the  Republican  party,  and  on  1  Jan.,
1803,  their  united  labors  were  crowned  with  suc-
cess. President  Lincoln's  proclamation  of  free-
dom to  the  slaves  was  a  complete  vindication  of
the  doctrine  of  immediate  emancipation ;  while
the  conditions  of  reconstruction  gave  the  country
a  new  constitution  and  a  new  Union,  so  far  as
slavery  was  concerned.  When  the  contest  was
over,  the  leaders  of  the  Republican  party  united
with  Mr.  Garrison's  immediate  associates  in  rais-
ing for  him  the  sum  of  $30,000,  as  a  token  of  their
grateful  appreciation  of  his  long  and  faithful  ser-
vice ;  and  after  his  death  the  city  of  Boston  accept-
ed and  erected  a  bronze  statue  to  his  memory.
During  the  struggle  in  which  he  took  so  promi-
nent a  part  he  made  two  visits  to  England,  where
he  was  received  with  many  marks  of  distinction
by  the  abolitionists  of  that  country,  as  the  ac-
knowledged founder  of  the  anti-slavery  movement
in  the  United  States.  The  popular  estimate  of  his
character  and  career  is  doubtless  expressed  in  the
words  of  John  A.  Andrew,  war-governor  of  Massa-
chusetts: "  The  generation  which  immediately  pre-
ceded ours  regarded  him  only  as  a  wild  enthusiast,
a  fanatic,  or  a  public  enemy.  The  present  genera-
tion sees  in  him  the  bold  and  honest  reformer,  the
man  of  original,  self-poised,  heroic  will,  inspired
by  a  vision  of  universal  justice,  made  actual  in  the
practice  of  nations;  who, daring  to  attack  without
reserve  the  worst  and  most  powerful  oppression  of
his  country  and  his  time,  has  outlived  the  giant
wrong  he  assailed,  and  has  triumphed  over  the
sophistries  by  which  it  was  maintained."

GARTH,  George,  British  soldier,  d.  in  1819.
His  father,  John  Garth,  was  member  of  parliament
for  Devizes.  The  son  entered  the  1st  regiment  of
foot-guards  in  September,  1755;  was  made  colonel
in  February,  1779;  major-general  in  November,
1782;  and  general  in  1801.  He  was  afterward
governor  of  Placentia,  and  was  a  general  of  brigade
in  the  American  war  of  the  Revolution.  In  July,
1779,  he  was  second  in  command  of  Trvon's  expe-
dition, which  plundered  and  dest  roved  Fairfield
and  Norwalk,  Conn.,  and  served  under  Clinton  in
the  expedition  against  Charleston  in  1780.

GARTLAND,  Francis  Xuvier,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,


20  Sept.,  1854  He  received  both  his  classical  ami
theological  training  at  St.  Mary's  college.  Kmmetts-
bnrg,  and  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop  Connell
in  Philadelphia,  fal  1888.  He  was  immediately  af-
terward appointed  assistant  to  Father  (afterward
Archbishop)  Hughes  at  St.  John's  church,  Phila-
delphia, and  succeeded  him  as  pastor  sites  his
nomination  to  be  coadjutor-bishop  of  New
In  1845  he  was  appointed  vicar-general  and  aided
the  bishop  in  his  administrative  duties.  He  laid
the  corner-stone  of  several  churches  while  with
Bishop  Kenrick.  On  the  erection  of  the  new  see
of  Savannah,  in  1849,  Dr.  Gartland  was  nominated
its  first  bishop,  but,  owing  to  the  Roman  revolu-
tion and  the  flight  of  Pius  IX.,  the  pontifical  briefs
for  his  consecration  did  not  reach  Baltimore  until
9  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  consecrated  bishop  at  St.
John's  church,  Philadelphia,  on  10  Sept.,  by  Arch-
bishop Eccleson.  Although  the  resources  of  the
new  diocese  were  very  limited,  he  at  once  entered
strenuously  on  the  work  before  him.  He  visit!
every  part  of  his  see  repeatedly  and  enlarge.  1  the
cathedral  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  which  he  re-
dedicated,  26  June,  1853.  He  erected  three  new
churches,  created  as  many  missions,  increased  the
number  of  his  clergy,  and  established  numerous
societies  and  fraternities.  Among  the  institutions
with  which  he  endowed  his  diocese  were  the  Orphan
asylum  for  boys  established  in  Savannah,  ana  the
Society  of  Our  Lady  Help  of  Christians.  He  all
established  day-schools  and  Christian  doctrine-
schools  in  various  places.  When  Savannah  wa
desolated  by  the  yellow  fever  in  1854  he  went  from
house  to  house  administering  the  sacraments.  At
last  he  was  attacked  by  the  disease,  and  conveyed
to  the  house  of  a  friend,  who  cared  for  him  until
his  death.  Bishop  Gartland  travelled  extensively
in  the  northern  states  the  year  after  his  consecra-
tion, and  visited  his  native  country  in  the  interests
of  his  diocese.  He  also  took  part  in  the  delibera-
tions of  the  eighth  council  of  Baltimore.

GARY,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middlefield,
Otsego  co.,  N.  Y„  8  Dec.,  1793 ;  d.  25  March,  1855t
He  entered  the  New  England  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1809,  in  1818  wa
made  presiding  elder,  in  1825  was  conference
sionary,  and  in  1834  a  missionary  to  the  Oneida  In-
dians. In  1836  he  was  transferred  to  the  Black
River  conference,  and  in  1844  was  appointed  mis-
sionary superintendent  of  Oregon.  He  remained
there  lor  four  years,  and  on  his  return  preache
until  1854,  when  failing  health  forced  him  to  re-
tire from  active  ministerial  labors.  He  was  an
eloquent  preacher  and  did  much  to  advance  tl
religious  and  educational  interests  of  the  church.

GARZA,  Lfizaro  de  la  (gar'-tha).  Mexican
C.  bishop,  b.  in  Pilon,  Nueva  Leon,  17  Dec.,  1785;
d.  in  Barcelona,  Spain,  11  March,  1862.  He  stud-
ied law  at  the  university,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1810,  but  in  1815  was  ordained  as  a  priest
He  became  successively  vice-rector  of  the  >emi-
nary,  rector  of  Tepotzotlan.  professor  of  canoni-
cal law  at  the  seminary,  and  rector  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Shrine  in  the  capital.  In  1819
he  had  taken  the  degree  of  doctor  in  canonical
law,  and  in  1830  doctor  of  common  law  in  the  uni-
versity of  Caracas.  In  1837  he  became  bishop  of
Sonora,  and  proceeded  immediately  to  establish  a
seminary  there.  He  also  began  to  build  a  cathe-
dral, and  endowed  many  other  churches  with
Saintings,  images,  and  vestments.  He  wa-
rmed archbishop  of  Mexico  in  1830,  and  then
devoted  nearly  his  whole  revenue  to  w<>
charity.  On  the  publication  of  the  decree  of  8§
June.  1856,  secularizing  the  church  propel!


0  ISCA


I  INK


618


:


za  attacked  the  government  vj<i|i-ntlv,  ami

I tin- ri'a<ii.iinir\ partv umier Miramon.
Win  n  tin-  liberal  [tarty  triumphed.  ( iarza.  together
with  other  iii«h<i|M,  was  ban  i -died  bydeerea  of  17
.lan  .  I860, and  fixed  hni  raaVkDea  in  Max;,
isr.i  be  was  called  t<»  Roma  by  Pop*  Pirn  IX..  bat

died  i>n  his  way  thitln-r.

t.Vst V.  Pedro  de  la.  Spanish  bishop,  b.  in  Pla-

Siuiin.  in. I  line.  1  l*"> ;  il.  in  Siguenza,  18  Nov..

He  studied  at  the  University  of  Alcnla,and
after  leaving  college  lieeaine  noted  for  his  knowl-
•  men  and  affairs  ami  for  an  adroit,  subtle  in-
tellect. In  1542  he  was  employed  by  Charles  V.  in
.turns  with  the  |m>|m>  and  with  Hetirv  VIII.,
requiring  great  diplomatic  skill.  When  Gonsalo
Pizarro,  brother  of  the  oonqueror,  attempted  to
have  himself  crowned  king  of  pern,  the  emperor,
who  after  a  ruinous  war  was  unable  to  .send  M

army  against  the  rebel  leader,  iinininl— Vmail  Saani

to  restore  |M'ace,  naming  him  president  of  the
royal  audience  of  Lima  with  unlimited  powers
to"  punish  and  pardon.  The  latter  emltarkcd  in
May.  1046,  without  troops  or  money,  and  accom-
panied only  by  two  Dominican  priests  and  a  few
servants,  lie  landed  at  Panama,  where  Pizarro' s
fleet  was  stationed,  and  represented  himself  as  a
messenger  of  iteace,  charged  solely  with  the  task
of  n  iialaWlsmnn;  justice  ami  granting  a  general
■nasty.  At  the  same  time  he  insinuated  that  a
fleet  of  40  sail,  having  15,000  men  on  board,  was  to
leave  the  harbor  of  Seville  in  June,  which  would
quickly  restore  peace  in  Peru,  if  he  did  not  obtain
that  result  by  moderation  ana  justice.  His  adroit-
ness and  eloquence, combined  with  his  age  and  the
simplicity  ..f  his  manners,  gained  him  the  affection
of  the  officers,  whom  he  detached  from  Pizarro,  and
soon  master  of  the  whole  fleet.  Gonzalo
still  refused  to  submit,  and  fled  secretly  to  Cuzco,
where  he  had  left  the  flower  of  his  troops,  while
Oasca,  followed  bv  nearly  the  whole  fleet  of  Gon-
zalo. landed  at  Tumbez  in  1547.  Here  he  is-
sued a  proclamation  announcing  the  mission  with
which  he  was  charged  by  the  emperor,  and  invit-
ing all  good  citizens  to  unite  their  efforts  with  his,
in  order  to  re-tore  tranquillity.  By  another  proc-
lamation he  granted  a  general  amnesty  to  all  de-
serters, and  promised  rewards  to  those  who  would
arm  in  defence  of  the  royal  cause.  By  these  pru-
dent arrangements  he  saw  himself  soon  at  the  head
of  a  respectable  army,  which  he  exercised  himself,
and  with  which  he  marched  to  Cuzco  in  December.
Pizarro  with  a  strong  force  encamped  in  the  val-
ley of  Xaguidaguana,  to  bar  his  passage.  But
Oasca,  Instead  of  risking  a  battle,  tampered  with
the  principal  officers  of  Pizarro,  and  won  them
over  by  promises  and  threats.  The  two  armies  met
In  the  valley  of  Sacsahuana,  9  April,  1048,  when
most  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  rebel  leader
deserted  his  banner  and  made  their  submission  to
the  president,  who  remained  master  of  the  Held
without  having  struck  a  blow.  After  punish-
ing Pizarro  and  the  fomentors  of  the  revolt  with
death,  (iasca  proved  himself  as  good  an  adminis-
trator as  he  was  an  able  politician.  He  removed
the  en.wd  of  adventurers  that  filled  Peru  from  the
country,  distributed  rewards  to  the  royalists,  and
pardoned  the  least  guilty  among  the  rebels,  He
regulated  the  administration  of  justice  and  the  ool-
IsOtion  of  the  public  revenues,  while  at  the  same
time  he  issue*  1  several  regulations  forbidding  op-
>n  of  the  Indians,  lie  then  surrendered  all
rera  to  the  royal  audience,  and  returned  to
Simm  in  1040.  <  »n  his  arrival  he  was  made  bishop
encia  by  char!.-  V.,  and  in  r>iil  promoted
iy  Philip  11.  t..  the  bishopric  <>f  Sigflensn,


8A8PAI  Ml.  \ntonlo  (gas-par).  Maya  In-
dian author  (his  original  name  wa»  (in  Xn '  i.  I>.  in
Yucatan  about  1541  ;  d.  then-  in  the  beginning  of
the  17th  century.  He  was  son  of  the  famous  priest
Kin-Chi,  the  gmadsoa  Of  Tutul  Xiu.  nn  Indian
king,  who  was  an  ally  of  the  Spaniards,  and  was
educated  by  the  missionaries  accompanying  an
expedition  against  the  hostile  ('wouies,  under
the  name  of  Antonio  Caspar.  Young  Caspar
Xiu  soon  learned  to  speak  and  write  Spanish
and  Litin,  and  was  very  useful  to  the  conquerors
as  interpreter.  He  was  ap|H>inted  public  Iran  —
later  bf  royal  order,  and  did  much  to  cultivate
knowledge  among  his  native  people.  In  his  old
age  he  suffered  from  DOfSftg  ami  neglect,  and  by
a  royal  decree  of  i;  Sept..  1060,  was  granted  a  pajB-
sion  in  consideration  of  the  service*  he  had  ren-
dered to  the  Spaniards.  He  wrote  MVooabalarJo
de  la  leiigua  Maya."  which  has  bssa  lost,  and  proba-
bly m>  coy  exists  now.  It  is  cited  by  Piinentel  in
his  "Cuadro  descriptivo  y  eomparativo  de  las  len-
guas  indigenas  de  Mexico,"  and  by  many  others.
He  also  published  a  "  Kchicioii  I  listerias,  sobre  las
Costumbres  de  los  Indios"  (188ft

GASPK.  Philip  Aubert  de.  Canadian  author,
b.  in  Qaabso,  00  Oct,  1988;  d.  there,  •»»  Jan..  I8TL
He  was  educated  in  the  seminary  of  Quebec,  studied
law,  and.  after  practising  his  profession  for  some
years,  became  sheriff.  But  he  neglected  his  duties,
and  his  generosity  to  friends  involved  him  in  diffi-
culties. Those  for  whom  he  had  sacrificed  himself
abandoned  him  in  adversity,  and  he  was  imprisoned
four  years  for  debt.  On  his  release  he  retired  to
his  domain  of  Saint-Jean  Port-Joli.  His  "  Anciens
Canadiens"  (18*52)  was,  nerhaps,  the  most  popular
book  ever  published  in  Canada.  An  English  trans-
lation, by  Sirs,  pennie,  was  published  in  England.
This  and  his  "  Memoires"  (1866)  deal  with  the  tra-
ditions and  folk-lore  of  Canada.

GASPE,  Philip  Ignatius,  soldier,  b.  in  Canada.
5  April,  1714;  d.  there,  19  June,  1787.  He  entered
the  army  in  1727,  and  in  1735  served  under  I)e
Novel  le  in  the  campaign  against  the  Foxes.  He
followed  the  Baron  de  Longueil  in  17.'$y  in  his
expedition  against  the  Natchez  and  Chicachas  on
the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  and  on  his  return
stopped  at  Michilimackinac,  where  De  Vercheres
commanded.  He  remained  there  three  years,  mak-
ing frequent  raids  on  the  English  colony.  He
suggested  to  Col.  Villiers  the  possibility  of  captur-
ing Grand-Pre\  In  1750  he  Duilt  a  fort  on  the
river  St.  John,  which  he  commanded  for  more
than  two  years.  He  was  present  at  the  attack  on
Fort  Necessity,  where  Washington  was  defeated,
cum  mam  I..1  the  Canadian  militia  at  the  defence  of
Fort  Carillon,  in  which  3,058  Frenchmen  were  en-
gaged with  about  15,000  English  and  provincials,
ami  contributed  largely  to  the  -uccosuf  the  French
in  this  battle.  After  the  capture  of  Quebec  by  the
English  in  1760  he  commanded  the  grenadiers  un-
der Levis.  He  received  the  cross  of  St.  Ixuis  in
March,  1761.  ami  the  rest  of  his  life  was  passed  on
his  estate  of  St.  .lean  Port-Joli.

GASTINE.  Civiquc.  W.m  Indian  reformer,  b.
in  Fort  de  Frame,  Martinique,  in  17'.»:!;  d.  in
Port  an  Prince.  Hayti.  12  June,  1888,  He  was  of
a  wealthy  family,  and  from  early  childhood  was  im-
I  DJ  his  mulatto  nurse  with  synqiathy  for  the
colored  race.  In  IH03  as  was  sent  t<>  New  Orleans
to  receive  hi>  education,  and  in  1WK»  came  to
Philadelphia  to  study  law.  A  pamphlet,  which  he
published  there  regarding  the  emancipation  of  the
negroes,  gave  ri-e  to  some  attacks  on  him. and  when
in  1N1:{  he  ajwks  at  a  public  meeting  in  favor  of
equality  batWSea  blacks  and  whites,  he  *>ai  in  dan-


614


<■  \ -TON-


GATES


per  of  btfalg  lvnched.  and  BedtO  Paris.  BsMOftped
oonsoription  there  in  1814  as  an  American  citizen,
and  in  1*1">  begM  the  publication  of  the  paper
••  Ii'ami  du  noir."  He  was  condemned  several
times  to  fines  and  imprisonment  for  offensive
articles,  and,  when  he  published  his  ••  Lett  re  an  roi
sur  I'indcpendance  de  la  r^publique  de  Haiti  ot
l'abolition  de  1'esclavage  dans  les  colonies  fran-
<;ui-e<  "  and  "  De  la  necessite  de  faire  un  traite  de
commerce  avec  Haiti"  (Paris,  1821),  the  govern-
ment took  a<l  vantage  of  Gastine's  violent  personal
attacks  to  confiscate  the  work  and  banish  the
author.  He  went  to  Hayti  in  1821,  and  was  en-
thusiastically received  on  his  arrival  at  Port  au
Prince  by  the  public  and  President  Boyer,  who
appointed  him  secretary  of  foreign  relations,  and
granted  him  a  yearly  pension  of  5,000  francs.  By
public  subscription  a  magnificent  property  at  Aux
Cayes  was  presented  to  Gastine.  but  he  only  en-
joved  it  a  few  months.  He  published,  besides  the
two  works  already  mentioned,  "  Histoire  de  la  re-
publique  de  Haiti,  1'esclavage  et  le  colon  "  (Paris,
1819);  "  L'Esclavage  aux  Etats-Unis"  (1819);  and
"  Histoire  de  1'esclavage  dans  la  Louisiane  "  (1820).
GASTON,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Newbern,  N.
C,  19  Sept.,  1778;  d.  in  Raleigh,  23  Jan.,  1844.  He
was  the  son  of  Alexander  Gaston,  an  eminent
physician  of  Huguenot  descent,  who  on  20  Aug.,
1781,  was  murdered  by  the  Tories  in  the  presence
of  his  wife  and  children.  The  son  was  educated
at  Georgetown,  D.  C,  college,  and  at  Princeton,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1  ?!)(!.  He  studied  law
at  Newbern,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1798,  and

soon  attained
distinction  in
his  profes-
sion. In  1799
he  was  elected
to  the  state
senate  from
Craven  coun-
ty, and  in  1808
to  the  house
of  delegates,
over  which  he
was  chosen  to
preside.  He
was  a  member
of  congress
from  1813  till
1815.  His
speech  in  op-
position to
the  loan  bill,
which pro-

rosed  to  place
for  the  con-
quest of  Canada  during  the  war  with  Great  Britain.
was  a  model  of  eloquence  and  was  widely  read  and
greatly  admired.  He  was  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  North  Carolina  from  1834  till  his  death,
and  some  of  the  best  statutes  of  that  state,  as  well
as  it>  judicial  organization,  are  his  work.  In  1835
he  assisted  the  convention  in  amending  the  state
constitution,  and  suggested  and  elaborated  nearly
all  the  reforms  in  it.  He  spoke  and  voted  against
the  proposition  to  deprive  tree  colored  men  of  the
franchise.  He  was  offered,  but  declined,  the  Unit-
ed States  senatorship  in  1840.

GASTON,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  South  Kil-
linurly,  Conn..  :i  Oct.,  1890.  He  is  of  Huguenot  an-
cestry, and  is  descended  from  John  Gaston,  who
settled  in  New  England  about  1730.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Brooklyn  and  Plainfleld  academies,  and  at
Brown,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1840. He  stud-


/VT^OJ  J/dtfF&T^


rt<nrz<y£4  JsCC&fJ


ied  law  and  began  practice  in  Hoxhurv.  Mass.,  in
1846,  was  city  solicitor  from  1856  till'  1880,  and
mayor  in  1861-2.  He  was  a  member  of  tip
sachusetts  legislature  in  1853-'4  and  **'>.  and  of
the  state  senate  in  1868.  He  was  mayor  of  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  in  lH71-'2.  and  was  elected  governor  of
Massachusetts  in  1875,  being  the  only  Democrat
that  has  enjoyed  that  honor  in  many  years.  On
retiring  from  the  gubernatorial  chair,  he  resumed
his  professional  labors  in  Boston.

GATES,  Horatio,  soldier,  b.  in  Maiden,  Essex
co„  England,  in  1728;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10
April,  1806.  The  story  that  he  was  a  natural
son  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  is  without  foundation.
His  parents  were
the  butler  and  the
housekeeper  of  the
Duke  of  Leeds.
Horace  Walpole,
himself  a  mere
lad,  who  chanced
at  the  time  to  be
visiting  that  noble-
bleman,  good-na-
turedly acted  as
his  god-father.  He
entered  the  army
while  a  youth,  and
served  in  thiseoun-
try  in  command  of
the  king's  New
York  independent
company.  Early  in
1755  he  was  sta-
tioned at  Halifax,
where,  under  the
protection  of  the  Hon.  Edward  Cornwallis,  at  that
time  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  uncle  of  Lieut.-Gen.
Lord  Cornwallis,  he  rose  rapidly  to  the  rank  of
major.  Accompanying  Braddock  on  his  unfortu-
nate expedition,  he  was  shot  through  the  body  at
the  slaughter  of  the  Monongahela,  and  for  a  long
time  was  disabled.  In  July,  1760,  he  was  brigade-
major  under  Monckton  at  Fort  Pitt,  and  in  1763
was  with  that  general,  as  an  aide,  at  the  capture  of
Martinique,  rendering  effective  service  and  estab-
lishing a  reputation  for  military  ability.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  bought  an  estate  in  Berkeley
county.  Va.,  where  he  remained,  quietly  cultivating
his  land,  until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
caused  him  to  offer  his  sword  to  congress ;  and  in
July,  1775,  he  received  from  that  body  the  appoint-
ment of  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  briga-
dier. In  the  following  year  he  was  appointed  to
the  command  of  that  portion  of  the  northern  army
which  had  been  successively  commanded  in  Can-
ada by  Montgomery,  Arnold,  Wooster,  Thomas,
and  Sullivan.  This  step  put  Gates  over  Sullivan,
his  senior  in  rank,  much  to  the  disgust  of  that
officer;  and  it  marked  the  beginning  of  a  s<
intrigues  by  which,  with  the  aid  chiefly  of  the  New
England  delegates  in  congress.  Gates  was  pushed
into  higher  places,  at  first  superseding  Schuyler
and  afterward  attempting  to  supersede  Washing*
ton.  Gates's  present  command  was  over  "the
northern  army  in  Canada,"  with  headquarters  at
Ticonderoga.  When  he  reached  that  fortress  he
found  there  was  no  longer  any  northern  army  in
Canada,  because  it  had  retreated  into  New  York,
lie  then  set  up  a  claim  to  the  command  of  this  j  Mo-
tion of  the  northern  army  independently  of  Schuy-
ler, who  was  commander-in-chief  of  the  northern
department,  with  headquarters  at  Albany.  The
matter  being  referred  to  congress,  a  discussion  en-
sued, as  the  result  of  which  Gates  was  instructed


I


r,i:>


to  consider  hin  -><huyler. The

for  mpenedi&g  the  lntt<T  general  <>iiiv
•iluiiii" ■!•■  'I.  however,  and  in  tin-  tummer  ol

it  in  Km  innl-t of  tin-  panic pr...
I by  th«>  rapid  advance of Burgoyne. On

•  :lteS WAS H])|M)itltl-(i tn command tin-

hern  dc|>artincnt. Me  has  own  snopeolod  of

a  lack  of  personal  courage,  a  suspicion  that h

ngthened  hy  his  conduct  during  the  battle  of

for  while  Bur-

Sails  in  the  thickest  of  the  light,  receiving
ree  bullets  through  his  clothes.  Gates,  two  miles
away,  was  looking  forward  to  a  possible  retreat.
Scarcely  had  the  action  begun  when,  by  his  com-
mand. 1  he  baggage -trains  were  loadeil,  and  team-
sters placed  at  the  horses'  heads,  in  readiness  to
move  at  a  moment's  notice.  Gates  ordering  than  to
move  on  or  hall  alternately,  a*  the  news  from  the
battle-field  was  favorable  or  adverse.  Indeed,  the
same  Incapacity  that  afterward  was  so  apparent  in
(iates,  during  his  unfortunate  southern  campaign,
was  manifested  from  the  time  of  his  assuming  the
command  of  the  northern  army  until  the  surren-
der. The  laurels  won  by  him  should  reallv  have
been  worn  by  Schuyler  and  Arnold.  Not  only  had
the  army  of  Burgoyne  Ijeen  essentially  disabled  by
the  defeat  at Bennington before the  arrival  of

s,  but  the  overthrow  of  St.  Legcr  at  Fort
Btanwix  had  deranged  the  plans  of  the  British
general,  while  safetv  had  been  restored  to  the
western  frontier,  ami  the  panic  thus  caused  had
subsided. After  the  surrender,  the bearing of

-  toward  the  commander-in-chief  was  far  from
iwpni  tful  He  did  not  even  write  to  the  latter  on
that  occasion  ;  nor  was  it  until  the  second  day  of
November  that  he  deigned  to  communicate  to
Washington  a  word  upon  the  subject,  and  then
only  incidentally,  as  though  it  were  a  matter  of
secondary  iiii|x>rtance.  Congress,  in  the  first  flush
of  gratitude,  passed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  Gates  and
his  army,  ami  presented  him  with  a  gold  medal
having  on  one  side  a  bust  of  the  general,  with  the
words  "  1 1' "ratio  Gates,  duci  strenuo,"  and  on  the
reverse  a  representation  of  Burgoyne  delivering
up  his  sword.  In  November,  1777,  he  was  made
president  of  the  new  hoard  of  war  and  ordnance,
and  during  the  following  winter  sought,  with  the
aid  of  the  disreputable  clique  known  as  the  "Con-
way ealwil,"  to  supplant  Washington  in  the  chief
command  of  the  army.  His  falsehoods  in  a  series
of  intriguing  letters  having  been  exposed  by  Wash-
ington, he  fell  into  some  discredit,  and  in  the
spring  of  177M  it  became  evident  that  his  ambitious
schemes  had  miscarried.  In  the  course  of  this
affair  he  became  involved  in  a  quarrel  with  Wil-
kinson, his  former  adjutant,  which  led  to  a  duel.
the  details  of  which  may  be  found  in  the  "  Boston
Evening  Post  and  General  Advertiser  "  for  170ct.,
1778.  He  retired  from  active  service,  and  lived
for  some  time  on  his  estate  in  Virginia,  until  he
was  appointed.  18  June,  1780.  to  the  command  of
the  army  in  North  Carolina  designed  to  check  the

-Tress  of  I»rd  Cornwallis. In  the  bat  t  le  near

len.  S.  ('..  li»  Aug..  he  was  defeated,  and  his

army  nearly  annihilated. He  was  soon  afterward

iTaadad  by  Gen.  Greene,  ami  suepended  from
dnty. A  court  of  inquiry  was  appointed  to  inves-

te  his  military  conduct,  and  he  was  not  acquit-

or  reinstated  until  1782;  so  that  the  battle  of
•  len  virtually  ended  his  military  career.  At
tin-  close  of  the  war  he  retired  to  his  estate  in  Vir-
ginia, where  he  lived  until  1?!H),  when  he  removed

fork city. In 1HOO he  was elected  to  tin

state  legislature,  but for  political  reasons  resigned
soon  after  taking  his  ^-at. His  death  occurred.


I  long  illness,  nt  his  house,  now  the  corner  of

83d  street  and  Id  erenue,  then  the  Bloomingdale
pike, (bites  was  a  man  of  great  plausibility  and

address,  of  a  handsome  person  and  fair  education,
and  a  gnat  lion  in  society.  Though  having  many
faults,  the  chief  of  which  was  an  overweening
(ideiice  in  his  own  ability  combined  with  arrogance
and  untruthfulness,  he  had  also  sonic  noble  traits.
Before  removing  to  New  York  from  Virginia,  ho
emancipated  his  slaves,  providing  for  such  of  tlnin
as  could  not  take  care  of  themselves.  In  his  do-
mestic relations  he  was  an  affect  innate  hu»l»and
and  father,  and.  during  the  ln-t  Mars  of  his  life,  a
sincere  Christian.  He  married  Mary,  only  child  of
.lames  Valence,  of  Liverpool,  who.  at  her  father's
death,  lie  fore  the  {(evolutionary  war,  emigrated
to  this  country,  bringing  with  her  $ 450,000.  In
the  struggle  for  independence  Mrs.  Gates  freely
expended  nearly  all  of  her  fortune  in  a  lavish  hos-
pitality upon  her  husband's  companions  in  arms,
especially  those  that  were  in  indigent  circum-
stances; and  many  of  the  Revolutionary  heroes
were  |wirtici|>ants  in  her  l>ounty,  particularly
Thaddeus  KoMiusko,  who.  when  wounded,  lay  six
months  at  her  hou.»c.  tenderly  nursed  by  herself
and  her  huslumd.  Mrs.  Gates,  who  survived  her
husband,  left  the  residue  of  her  fortune  ($90,000)
to  several  relatives,  whose  de-
scendants are  still  living  in
New  York  and  Philadelphia.
The  Saratoga  monument.
shown  in  the  accompanving
illustration,  was  erected  to
commemorate  the  surrender
of  Gen.  Burgoyne  to  Gen.
Gates,  and  is  in  the  village
of  Schuylerville,  N.  Y.  It
is  155  feet  in  height,  and
stands  within  the  lines  of
Burgoyne's  intrenchments,
on  a  bluff  350  feet  above
Hudson  river  and  overlook-
ing the  surrender  grounds.
A  staircase  of  bronze  leads
from  the  base  to  the  top,
whence  can  be  seen  the  en-
tire region  between  Lake
George, the  Green  mountains,
and  the  Catskills.  On  each
of  three  sides  of  the  monu-
ment is  a  niche  containing
heroic  statues  of  Gens,  Gates,  Schuyler,  and  Mor-
gan, while  the  fourth  is  left  vacant,  with  the  name
of  Arnold  inscribed  underneath.  Within  the
monument,  and  lining  its  two  stories,  are  alto
rilievo  decorations  in  bronze,  representing  his-
torical and  allegorical  scenes  connected  with  the
campaign  of  Burgoyne.  The  corner-stone  of  this
structure  was  laid  on  17  Oct..  1S77.  when  |>oems
and  addresses  were  delivered  by  Horatio  Seymour,
George  William  Curtis,  .lames  Grant  Wilson,  Al-
fred B.  Street,  and  William  L.  Stone.  Sec  Stone's
'•Campaign  of  Lieut. -(Jen.  Bnrgowic"  (Albany.
1*77).  and  Bancroft's  "  Hi-torv  of  the  I'nited
States"  M  vols..  New  York.  188$

GATES,  Seth  Merrill,  tarter,  b.  in  Winfleld,
Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y..  M  Oct..  1880;  d.  in  Warsaw,
N.  Y.,  84  Aug..  1*77.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  tin-  liar  in  1887,  and  Ugan  practice  in  Le  Boy,
lb-  was  elected  to  the  Mate  legislature  in  \XV2.  but
declined  a  re-election.  During  this  session  he  was
instrumental  in  pn>curing  a  charter  for  the  first
railroad  in  western  New  York,  being  a  portion  of
the  present  New  York  Central.  In  is;[s  he  pur-
chased the  '•  Le  Boy  (ta/ette."  which he  edited  for


610


GATES


GATES


several  years.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1888,
mill  re-elected  in  1840.  On  the  expiration  of  his
Mmgnm&ooal  service,  he  removed  to  Warsaw,  and
continued  his  law-practice.  On  account  of  his
hostility  to  slavery,  a  reward  of  $ 500  was  offered
by  a  southern  planter  for  his  "  delivery  in  Savan-
nah, dead  or  alive."  In  1848  he  was  the  Free-soil
canditlate  for  lieutenant-governor  of  New  York,
but  was  defeated.  He  drew  up  the  protest  of  the
Whig  members  of  congress  in  1848  against  the  an-
nexation of  Texas,  erroneously  attributed  in  sev-
eral histories  to  Mr.  Adams's  pen;  and  the  eorrc-
■pondeOM  l>etween  Mr.  Gates  and  ex-President
John  Qniney  Adams,  who  signed  the  protest,  is
still  in  the  possession  of  his  son. — His  son,  Mer-
rill Edwards,  educator,  1>.  in  Warsaw,  N.  Y.,
6  April,  1848,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Rochester  in  1870.  He  became  principal  of  the
Albany  academy in 1870, president  of  Rutgers


college  (shown  in  the  engraving),  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  in  1882,  and  in  1884  a  member  of  the  U.  S.
board  of  Indian  commissioners.  He  has  lectured
in  the  cities  of  New  Jersey  and  New  York  on
educational  topics.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  bv  the  University  of  New  York
in  1880,  and  LL.  D.'  by  Princeton  in  1882.

GATES,  Sir  Thomas,  governor  of  Virginia,
lived  in  the  17th  century.  The  second  charter  of
Virginia,  which  bears  the  date  of  23  May,  1609,  in-
trusted the  colonization  of  that  land  to  a  numerous
body  of  adventurers.  Among  those,  who  were  to
execute  Raleigh's  design,  were  Robert  Cecil,  earl  of
Salisbury,  Sir  Francis  Bacon,  Capt.  John  Smith,
Sir  Oliver  Cromwell,  uncle  to  the  protector,  and
others,  besides  a  number  of  public  companies  of
London,  which  represented  the  nobility,  army,  bar,
and  industry  of  England.  This  new  charter  trans-
ferred to  the  company  the  power  that  had  before
been  reserved  for  the  king  and  contained  a  com-
mand that  allegiance  and  obedience  should  be  ren-
dered to  such  governors  as  should  be  appointed  by
the  council  in  England.  The  officers  were  Sir
Thomas  West,  Lord  De  la  Warr,  captain-general  of
Virginia;  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  lieutenant-general;
Sir  George  Somers,  admiral ;  Capt.  Newport,  vice-
admiral  :  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  high-marshal ;  and  Sir
Ferdinand  Wainman,  general  of  horse.  Coloniza-
tion had  taken  such  hold  of  the  public  mind  that
large  sums  of  money  were  freely  contributed,  and
so  many  persons  desired  to  be  transported  that
nine  ships,  with  more  than  five  hundred  emigrants,
were  despatched  in  charge  of  Capt.  Newport.  Sir
George  Somers,  and  Sir  Thomas  Gates.  They  sailed
from  England  in  May,  1609,  but  only  seven  ships
arrived  in  Virginia.  The  ship  of  the  three  coni-
missioners,  the  "Sea  Venture."  was  separated  from
the  rest  of  the  fleet  by  a  hurricane,  and  stranded


0B  the  rocks  of  Bermuda,  and  a  small  ketch  also
perished.  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and  his  passengers
remained  nine  months  in  Bermuda,  where  they
eonMructed  two  vessels,  partly  from  the  wreck  of
the  "Sea  Venture"  and  partlv  from  cedars,  which
they  felled.  On  reaching  V  irginia,  on  24  May,
1610,  they  found  the  colony  in  a  state  of  misery
and  desolation;  for,  after  the  departure  of  Smith",
the  old  and  new  colonists,  no  longer  controlled  by
a  recognized  authority,  had  abandoned  themselves
to  indolence  and  vice.  Famine  had  reduced  their
numbers  to  sixty,  and  only  four  pinnaces  remained
in  the  river.  The  settlers  desired  to  burn  the  town,
but  were  prevented  by  Gates,  who  resolved  to  sail
for  Newfoundland  with  the  remaining  colonists  in
order  to  seek  a  passage  for  England.  As  they  de-
scended the  river,  they  met  Lord  De  la  Warr,  bring-
ing colonists  and  supplies,  9  June,  1610,  and  re-
turned with  him  to  Jamestown.  The  council  were
eager  for  some  immediate  profit,  and,  in  order  to

E've  them  a  full  account  of  the  state  of  affairs,
ord  De  laWarr  sent  Sir  Thomas  Gates  to  England.
Becoming  discouraged  by  his  report,  many  of  the
organization  withdrew  their  aia,  and  the  return
of  Lord  De  la  Warr  confirmed  their  suspicion-.  Sir
Thomas  Gates  succeeded,  however,  in  collecting
new  recruits,  and  in  August,  1611,  arrived  in  Vir-
ginia with  six  ships,  three  hundred  men,  one  hun-
dred cattle,  and  all  manner  of  provisions.  He  as-
sumed the  office  of  governor,  and  endeavored  to
make  religion  the  foundation  of  law  and  order.
During  his  rule,  new  settlements  were  made  in
Henrico  (1611),  and  the  third  patent  for  Virginia
was  signed  (March,  1612),  which  granted  to  the
share-holders  in  England  the  Bermudas  and  all
islands  within  three  hundred  leagues  of  the  Vir-
ginia shore.  This  acquisition  was  subsequently
transferred  to  a  separate  company.  Sir  Thomas
Gates  returned  to  England  in  1614,  and  endeavored
to  revive  and  strengthen  the  fallen  hopes  of  the
London  company  of  share-holders.  Sir  Thomas
Dale  succeeded  him  as  governor  of  Virginia.  It  is
supposed  that  the  wreck  of  the  "Sea  Venture"
furnished  Shakespeare  the  groundwork  for  his
comedy  of  "  The  Tempest."

GATES,  William,  general,  b.  in  Massachusetts
in  1788;  d.  in  New  York,  7  Oct.,  1868.  He  was  a
son  of  Lemuel  Gates,  an  officer  in  the  Revolution,
who  died  in  1806.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1806,  receiving  the  appoint-
ment of  2d  lieutenant  in  the  regiment  of  artiller-
ists, and  served  in  garrison  until  1812.  When  the
war  with  Great  Britain  began,  he  was  appointed
acting  adjutant  of  light  artillery  and  aide  to  Gen.
Porter,  and  in  1813  ne  was  promoted  to  captain.
He  was  engaged  in  the  capture  of  York  (now  To-
ronto), Canada  West,  and  in  the  bombardment  and
capture  of  Fort  George.  In  May,  1814,  he  was
transferred  to  the  corps  of  artillery,  and  served  in
garrison  and  frontier  duty  for  several  years.  He
was  appointed  captain  of  the  2d  artillery  upon  the
reorganization  of  the  army  in  June,  1821,  and  two
years  later  was  brevetted  major.  He  served  on
garrison  duty  until  1832,  when  he  was  stationed  at
Fort  Moultrie,  Charleston  harbor,  during  the  nulli-
fication troubles.  He  took  part  in  the  Florida
war,  personally  captured  Osceola,  and  escorted  the
Cherokees  to  the  Indian  territory.  He  served  in
the  war  with  Mexico  as  colonel  of  the  3d  artillery,
and  from  1846  till  1848  acted  as  governor  of  Tain-

Sico,  Mexico.  Subsequently  he  served  on  garrifloa
uty,  and  retired  from  active  service  in  1808,  He
was  brevetted  brigadier-genera]  in  1865  for  long
and  faithful  service.— His  son.  Collinson  llce«l.
b.  in  New  York  in  1816; d.  in  Fredericksburg.


gavit


617


tf,S8  •Inn.'.  1*49,  was  graduated  .it  the  I
military  academy  in  lKjii,  iiml  annotated  M  li,-'»-
lenanl  of  the 4th  infantry.  He  served  inth.-Smi-
ii..|r  war  in  1888  "8, whan  be  wu  made  1st  liout«-n-
nut  of  the  8th  infantry.  In  lKts  („•  served  on  the
Lhern  frontier  during  1 1  *•-  Canada  border  die*
turlmn.-es.  II.  was  engaged  again  in  Florida
•gainst  the  Seminole  Indian**  in  1840.  Kfl  1841  he
served  in  Tezaa,  and  In  isr*  In  tin-  war  wit ii  M

was  in  the  battle*  of  Palo  Alt...  8  Mar,  1H46.

and  Rneere  <!«'  la  Palma,  9  May,  ih4<i.  nin  he

was  wounded  and  brevetted  colonel. He  was  ofj

ioe  in 1840,  and  in  the  following

year  returned  t<>  his  regiment.  being  engaged  in

us  important  battles  of  Mexico, In  1848  he

was  in  garrison  at  Jefferson  barracks.  Mo.,  and  in

the  following  year  served  on  frontier  duty  in  Texas.

GATLING,  Richard  Jordan,  Inrentor,  l».  in

Bertford  oounty,  N.  ('..  IS  Sept..  1818. White  yet

a  boy  he  assisted  his  father  in  perfecting  a  machine

for  sowing  <-<>t ton-seed,  and  another  for  thinning

e..tt..n-|ilants. His  first  invention  was  a  screw  for

pro|N*lling  water-craft,  1. ut.  <>n  applying  for  lett.  r>-

gitent,  he  found  that  be  had  been  anticipated  by
riesson.  lie  subsequently  invented  and  patented
a  machine  f«>r  sowing  rice,  and,  on  his  removal  to
St.  Louis  in  1S44,  he  adapted  it  to  sowing  wheal  in
drills.  He  attended  medical  lectures  at  LapOfta,
Ind.,  in  1k47-'n.  and  also  at  the  Ohio  medical  col-
in  Cincinnati  in  1848-'9,  but  never  practised
his  profession.  In  1850  he  invented  a  machine  for
bnsjfc  lllg  hemp,  and  in  1857  a  steam  plough,  which,
however,  was  never  brought  into  use.  In  1861  he
conceived  the  idea  of  his  revolving  battery  gun.
The  first  of  these  was  made  at  Indianapolis  in  1888.
Twelve  were  subsequently  manufactured  and  used
by  Gen.  Butler  on  the  .lames  river.  Vh.  In  1865
Dr.  Getting  further  improved  his  invention,  and  in
1866,  after  satisfactory  trials  at  Washington  and
at  Fortress  Monroe,  the  arm  was  adopted  into  the
l'.  S.  service.  It  is  also  mad.-  in  Austria  and  in
England,  and  is  used  by  several  Kuropean  govern-
ments. As  now  |>erfected,  the  gun  is  made  of
various  calibres  and  weights,  for  different  kinds  of
service,  and  consists  of  a  number  of  simple  breech-
loading  rifled  barrels,  grouped  around  and  revolv-
ing about  a  common  axis,  with  which  they  lie  par-
allel. These  component  barrels  are  loaded  and
fired  while  revolving,  the  empty  cartritlge  shells
being  ejected  in  continuous  succession.  Each  bar-
rel i**  tired  only  once  in  a  revolution,  so  that  a  ten-
barrel  gun  fires  ten  times  in  one  revolution  of  the
group  of  barrels.  The  mode  of  firing  is  simple.
One  man  places  one  end  of  a  feed-case  full  of  car-
tridges into  a  hopper  at  the  top  of  the  nun.  while
another  turns  a  crank  by  which  the  gun  is  revolved.
As  soon  as  the  supply  of  cartridges  in  one  feed-.

haii-t.d,  another  feed-case  may  be  substituted
without  interrupting  the  revolution  or  the  Bucces-
sion  of  discharges.  The  usual  iuimiIkt  of  barrels
DOmposing  the  gun  is  ten.  The  invention  is  now
protected  by  five  patents,  which  cover  successive
Improvements.  The  nature  of  these  may  l«  in-
ferred from  the  statement  that,  whereas  tl tiginal

Qatling  ^un  only  fired  from  250  t<>  :t(M»  shots  |kt
minute,  those  now  made  discharge  l.'2»H>  shots,  as
many  as  500  having  frequently  been  fired  in  two
and  one  half  seconds.  l»r.  Catling  now  (lxs?)  re-
sides in  Hartford,  Conn.  He  has  recently  patented
a  new jrun-mctal.  composed  of  steel  and  aluminum.
c\ls<  HET,  Albert  Samuel,  ethnologist,  b.
in  St.  Beatenberg,  Berne.  Switzerland, :J  Oct..

died at Sen. mutel in is c.[  •;, jn [feme  ,„

id in the universities  of  Heme  and

8. His  attention  was  early  directed


to  philological  researches,  and  in  1865  he  began
the  publication  of  a  series  of  brief  inonograpl
the  I.H-al  etymology  of  his  own  country,  entitled
••  ( hisetymofoK  hungen  sua  der  Scha

In 186?  he  spent  some  time  in  London,

uwaaing antiquarian  investigations  in  the  British

iiiUMMim,  and  during  the  following  year  aasaj  t<>
the  I'llited  States.  At  tir**t  he  settled  ill  New  York,
and  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuit*.  publNh-
ing  several  articles  on  the  languages  of  the  Ameri-
. -an  Indians.  These  |(<1  to  his  being  a|.|>oiuted
ethnologist  of  the  l\  S.  geological  -urvev.  under
Maj.  John  W.  Powell,  and  he  was  occupied  for  a
time  in  arranging  the  linguistic  manuscripts  of  the
Smithsonian  institution.  In  1H?1(  the  bureau  of
ethnology  became  a  department  «.f  the  institution,
and  In-  has  since  been  actively  connected  with  it.
For  the  liettcr  accomplishment  of  his  work,  he  has
made  extensive  trij>s  for  ethnologic  and  lingui*tic
exploration  anions  the  Indians  of  North  America,
including  journeys  to  California  and  Oregon  in
1877,  to  South  Carolina  and  Louisiana  in  lH81-'2,
and  to  Texas,  Louisiana,  and  Mexico  in  1884-'6,
and  is  compiling  an  extensive  report  embodying  his
researches  among  the  Klamath  Lake  and  ModoS
Indians  of  Oregon.  Among  the  languages  of  other
triU-s  discussed  by  him  in  separate  publications
are  the  Timucua.  Tonkawa.  Yuma.  Chuineto.  Creek,
and  Hitchiti.  He  has  published  very  extensively
both  in  magazines  and  government  reports,  also  in
the  volutins  leaned  by  the  American  philosophi-
cal society.  Upward  of  sixty  titles  are  credited  to
him  by  James  C.  I'illing  in  his  "  Bibliography  of
North  American  Languages"  (Washington,  1885).

GAUL,  Gilbert  William,  artist,  b.  in  .Jersey
City.  N.  .1..  81  March,  IN-m.  lie  studied  art  under
John  (J.  Brown,  and  has  devoted  himself  to  genre
painting.  He  was  made  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  design  in  1879,  was  elected  an
academician  in  1882,  and  also  in  that  year  became
a  member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists.
Among  his  works  are  "Stories  of  Liberty  to  the
(  oiifined  "  (1879);  "  Charging  the  Batterv ''  (1882) ;
"  Holding  the  Line  at  all  Hazards,"  which  received
the  first  medal  of  the  American  art  association
(1886) ;  and  "  With  Fate  Against  Them  "  (1887).

GAULT,  Matthew  Hamilton,  Canadian  capi-
talist, b.  in  Strabane.  Ireland,  in  July,  1H2'2:  d.  in
Montreal,  1  June,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  home,
and  in  1*4-5  went  to  Canada  and  engaged  in  the
insurance  business.  Subsequently  he  was  for  sev-
eral years  resident  manager  of  the  Hritish  Ameri-
can assurance  company  for  the  province  of  Qnebeft,
director  of  the  Hicheiieu  and  Ontario  navigation
company,  and  interested  in  many  other  industrial
and  financial  enterprises.  He  was  the  founder  of
the  Irish-l'mtestant  Unevolent  society  of  Mon-
treal, and  took  an  active  interest  for  many  years
in  the  Montreal  garrison  artillery,  from  which  he
retired  in  1800,  retaining  his  rank  as  an  officer.
Bf  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment, for  Montreal  west,  in  1878,  and  was  re-el eet.d
in  1888.  Hi  was  a  Conservative,  and  favored  the
protection  of  native  industries.

GAVIT,  John  K..  engraver,  b.  in  New  York,
29  Oct..  1*17:  d.  in  Stockbridge.  Mass.,  88  Am;..
1871.  At  an  early  age  he  went  to  Allwiiy.  where
he  engaged  in  steel-engraving  and  printing.  As
an  engraver  <>f  hank-note*,  hi*  attention  was  di-
rected to  the  study  of  finance  and  banking  in  their
relations  to  engraving,  and  by  his  inventive  and
mechanical  talent  he  S00B  made  improvement-  in
his  work.  In  1808  be  seriated  in  organizing  the
American  l»ank-note  eompany  in  New  York,  and
in 1858  united  his  business  with  that  enterprise.


618


GAY


GAY


I


He  held  the  office  of  secretary  from  the  time  of  its
organization  until  lM«»ti.  when  he  was  elected  yn->\-

deiit,  anil  remained  in  oflee  till  his  death. I  ndec

hi-  direction  the  company  famished  bonds,  bank-
notes,  revenue-stamps  for  the  governments  and
hanks  of  Spain,  Italy,  Greece.  Switzerland,  South
and  Central  America,  as  well  as  tor  the  govern-
ment  of  the  United  States.  He  took  an  active
interest  in  astronomy,  and  aided  in  establishing
the  Dudley  observatory  in  Albany.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  president  of  the  Microscopical
society  of  New  York,  anil  he  had  made  numerous
investigations  in  this  branch  of  science.

(JAY,  Claude,  French  naturalist,  b.  in  Dra-
mignan.  1*  March,  1800;  d.in  Paris,  6  April,  1803.
In  1882  he  went  to  Paris  to  assist  at  the  course  of
lectures  in  the  museum,  in  order  to  study  zoology
and  prepare  himself  for  voyages  that  he  projected.
After  a  preliminary  excursion  to  Greece  and  Asia
Minor,  he  went  to  Chili  to  study  the  flora  of  South
America,  arriving  at  Valparaiso  in  March,  1828.
The  results  of  this  expedition  were  so  important
that  the  Chilian  government  commissioned  him,  in
1829,  to  take  astronomical  observations  and  pre-
pare a  scientific  survey  of  the  republic.  But  he  was
greatly  hampered  in  his  work  by  want  of  proper
instruments,  and  in  1832  went  to  Paris,  where,
during  a  stay  of  six  months,  several  instruments  of
his  own  invention  were  constructed  for  him.  He
returned  to  Chili  in  1833,  and  began  a  ten-years'
exploration  of  the  republic,  in  which  he  visited
every  province  and  the  islands  of  Juan  Fernandez
and  the  archipelago  of  Chiloe.  He  made  also  the
most  detailed  bibliographic  investigations,  taking
copies  of  every  important  document,  and  soon  had
gathered  an  enormous  collection  of  historical  facts
and  an  herbarium  of  over  4,000  species.  The  gov-
ernment bestowed  the  highest  honors  upon  him,
ami  in  1841  congress  appropriated  the  means  to
publish  his  work.  He  also  explored  Peru  and  the
course  of  the  Ucayali  river,  and  visited  Buenos
Ayres  and  Rio  Janeiro,  and  in  1843  returned  to
France,  where  he  prepared  for  publication  his  great
work  "Historia  Fisica  y  Politica  de  Chile"  (Paris
and  Santiago,  1843-'ol,  24  vols.,  with  an  atlas  in  2
vols.).  In  May,  1856,  Gay  was  elected  a  member  of
the  Academy  of  sciences  in  the  botanical  section.
He  made  a  journey  through  Russia  and  Tartary  in
1856-'8,  and  toward  the  end  of  the  latter  year  was
sent  by  the  academy  to  study  the  mining  system  of
the  United  States,  returning  in  1860.  He  published,
besides  his  great  work  mentioned  above,  •'  Conside-
raciones  sobre  las  Minas  de  Mercurio  de  Andacolla
e  Illapel  con  su  posici6n  Geologica  "  (Valparaiso,
1837 ;  Paris,  1851) ;  "  Noticias  sobre  las  tslas  de
Juan  Fernandez  "  (Valparaiso,  1840) ;  "  Origine  de
la  Pomme  de  terre  "  (Paris,  1851 ;  a  translation  of
an  article  in  "La  Araucana"  of  Santiago  in  1834);
"  Triple  variation  de  l'aiguille  aimantee  dans  les
parties  Ouest  de  l'Amerique"  (1854);  "Carte  ge-
nerale  du  Chili "  (1855) ;  "  Considerations  sur  les
Mines  du  Perou,  comparees  aux  mines  du  Chili"
(1855) ;  "  Notes  sur  le  Bresil,  Buenos  Ayres,  et  Rio
de  Janeiro  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Rapport  k  l'academie
dee  sciences  sur  les  mines  des  Etats-Unis  "  (1861).

(JAY,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dedham,
Mm—.,  26  Aug.,  1696;  d.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  in
1787.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1714,
taught  school  at  Hwltey  and  Ipswich,  at  the  same
time  studying  theology,  and  in  1718  became  pastor
of  the  church  at  Hingham,  Mass.,  where  ne  re-
mained till  his  death,  preaching  in  the  same  pulpit
within  three  months  of  seventy  years.  He  was  a
man  of  great  learning,  and  celebrated  for  his  wit.
His  theology  was  liberal,  and  he  is  regarded by


some  as  the  father  of  American  I  uitarianism.  K\-
Pn-ident  John  Adams  said,  09  the  Aral  distinctive
announcement  of  Unitarian  principles  in  this  coun-
try, that  he  had  heard  the  doctrine  from  Dr.  Qaj
long  before.  Savage  sj>eaks  of  him  ee  "the  hon-
ored patriarch  of  our  New  England  pulpit  in  that
n^<\"  He  was  a  Tory  during  the  Revolution,  and
suffered  some  persecution  at  the  hand-  of  bia  own
parishioners.  lie  married  Jerusha  Bradford,  a
granddaughter  of  Gov.  Bradford,  of  Plymouth
colony,  and  by  her  had  a  large  family.  Dr.  (Jay
published  many  sermons,  among  them  one  delivered
on  his  eighty-fifth  birthday,  from  the  text  "  Lo,  I
am  this  day  fourscore  and  five  years  old,"  which
became  widely  known  under  the  title  of  "  The  Old
Man's  Calendar,"  and  went  through  several  editions
both  here  and  in  England,  being  also  translated
into  some  of  the  continental  languages  of  Europe.
— His  son,  Jot  ham,  b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  in  1  7m  |
d.  there  in  1802,  was  a  colonel  in  the  Continental
army,  served  through  the  old  French  war,  and  was
part  of  the  time  governor  of  Fort  Edward  in  Nova
Scotia.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  left
the  army,  being  a  Tory,  and  was  a  refugee  in  Nova
Scotia  during  the  war.  He  resided  for  the  rest  of
his  life  in  Hingham. — Ebenezer's  grandson,  Sam-
uel, b.  in  Boston  in  1755;  d.  in  Fort  Cumberland,
New  Brunswick,  21  Jan.,  1847,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1775,  and  emigrated  to  Nova  Scotia  in
1776  with  his  father,  Martin,  who  was  formally
banished  from  Massachusetts  as  a  Tory  in  1778.
The  son  afterward  settled  in  New  Brunswick,  was
a  member  of  the  first  house  of  assembly  of  that
province,  and  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common
pleas. — Ebenezer's  great-grandson,  Martin,  physi-
cian, son  of  Ebenezer  Gay,  of  Hingham,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  16  Feb.,  1803;  d.  there,  12  Jan.,  1850,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823.  He  had  a  high  rep-
utation as  an  analytical  chemist,  and  his  frequent
testimony  as  a  witness  in  courts  of  justice,  in  cases
of  death  by  poisoning,  marks  an  era  in  the  history  of
medical  jurisprudence  in  this  country. — Martin's
brother,  Sydney  Howard,  author,  b.  in  Hingham,
Mass.,  in  1814;  d.  in  New  Brighton,  Staten  Island,
2")  June,  1888,  entered  Harvard,  but  was  obliged
to  give  up  study  on  account  of  his  health.  The
degree  of  A.  B.  was
afterward  conferred
upon  him.  After
some  years,spent  part-
ly in  travel,  partly  in
a  counting-house  in
Boston,  he  began  the
study  of  law  in  his
father's  office  in  Hing-
ham. -  But  he  soon
abandoned  it  from
conscientious  scruples
concerning  the  oath  to
support  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United
States;  for  he  came
to  the  conclusion  that,
if  one  believed  slavery
to  be  absolutely  and
morally  wrong,  he  had
no  right  to  swear  allegiance  to  a  constitution  that
recognized  it  as  just  and  legal,  and  required  the
return  of  fugitives  from  bondage.  Of  the
risonian  abolitionists,"  with  whom  he  thereafter
cast  his  lot,  he  says:  "This  handful  of  people,  to
the  outside  world  "a  set  of  pestilent  fanatii  -
among  themselves  the  most  charming  circle  of
cultivated  men  and  women  that  it  has  ev<
my  lot  to  know." In  1842  he  became  a  lecturing


I.  \\


-.  LI  \ u i: l ;


r.isi


agent  f<<r  tin-  American  anti  and

in  Is  1 1  r.|it«>r  of  the  "  Anti-Sliiv.n  Standard."
published  in  New  York.  This  plan  M  retained
till  1N58,  when  be  became  editorially  eonn<
with  the  "Tribune,"  of  which,  from  1N02  till  i
In-  was  managing  editor.  Henry  Wilson,  after-
ward vice-president  of  the  I'm  ted  States,  said:
"The  man  deserved  wall  Of  his  country  who  kept
tin-  'Tribona'  a  war  j»a|MT  in  spite  "f  Greeley."
Mr.  (iav  was  managing  editor  of  the  Chicago
bone"  from  isnx  till  thi  graft  lire  ..f  187L
During  the  following  winter  he  acted  with  the  relief

committee,  and  wrote  their  first  public  reiHirt.  in  the
spring  of  ls7«\  of  their  frreat  work  of  t tit*  jmiM  mx
nnmths.  Sul»S4Mjue!itlv.  for  two  years,  he  VM  <>u  the
editorial  statf  of  the  New  York"  Kvcning  Post."  In
;.  William  Cullen  Bryant,  being  invited  to  join
a  great  publishing-house  in  the  enterprise  of  pre-
paring an  illustrated  history  of  the  United  States,
consented  on  condition  that  .Mr.  (iav  should  l>e  its
author.  a.s  he  himaelf  could  not  think  of  undertak-
ing such  a  work  at  his  advanced  age.  Mr.  Bryant
wrote  the  preface  to  the  first  volume,  while  the
history  Itself  was  written  by  Mr.  (ray,  with  the
help  of  several  collalx.rotors  in  special  chapters,  to
whom  lie  gives  credit  in  his  prefaces.  This  work
-■.>>.  Now  York,  18?(&-'81),  beginning  with
the  prehistoric  races  of  America  and  coming
down  to  the  close  of  the  civil  war,  introduced  a
new  treatment  of  American  historv,  which  has
been followed by  later  writers  and has  become

Sopular.  Mr.  Gay  afterward  wrote  a  "  Life  of
ames  Madison"  (Boston,  1884%  He  was  engaged
on  a  life  of  Edmund  Qtrfncy  for  tho  series  of  the
"American  Men  of  Letters,"  when  he  was  inter-
rupted bv  a  long  and  serious  illness. — Another
brother.  S\  inch  worth  Allan,  artist,  b.  in  Hing-
ham,  Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1821,  was  a  pupil  of  Prof.
Robert  W.  weir,  and  studied  in  Italy  and  France,
a  part  of  the  time  with  Trovon.  He  resides
in  Hingham,  and  has  attained  reputation  as  a
nainicr  of  mountain  and  sea-coast  scenery.  He
ha>  travelled  in  Egypt.  China,  and  Japan.  "A
.Sen,'  in  the  White  Mountains,"  painted  for  the
Boston  athemeum,  and  "A  Beam  in  Japan,"  paint-
ed for  the  Somerset  club,  of  Boston,  are  specimens
of  his  earlier  and  later  styles.  Among  his  pictures
exhibited  at  the  National  academy  in  New  York
iitv  are  "Mackerel  Fleet,  Beverly  Coast.  Mass."
0888),  and  "The  Doge's  Palace,  Venice"  (1K75).
His  •  Windmills  of  IMftshaven,  Holland,"  was  at
the  Centennial  exhibition  at  Philadelphia  in  1878,
and  was  spoken  of  in  the  official  report  as  "a  very
admirable  picture." — Winckworth  Allan's  nephew,
Walter,  artist,  b.  in  Hingham,  Mam.  81  Jan.,
1850,  entered  a  business  office  in  his  youth,  but
was  sent  in  1*72,  for  his  health,  to  a  cattle-ranch
in  Nebraska.  He  returned  to  Boston  at  the  age  of
seventeen,  and  began  immediately  to  iwiint  flower
subjects,  one  of  which,  "  Fall  Flowers,  '  was  exhib-
ited at  the  Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition
(lM?<i).  In  tlii^  \ear  ho  went  to  Paris  and  entered
the  studio  of  Bonnat.  At  the  end  of  three  years
he  made  a  visit  to  Spain,  the  influence  of  which
was  seen  in  his  first  important  picture,  "The  Penc-
ing  Laaaon,"  exhibited  at  the  Paris  salon  (18
His  other  works  include  "The  Trained  Pigeons"
lb:  "Troubles  of  a  Bachelor"  (1881);  "The
Knife-Grinder"  (1882);  "Conspiracy  under  Louis
XVI  »  The  Spinners "( 1885") ;  -  The  W<

:  and  "Richelieu"  (1887),  all  of  which

shown at the  Paris  salon,  and  "The  Spiu-

ived  honorable  mention.

<.\\. I  •hvnrd,  artist,  b.  in Ireland  in Is::

lie  began  to  study  art  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  with  James


Hart,  and  went  to  Germany  in  1862,  where  he
studied  with  Bohtnner  in  Uarfarnha,  and  subse-
quently with  (jessing  in  DQsaeldorf.  He  returned
t«»  the  United  State*  in  1807,  and  opened  a  studio
in  New  York.  In  1870  he  was  elected  a  National
academician,  and  has  regularly  contributed  to  the
exhibitions  of  the  Academy  and  to  those  of  the
Water-color  societ  v.  Among  his  works  are  "  Moun-
tain Stream"  (1880);  "  Swabian  Home"  (1809);
"Late  afternoon,  near  Alban  >ady

for  the  Reapers  "(1875);  -a  Quiet  Sour"  (Iff!
-The  Slopes  of  the  Mohawk"  (1h77);  "East  Chea-
ter. N. V  .  "The I...
Time"  (18 itherinj  the  Laara"  d*-

"Old Estates"  (1881); "Banks  of the  Tlw.i:

-:<:  "On  the  Sogne  Fjord,  Norway
"GotOn  (train  "  (1KS:{);  ami  •*  Norwegian  Scene"
1 1VV>1).  His  water-colors  include  "  PogjgJ  Morning
bv  the  Lake"  (1876);  "  A  Spring Morning "  (1877);
•Waving  Grain"  (1884);  ••  Kiverside*  (1884):
"  IIavmaking"(l884  :  Kve-Ficlds  in  Earl v  June"
(1885);  "Hill-Side"  (1885):  "Ovst.r-Ii.-ds'  in  Pel-
ham  Bay"  (1885);  and  "Salt  Marshes"  fl8f

GAY,"  Picard  du,  French  anlorar,  lived  in  the
17th  century.  He  accompanied  Father  Hennepin
and  Michael  Akoon  a  voyage  to  explore  the  sources
of  tho  Mississippi  river.  They  left  Fort  CltvauuWf
on  29  Feb.,  1080,  in  a  small  canoe,  and  sailed  down
the  Illinois  river.  After  waiting  for  the  Mississippi
to  become  clear  of  floating  ice,  thev  turned  north-
ward, and  on  11  April,  1080,  arrived  in  WleoOttsJn,
where  they  were  surprised  by  a  body  of  Indians  in
thirty-three  canoes,  who  captured  the  party  and
seized  their  goods.  On  the  following  dav  the  calu-
met was  smoked,  the  rude  treatment  changed  for
civility,  and  the  explorers  were  allowed  to  depart.
After  railing  nineteen  days  they  came  in  view  of
the  cataract,  which  Hennepin  named  the  "Falls
of  St.  Anthony,"  in  honor  of  his  patron  saint.  Sub*
sequently  they  were  captured  lay  the  Sioux,  but
were  permitted  various  liberties,  and  Hennepin
and  Ako  went  on  an  exploring  trip  of  several
weeks,  leaving  Picard  du  Gay  in  charge  of  tho
sword,  pistols,  and  powder.  They  remained  in  this
region  for  three  months,  when  they  met  a  party  of
five  Frenchmen  under  the  command  of  Sieur*  du
Luth,  who  had  arrived  by  way  of  the  St.  Ijawrence.
Hennepin,  (iav,  and  Ako  joined  this  party,  and,
after  wandering  among  the  savage  triltes  for  a
while,  returned  to  Canada  in  September,  1080.

GAYARRE,  Charles  Etienne  Arthur,  histo-
rian, b.  in  New  Orleans.  La*  9  Jan.,  1805.  He  was
educated  at  the  College  of  New  Orleans.  In  1825,
the  draft  of  a  criminal  code  having  been  laid  be-
fore the  state  legislature  by  Edward  Livingston,
Gayarre  published  a  pamphlet  opposing  some  of  its
provisions,  particularly  tnat  relating  to  the  aboli-
tion of  capital  punishment.  He  went  to  Phila-
delphia in  1888,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  there  in  1828,  returning  to  New  Orleans
in  1S2!>.  In  the  same  year  he  was  fleeted  to  the
legislature,  and  was  chosen  bv  that  body  to  write
an  address  complimenting  the  French  chambers  on
the  revolution  of  lsctn.  He  snw appointed  deputy
attorney-general  of  the  state  in  IXil.  and  in  1888
presiding  judge  of  the  city  court  of  New  Orleans.
In  is:!.")  In-  was  elected  to  the  lT.  S.  senate,  but
impaired  health  prevented  his  taking  his  gent,  and
he  went  to  Kurope,  where  he  remained  for  nearly
eight  years.  In  1844  he  again  entered  the  state
legislature,  and  was  re  olcoted  in  1840.  He  was
appointed  secretary  of  state  in  »he  latter  year  and
again  in  18.V1,  retaining  theofli.e  for  seven  year*.
In  IH.%;{  'udge  (iayarrc  was  an  Bnenoomfn]  Inde-
pendent candidate  for  congress. During  the  civil


020


GAYLE


GEARY


C.  /s«  r/i-J C.  r»y  o


««rhe«pOMMd  t  he  cause  of  the  seceding  state-,  ami
in  1868  delivered  an  address  urging  the  arming  ><(
the  slaves  ami  their  emancipation,  conditioned  on

the  recognition  of
the  Confederacy
by  France  and
England.  Since
the  war  he  has
been  for  some
time  reporter  of
the  state  su-
preme court.  1 1  is
historical  works
comprisethcllis-
toire  dfl  la  Loui-
siane "  (2  vols.,
New  Orleans,
1847);  "Romance
of  the  Histo-
ry of  Louisiana  "
(New  York,  1848);
••  Louisiana,  its
Colonial  History  and  Romance"  (New  York,  1851);
-Louisiana,  its  History  as  a  French  Colony"  (2
vols.,  1851-'2) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Spanish  Domi-
nation in  Louisiana  from  1769  to  December,  1803  "
(1K54).  The  complete  "  History  of  Louisiana,"  re-
vised and  brought  down  to  1861,  afterward  ap-
peared (3  vols.,  1866).  He  is  the  author  of  "  Philip
11.  of  Spain,"  a  biography,  with  an  introduction
by  George  Bancroft  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  Fernando
de  Lemos,  Truth  and  Fiction,"  a  novel  (1872);  and
"Aubert  Dubayet,"  sequel  to  the  foregoing  (Bos-
ton, 1882).  He  has  also  published  a  drama,  "The
School  for  Politics  "  (1854),  "  Dr.  Bluff,"  a  comedy
in  two  acts,  and  several  literary  and  political  ad-
dresses, among  which  are  two  lectures  on  "The
Influence  of  the  Mechanic  Arts."

GAYLE,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Sumter  dis-
trict, S.  C,  11  Sept.,  1792;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in
July,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  South  Carolina,  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  In  1813  he  removed  to  Mobile,  where
he  began  to  practise  his  profession.  He  was  a
member  of  the  territorial  legislature  in  1817,  solic-
itor of  the  1st  judicial  district  in  1819,  judge  of
the  state  supreme  court  in  1823,  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives,  and  its  speaker  in
1829.  From  1831  till  1835  he  served  as  governor
of  Alabama.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1836
and  in  1840.  He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  and  served  in  1847-'9.  He  became  judge
of  the  I .  S.  district  court  of  Alabama  in  1849.
He  had  brilliant  talents.

GAYLER.  Charles,  dramatist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  1  April,  1820.  He  early  began  journalistic
work,  and  in  1848  edited  the  Cincinnati  "  Evening
Despatch."  He  also  at  this  time  wrote  for  the
stage.  In  1850  he  returned  to  New  York  and  be-
came connected  with  the  press,  and  is  still  (1887)  a
frequent  contributor.  He  has  produced  upon  the
American  and  London  stage  more  than  one  hun-
dred plays,  comedies,  dramas,  burlesques,  etc.,  the
majority  of  which  have  received  favorable  recog-
nition. Among  these  are  "  The  Gold-Hunters  "
(1849);  "  Taking  the  Chances"  (1851) ;  "The  Love
of  a  Prince  " ;  "  The  Son  of  the  Night " ;  "  The
Magic  Marriage " ;  "A  Mistress  of  Arts " ;  " The
Connie  Soogah";  "The  Refugees";  "The  Ameri-
can Cousin  at  Home  "  ;  "  Our  Female  American
Cousin  " ;  "  Olympiana  "  ;  "  The  Robbers  of  the
Khin-o";  "The  Romance  of  a  Very  Poor  Young
Man";  "The  Life  Shadow";  "Aspasia";  "The
Child-Stealer  *' ;  "Night  and  Morning";  "The
Wizard's  Tempest  "  ;  "  Out  of  the  Streets" ;  "  Dust


and  Diamonds";  "With  the  Tide";  'Fritz";
"Inflation";  "  Brom  Bones  ":"  Sleepy  Hollow";
".lucijuinc" ;  "  Lord  Tatters";  "Kissing  the
King  ';  "Jalma";  "The  Bohemian";  "  Under  t lu-
lling ";  and  "  Miss  Mollie."  He  has  also  written
m  \eral  novels,  among  which  are  "  Montagone,"
"The  Romance  of  a  Poor  Young  Girl."  ••  out -of
the  Streets,"  "  Pet,"  and  "The  Cousin  Germain."

GAZZAXIGA,  Signora,  vocalist,  b.  in  Voghera,
Sardinia,  in  1825.  She  studied  in  the  Milan  mu-
sical conservatory,  and  made  her  earliest  appear-
ance in  1844  at  the  opera-house  in  Venice.  After
various  engagements  in  the  principal  cities  of
Italy,  she  married  in  1850  the  titular  Italian
marquis  di  Malispina.  During  the  year  l>s.">7  aha
came  to  the  United  States,  and  appeared  in  Phila-
delphia on  23  Feb.  with  an  Italian  opera-company.
On  13  April  she  performed  in  New  York  city,  where
she  at  once  became  a  great  attraction,  and  retained
her  popularity  for  several  years.  But  afterward,
when  younger  artists  had  replaced  her,  she  was
left  to  the  representation  of  parts  of  secondary  im-
portance. Gazzaniga  successfully  taught  vocal  mu-
sic fcr  several  years  in  New  York  city  and  Phila-
delphia, and  then,  with  a  competence,  retired  to
professional  obscurity  in  her  native  land.

GEAR,  John  Henry,  governor  of  Iowa,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  7  April,  1825.  He  removed  to  Fort
Snelling  in  1836,  and  in  1843  became  a  citizen
of  Burlington,  Iowa,  where  he  has  since  been  en-
gaged as  a  merchant.  He  was  an  original  member
of  the  Republican  party  of  Iowa,  and  in  1863  was
elected  mayor  of  Burlington.  From  1874  till  1876
he  served  as  speaker  in  the  general  assembly  of
Iowa,  and  for  two  sessions  was  the  presiding  officer
of  the  state  house  of  representatives.  He  held  the
office  of  governor  from  1878  till  1882.

GEARY,  John  White,  soldier,  b.  near  Mount
Pleasant,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  30  Dec.,  1819 ;  d.
in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  8  Feb.,  1873.  His  father  was
of  Scotch-Irish  descent.  The  son  entered  Jefferson
college,  but,  on  account  of  his  father's  loss  of  prop-
erty and  sudden  death,  was  compelled  to  leave  and
contribute  toward  the  support  of  the  family.  After
teaching  he  became  a  clerk  in  a  commercial  house
in  Pittsburg,  and  afterward  studied  mathematics,
civil  engineering,  and  law.  He  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  but  never  practised  his  profession.  After
some  employment  as  civil  engineer  in  Kentucky,
he  was  appointed  assistant  superintendent  and  en-
gineer of  the  Alleghany  Portage  railroad.  When
war  was  declared  with  Mexico,  in  1846,  he  became
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2d  regiment  of  Pennsyl-
vania volunteer  infantry,  and  commanded  his  regi-
ment at  Chapultepec,  where  he  was  wounded,  but
resumed  his  command  the  same  day  at  the  attack
on  the  Belen  gate.  For  this  service  he  was  made
first  commander  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  colonel
of  his  regiment.  He  was  appointed  in  1849  to  be
first  postmaster  of  San  Francisco,  with  authority  to
establish  the  postal  service  throughout  California.
He  was  the  first  American  alcalde  of  San  Francisco,
and  a  "judge  of  the  first  instance."  These  offices
were  of  Mexican  origin,  the  "  alcalde  "  combining
the  authority  of  sheriff  and  probate  judge  with
that  of  mayor,  and  the  judge  of  the  first  instance
presiding  over  a  court  with  civil  and  criminal
as  well  as  admiralty  jurisdiction.  Col.  Geary  -
until  the  new  constitution  abolished  these  offices.
In  1850  he  became  the  first  mayor  of  San  Fran-
cisco. He  took  a  leading  part  in  the  formation  of
the  new  constitution  of  California,  and  was  chair-
man of  the  territorial  Democratic  committee.  In
1852  he  retired  to  his  farm  in  Westmoreland  conn-
ty,  Pa.,  and  remained  in  private  life  until  1856,


m


when be wu  appointed territorial governor <>f
.i>,  which  « > ITi« -•- In- held OM ><-nr. Bi tln-n

returned  to  Penneylvanhv  Hii<i  ut  the  beginning  of

ivil  war  raised  the  98th  Pennsylvania  volun-

mended  in  several  engagements,  and

distinction  el  Ii*»livur  Height*,  when  In*  was

wounded. He  occupied  Lessburg,  \'a..  m  March,

. and routed  Gen. Hill. On  23  April, !

■  I  the  commission  of  brigadier-general  Of
t  S,  volunteers,  He  wee  esveral)  woanaed  in  the
arm  nt  (  edar  Mountain,  '.»  Aug..  1808,  iiikI  in  con-
sequence could  not  take  part  in  tin-  battel  of  An
i  ii.  At  tin-  battles  nf  Chauccllorsville  and
Oettysbarg  he  I«n1  the  2d  division  <»f  the  19th  corps.
The  oorps  to  which  Geo.  Qearv*i  regiment  wasat-
ied  joined  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  nnder
(nil.  Hookers  command,  to  aid  in  repairing  tin-
ier at  Chickamauga,  and  he  took  part  in  tin-
battles  of  rVauhatohie  and  Lookout  Mountain,  in
Ix-tli  <>f  which  he  was  distinguished,  lie  com-
manded the  2d  division  of  the  80th  OOtpi  in  Sher-
man's march  to  the  sea,  and  was  the  first  to  enter
iimali  after  its  evacuation,  H  Deft.  1*04.  In
consideration  of  his  services  at  Fort  Jackson  he
was  appointed  military  governor  of  Savannah,  and
in  1805  he  was  promoted  to  be  major-general  by
brevet.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Pennsylvania
in  1866,  and  held  this  office  until  two  weeks  tiefore
his  death.  During  his  administration  the  debt  of
the  commonwealth  was  reduced,  an  effort  to  take
ral  millions  from  the  sinking  fund  of  the  state
bonds  was  prevented,  a  disturbance  at  Williatns-
jx>rt  qneUeO,  and  a  bureau  of  lal>or  statistics  es-
tablished by  the  legislature.  IS  April,  is?-,'.  Gov.
Geary  |>ossessed  great  powers  of  application  and
perception,  force  of  will,  and  soundness  of  judg-
ment, and  was  |N>piilar  among  his  troops.  The  gen-
eral assembly  lias  erected  a  monument  at  his  grave
in  Haniaburg.  See  "Gov.  Geary's  Administra-
tion in  Kansas,"  bv  John  II.  Gihon  (Philadelphia,
1867V— Hie  son.  Edward  Ratchford,  h.  in  West-
moreland county,  Pa.,  14  Sept..  1846;  killed  in  the
battle  of  Wauhatchie,  Lookout  .Mountain,  8B  Oct.,
1863,  left  the  sophomore  class  in  Jefferson  college
in  1861  to  enlist  as  a  private  in  the  28th  Pennsyl-
vania regiment,  lie  became  captain  of  Hampton
battery,  and  subsequently  a  lieutenant  in  Knapp's
I  <attrrv,  which  post  lie  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.
He  was  engaged  at  Cedar  Mountain,  Antietam,
Clianiellorsville,  and  Gettysburg.

GKHDKS.  George,  engineer,  b.  in  Fairmount,

On lags co.. N. V.. 14 Feb., 1809;  d. in  New

York  state,  8  Oct.,  1883. He  studied  engineering
and  surveying  in  Middletown.  Conn.,  and  law  in
Skancatcles,  N.  Y. In 1830  he  returned  to his
home  and  assumed  charge  of  the  farm. He  was  a
member  of  the  senate  of  the  state  of  New  York  in
1"  17.  and  re-elected  in  184U. He  made  an  exhaust-
ive report in favor  of  a  railroad  law  that  would
enable  [>crsons  to  construct  and  operate  railroads
without  s|M-.-ial  legislation,  and  a  bill  of  this  kind
was  passed  in  the  senate  in 1851. He  had  charge
of  lowering  the  canal  of  Seneca  river,  from
till 1856. In 1861  he  was  president  of  the  New
York  state  agricultural  society,  and  in  1865-*71  su-
parintendent  of  Onondaga  salt  springs. He  was  a
contributor  to  newspa|>ers  and  magazines.
GKIH>r!S, James, engineer, b. near  Carlisle.
ilv. 17»hl;  d. in Geddcs, Onondaga  co.,
..  18  Aug.,  1889. He  obtained  ■  limited  edo
ii  while  working  on  a  farm,  and in 1784  re-
moved to Onondaga county,  where  the  town of
:>  was  named  in  his  honor. He  organized  a
ipanj  for  the  manufacture  of  salt  in  that  coun-
ty in  IT'.M. He  was  prominent  in  urging  the  pro-


ject lor •  canal  from  Lake  Krie  to  Hudson  river,
ami  in  1808 wm  appointed  tomakethepraUminarj

siirvivs  ..f  the  route.  lb*  wes  elected  a  magfot
in  1800,  ■  member  of  the  State  legislature  in
and  1818,  an  associate  county  justice  in  1809,  and
judge  of  the  common  pleas  in  1*12.  From  1*13
till  1Mb")  be  represented  Maw  York  in  congress.  In
1816  he  liecame  engineer  of  the  Krie  canal,  and
two  years  later  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of
tli*-  (hamplaiu  canal,  tie  was  appointed  to  make
surveys  for  a  canal  from  Ohio  river  to  Lftka  Krie  in
In  1827  he  was  emplojed  to  kwata  the
('licsji|Make  and  Ohio  canal,  mid  in  1888  was  engi-
neer for  the  canals  of  Pennsylvania.

GKUUKS,  James  Lorraine,  soldier,  b.  in  Kdin-
burgh,  Scotland,  1!»  March,  1827;  d.  in  Ames,  Story
oo.,  Iowa.  81  Pen,  1887,  In  1881  he  was  brought
by  his  father,  (apt.  Alexander  (ieddea,  to  Canada.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  returned  to  Scotland,  but
soon  sailed  for  India,  where,  after  st  inlying  for  two
ram  at  the  Brltiah  military  academy  in  Calcutta,
ne  enlisted  in  the  Roval  horse  artillerv,  Bervmg
seven  years  under  Sir  Hugh  Gough,  Sir  Charles  Na-
pier, and  Sir  Colin  Camplicil.  He  passed  through
the  Puujaiib  campaign,  was  present  at  the  battle
of  Kyber  Pass,  and  ascended  the  Himalayas  with
the  last-named  officer  in  the  expedition  against  the
hill  tribes.  For  his  services  he  was  rewarded  with
a  medal  and  clasp.  At  the  end  of  ten  years  he
returned  to  his  home  in  Camilla,  and  was  commis-
sioned colonel  of  a  cavalry  regiment  ;  but  he  soon
n -signed  from  the  army,  emigrating  to  Iowa  in
1857,  and  settled  at  Vinton,  Benton  co.  At  the
In-ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  gave  up  his  place  as
a  teacher  and  in  August.  1W1.  enlisted  as  a  pri-
vate in  the  Nth  Iowa  regiment.  He  was  rapidly
Eroraoted  captain,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel,
eing ultimately  luevettcd  brigadier-general  in  the
volunteer  service,  5  June,  1865.  At  Shiloh  he  was
wounded  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  re-
maining a  prisoner  until  early  in  1863,  when  he
was  exchanged  and  again  saw  service  under  Gen.
Grant  at  Vicksburg  and  under  (icn.  Sherman  at
Jackson,  Miss.  In  October.  1863,  he  was  placed
in  command  of  a  brigade  and  ordered  to  Browns-
ville, Texas.  Subsequently  he  was  made  provost-
marshal  of  Memphis,  and  by  his  exertions  the  city-
was  probably  saved  from  capture  by  the  Confed-
erate Gen.  Forrest.  During  the  Mobile  campaign
he  commanded  a  brigade,  and  to  him  is  due  the
capture  of  Spanish  tort.  The  defences  of  that
work  were  considered  impregnable ;  but  on  one
side  ran  a  ravine,  beyond  which  was  a  bluff.  This
vulnerable  point  was  soon  discovered  by  Gen.
Geddes,  who  pushed  his  men  up  the  ravine,  over
the  bluff,  and  into  the  enemy's  works,  being  actu-
ally in  possession  before  the  commandant  of  the
fort  had  learned  the  fact,  or  it  had  become  known
to  (icn.  (ieddes's  superior  officer.  After  the  war
he  had  charge  of  the  blind-asylum  at  Vinton  for
several  years,  took  part  in  the  organization,  and
for  fifteen  years  shared  in  the  management  of
the  Iowa  college  of  agriculture  at  Ames,  Story  co.,
serving  at  different  times  as  vice-president,  pro-
fessor of  military  tactics,  treasurer,  and  land-agent,
(ien.  Geddes  wrote  several  war-songs,  which  were
set  to  music  and  Ix-came  widely  jtopular.  Among
them  were  "The  .Soldier's  Hat  tie- Prayer "  and
"The  Stars  and  Stri|»es."

GKIHU'.S.  John,  ■preraot  of  South  Carolina,
h,  in  Charleston.  S.  ('..  alxnit  1773;  d.  there,  5
March.  1888,  Ha  was  the  son  of  a  merchant,  and
was  educated  at  the  College  of  Charleston,  He
studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1797.
lb-  was  elected  to the house of representatives  of


VrJ'2


(iKDI)INGS


QBPPRAED


South  Carolina,  and  in  1810  and  1812  was  chosen
s|M'iik<T.  In  Is Is  I"'  was  tinted  governor,  which
office  In-  held  until  ly~(».  During  his  admiuist ra-
tion lie  entertained  President  Monroe  at  his  house
OB  BlOtd  street,  in  Charleston.  He  was  major  of
cavalry  in  ls()M,  and  after  his  service  as  governor
was  made  brigadier-general  of  militia.

GEDDINGS,  Ell,  physician,!),  in  the  district
of  Newberry,  S.  ('..  in  1  ?!)!>;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
'.»  t)(t..  l.sTH.  His  first  education  was  received  in
Abbeville  academy,  and  he  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine by  the  examining  board  of  the  Medical  society
of  South  Carolina  in  1820.  He  began  practice  in
St.  George's  parish,  Colleton  district,  but  soon  re-
turned to  Abbeville,  where  he  formed  a  oonnectfon
with  Dr.  E.  S.  Davis.  During  the  winter  of  1821-2
he  attended  lectures  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. He  went  to  Calhoun  settlement,  Abbeville
district,  where  he  continued  until  1824,  when  he
removed  to  Charleston,  ami  was  one  of  the  first  to
receive  a  degree  from  the  Medical  college  in  1825.
He  voluntarily  discharged  the  duties  of  demonstra-
tor of  anatomy,  and  after  a  year  spent  in  the  hos-
pitals of  Paris  and  London  held  this  office  until
1828,  when  he  resigned  it  to  open  a  private  school
of  practical  anatomy  and  surgery,  in  which  he  was
successful.  In  1831  he  accepted  the  chair  of  an-
atomy and  physiology  in  the  University  of  Mary-
land, and  removed  to  Baltimore,  where  he  edited
the  "Baltimore  Medical  Journal"  in  1833,  which
in  1835  was  changed  to  the  "  North  American  Ar-
chives of  Medical  and  Surgical  Science,*'  to  which
he  contributed  essays  and  editorials.  He  returned
to  Charleston  in  1837  to  take  the  chair  of  patho-
logical anatomy  and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the
Medical  college.  He  practised  in  all  branches  of
medicine  and  surgery.  In  1849  he  held  the  chair
of  surgery,  which  he  resigned  in  1858  so  that  Prof.
Dickson  might  be  reinstated.  He  was  a  surgeon  in
the  Confederate  army  during  the  civil  war.  When
the  fall  of  Charleston  was  imminent,  his  rare  medi-
cal library  was  sent  to  Columbia,  where  it  perished
in  the  fire  that  destroyed  a  large  part  of  the  city.
This  library  embraced  valuable  works  collected  in
Europe,  and  illustrated  all  branches  of  medical
literature  and  scientific  subjects.  His  collection
of  surgical  instruments  and  apparatus  was  stolen
while  he  was  absent  from  his  home  during  the
bombardment  of  the  city.  Several  years  before  he
had  organized  in  connection  with  the  college  a
medical  and  surgical  polyclinic,  which  he  revived
after  the  war.  In  1871  he  resigned  his  chair,  and
was  elected  professor  emeritus  of  the  institutes  and
practices  of  medicine.  In  that  year  a  new  chair  of
clinical  medicine  was  created,  to  which  he  was
elected,  and  he  gave  clinical  lectures  for  two  years.
His  early  papers,  published  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Medical  Science"  (Philadelphia),  include  re-
views and  sketches  in  various  languages.

GEDNEY,  Jonathan  Haight,  inventor,  b.  in
Rye,  Westchester  co..  N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in
Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1886.  He  removed  to
New  York,  and  in  1825  owned  the  Dry  Dock  saw-
mill, which  took  fire  in  1829,  making  so  bright  a
light  that  the  reflection  is  said  to  have  been  seen
as  far  as  New  Haven,  Conn.  By  this  disaster  Mr.
Gedney  and  his  partner  were  ruined.  The  former
subsequently  turned  his  attention  to  mechanics,
and  invented  the  wooden  cogs  used  in  the  cotton-
gin,  and  a  plough  for  digging  potatoes  with  one  or
two  horses.  He  afterward  returned  to  Rye,  and
held  several  local  offices  there.  In  his  seventy-fifth
year  Mr.  Gedney  walked  from  Rye  Neck  to  Dean
street,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  nine  hours.  When
eighty-four  years  old  he  mowed  for  an  entire  day.


GEE,  Joshua,  clergvman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
29  June,  1698;  d.  there.  22  .May.  17  is.  1 1,.  W!IS
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1717,  and  ordained  paafeoi
of  the  Old  North  church  in  Boston,  in  172::.  at  the
colleague  of  Cotton  Mather,  who  died  in  1728.  Mr.
Qee  continued  in  charge  of  the  church  until  his
own  death.  He  was  a  member  of  an  assembly  at
clergymen  that  met  in  Boston,  7  July,  1743,  to  dis-
cuss the  progress  of  religion  in  this  country,  and
the  same  year  published  a  letter  addreawd  to  the
moderator,  complaining  of  the  character  of  the  di>-
cussions,  asserting  the  prevalence  of  antinomian  er-
rors among  the  clergy,  alleging  that  not  more  than
one  third  of  the  pastors  of  Massachusetts  .
attendance,  and  upholding  the  great  Whitfieldian
revival.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  man  of  strong
mind,  unusual  powers  of  reasoning,  and  the  pos-
sessor of  much  learning,  but  to  have  been  intel-
lectually indolent.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Sermon
on  the  Death  of  Cotton  Mather,"  and  two  dis-
courses entitled,  "The  Strait  Gate  and  the  Nar-
row Wav  Infinitely  Preferable  to  the  Wide  Gate
and  the  "Broad  Way"  (1729).

(JEER,  George  J arvis,  clergvman,  b.  in  Water-
bury,  Conn.,  24  Feb.,  1821;  d.'in  New  York,  16
March,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,
Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1842,  and  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York,  in  1845,  and  became
rector  of  Christ  church,  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y.  He
became  associate  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Apostles,  New  York,  in  1859,  and  rector  of  St.  Tim-
othy's, New  York,  in  1866,  which  charge  he  held
until  his  death,  and  of  which  he  had  been  minister
in  charge  since  1859.  He  was  the  first  president
of  the  Free  church  guild  of  New  York,  ana  a  mem-
ber of  the  general  convention  of  1874.  He  received
the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia,  and  that  of
D.  D.  from  Union  in  1862.  By  appointment  of
the  bishops,  he  edited  and  published,  with  Bishop
Bedell  and  Rev.  Dr.  Muhlenburg,  the  "  Tune-BooK
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  "  (1858).  He
also  published  "The  Conversion  of  St.  Paul"
(New  York,  1871).

GEFFRARD,  Fahre,  president  of  Hayti,  b.  in
Anse  Veau,  Hayti,  19  Sept.,  1806;  d.  in  Kingston,
Jamaica,  11  Feb.,  1879.  His  father.  Gen.  Nicolas
Geffrard,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Havtian  inde-
pendence, died  a  few  weeks  after  his  birth ;  and  the
boy,  who  was  adopted  by  Col.  Fabre,  commanding
a  regiment  at  Aux  Cayes,  left  the  college  of  Aux
Cayes  in  1821,  and  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier.
He  rose  by  successive  promotions  to  a  captaincy,
and,  when  Gen.  Herard-Riviere  rose  in  rebellion
against  President  Boyer  in  1843,  he  appointed
Geffrard  lieutenant-colonel,  and  sent  him  to  occupy
Jeremie,  where  he  was  promoted  colonel  by  the
popular  committee.  He  defeated  Boyer  near  Jacmel,
and  pursued  him  as  far  as  Tiburon.  After  the
triumph  of  the  revolution  m  1844,  he  was  appointed
brigadier-general  and  commander  of  Jacmel.  In
1845  he  subdued  a  rebellion  under  Gen.  Achaau,
and  was  promoted  general  of  division  :  but,  when
President  Riche  came  into  power  in  1846,  fearing
Geffrard's  popularity,  he  had  him  arrested  ana
tried  by  a  court-martial,  which,  however,  acquitted
him.  Under  Soulouque's  presidency,  Geffrard  com-
manded a  division  of  the  expeditionary  army  against
the  Dominicans  in  1849,  being  wounded  in  the  bat-
tle of  Azua.  When  Soulouque  proclaimed  himself
emperor,  under  the  title  of  Faustin  I.,  in  18o(»,  he
created  Geffrard  Duke  of  Tabaro.  In  1856  Geffrard
took  part  in  the  unfortunate  second  campaign
against  Santo  Domingo,  and  as  commander  of  the
rear  guard  protected  the  retreat  and  saved  the
artillery. When  Soulouque's  government  became


<;i:n


QELM


an


unpopular  bMH to  be  suspicious  of

(Jeffrard's  popularity, mm)  deprived  him  of  b

iniuiii. GefTranl,  fearing  imprisonment,  ntca|M«l  to
Goiiaives. When this  became known,  the  | mmi|»N»

of  the  tw..  northern  departments  rose In  arms,
proclaiming;  the  dejiosition  of  Soulouque,  and  tin*
republic  under  Geffrard's  presidency, 'J
Geffrard mhiii  collected  a  large  tint,  ami  trium-

KheaUT entered  Port  an  Prime,  ISJojl,  i*.v»;  but
•  protected  the  Bight  of  the  fallen  avjporoi  tad
In-  family.  Under  mo  preeidenoy,  Hayti  entered
I  new  era  of  progress.  IK-  retrenched  the
pablic  expenses  ami  reduced  the  tnxee.  eepeejej)y
on  rural  property.  Hut  <>n  -i  S-pt.,  IS.*)!),  the  min-
ister of  the  laterior,  Qaorrier  Prophete,  heeded  ■

revolt.  An  attempt  00  Geffrard's  life  was  frustrate*!,
but  one  of  Ml  daughter-  was  assassinated.  Me
concluded  treaties  of  commerce  with  Frame,  Eng-
laml,  ami  Spain.  In  lNlil  his  government  DOOMM
very  un|>ojiular,  he  being  accused  of  sulxscrviency
to  Spam,  for  not  oppoeiag  the  occupation  of  Smto
Domingo  by  that  power,  ami  in  lnii-j  then
revolt  untler  (ien.  Log  WW  at  Gonaive-,  and  in  1S<h1
another  umlerSalnave  in  the  north.  In.Iuii
Salnave  made  a  new  attempt  at  (ionaives,  ami  was
again  defeated.  (ielTrard  now  promulgated  liberal
laws  and  abolished  eapital  punishment  for  political
offences.  But  the  revolt  continued  to  increase  in
the  interior,  and  on  22  Feb..  18*57.  MM  seconded  by
a  pronunciamento  in  favor  of  Salnave  at  Port  ail
Prime;  and,  although  (ielTrard  nut  the  capital  in
a  state  of  defence,  he  soon  saw  that  resistance  was
useless,  and,  taking  refuge  with  his  family  on
board  a  French  vessel,  13  March,  he  went  to
Jamaica,  where  he  died.

(.IK.  IK.  Kin  My.  Revolutionary  heroine,  b.
about  1760.  At  the  period  when  Gen.  Greene  re-
treated before  Ixird  liawdon  from  Ninetv-Six.S.
('..  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  had  {Missed
Broad  river,  he  was  anxious  to  send  an  order  to
Gen.  Sumter,  who  was  then  encamjK'd  on  the  \Va-
teree,  to  join  him  and  attack  Kawdon,  who  had
divided  his  forces.  But  no  one  could  be  found
willing  to  run  the  risk  of  traversing  a  section  of
country  that  was  infested  by  revengeful  Tories.
At  length  a  youag  girl,  Emily  Geiger  by  name,  of-
fered her  services,  greatly  to  the  surprise  of  the
American  officer,  who  at  once  accepted  them.  He
accordingly  wrote  a  letter,  which  he  gave  to  the
girl,  but  at  the  same  time  informed  her  of  its  con-
tent-, that  she  might  be  able  to  deliver  the  mes-
eage  orally  in  case  of  accident,  Emily  set  out  on
horseback,  and  met  with  no  adventures  until  the
second  day,  when  she  was  intercepted  by  Lord
Raw  don's  scouts.  Not  being  skilled  in  the  art  of
lolling  falsehoods,  she  was  suspected  and  placed  in
confinement, and  an  old  Tory  matron  was  MBt  for,
that  she  might  l»e  searched.  Emily  utilized  the
interval  by  Bating  the  letter,  anil,  nothing  suspi-
cious being  afterward  found  on  her.  she  was  al-
lowed to  proceed.  By  taking  a  circuitous  route,
she  ■upended  in  reaching  her  destination  and  dis-
charging her  mission.  In  consequence,  Sumter
soon  joined  the  main  army  at  Orangeburg.  Emily
Geiger  married  a  wealthy  planter  netted  Threr-
wit-.  who  lived  on  the  Congaree  river.  S.  ('.

(.1  IK  IK.  (  nnnlngham,  Scottish  clergyman,  b.
in  Edinburgh,  26  Oct.,  1896. He  was  educated  at
the High  school and  at  the I'niver-itv  of  Edin-
burgh. Following  his  father  to  Canada,  he  beOMBB
•f  a  church  near  Toronto,  and  subsequently
was  called  to  one  in  Halifax. In  lHt.2  he  accepted
rate  in  Sunderland,  England,  and  in  1M7G
took orders  in  the  Church  of  England,  and has
•etorships  at  Paris  and  at  Barnstable,  Eng-


land. Me  is  a  prominent  ••  Low  church  "  had-  r,
ami  i-  the  author  of  the  following  among  other
works: "The Ba<  kw<«  *04) ;

a  and  Precious  Promim  Life  and

Words  of  Christ"  (1877);  "<»id  Testament  Por-
traits" (1S7N);  und  M  Hours  with  the  Bible"  <l-
rt  /w</.).  Nearly  all  his  works  have  been  republished
in  the  I'nitcd"  States.  The  ••  Life  of  (  hri-t  "  has
passed  through  twenty-five  editions  in  Great  Brit-
ain, and  hej  ban  reproduced  in  four  separate
edition-  in  the  United  Slate*.

GKISINCKK,  David,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1790;  died  in  Philadelphia,  I  March.  1860.
Me  was  appointed  midshipman  in  the  I'.  S.  navy,
1")  Nov..  lsi«>;  lieutenant.  9  Dec.,  1814 ;  command-
er. 11  March,  1819;  and  captain,  24  May,
being  plaood  oa  the  naarvan  l i-~t .  II  BopL,  1855.

Muring  the  war  of  1N12  he  -aw  much  active  ser-
vice, and  was  on  board  the  •*  \\'a*p"  in  her  brilliant
crui-e  oil  the  Engli-h  coast  in  1N14.  Me  hud  the
good  fortune  to  l>e  sent  to  Savannah,  (J a.,  in  com-
mand of  the  prize  brig  "  Atalanta,"  and  oamaod
the  fate  of  the  "  Wasp."  whioh  was  lost  with  all  on
board,  ('apt.  Gci-inger  was  for  several  years  in
command  of  the  naval  asvlum  in  Philadelphia.

GFISSFNHAINFR.  '  Frederick  Wilbono,
clergvman.  b.  in  Mulheim,  (iermanv,  2<i  June,
1771 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  27  May,  1838.  In  early
life  he  gave  evidence  of  great  intellectual  pre-
cocity, and,  having  studied  at  the  universities  of
Giessen  and  Gottingen,  he  served  for  a  while  as
"professor  extraordinarius "  in  the  latter  institu-
tion. So  unusual  were  his  attainments  that  he  was
ordained  when  only  twenty  years  old, although  five
years  younger  than  the  age  at  which  candidates
were  usually  allowed  to  enter  the  ministry.  Emi-
grating to  this  country  in  1793,  he  labored  for  fif-
teen years  in  the  Groooheahoppea  and  associated
Lutheran  churches  in  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1808
removed  to  New  York  city  as  the  successor  of  Dr.
Kunze,  at  the  old  Swamp  church.  Me  was  absent
for  a  time  on  account  of  failing  health,  but  re-
turned to  New  York  in  1822,  and  remained  there
until  his  death.  He  possessed  a  powerful  intellect,
which  had  been  brought  under  the  influence  of  the
most  thorough  culture.  Latin  and  Greek  were  as
familiar  to  him  as  his  native  tongue.  Me  am  made
I).  I),  by  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1826.
Mis  literary  remains  include  lectures  on  church
history  and  on  the  gospels,  epistles,  and  portions
of  the  Old  Testament,

CI  I  PI  KIN.  Adolphus  Van,  educator,  b.  in
Rotterdam,  Holland,  in  1885.  Me  was  educated  in
his  native  city,  emigrated  to  South  America,  and
in  1856  was  appointed  professor  of  languages  in
the  University  of  Sucre,  Bolivia.  Me  afterward
wj -.it  to  the  Argentine  Republic, in  I860  established
in  Buenos  Ay  res  the  first  graded  public  school,  and
was  appointed  principal  Of  the  National  college  of
Parana.  In  1874.  under  Sarmiento's  administra-
tion, a  normal  school  was  established  in  BueaOJ
.  and  Vim  Gelderen  wa-  appointed  principal.
WB0B  in  1880  the  city  of  Buenos  Avres  wus  erected
into  a  federal  district,  the  normal  college  passed
also  under  the  National  government,  and  Van  Gel-
deren soon  made  it  the  foremost  establishment  of
itt  class  in  the  republic.  Prof.  Van  Gelderen  speaks
and  writes  fluently  Spanish.  English,  Dutch.  Ger-
man, French,  Italian,  and  Portuguese,  and  is  also
proficient  in  Lntfa,  Greek,  and  Hebrew.  Me  has
published  valuable  works  <>u  education,  and  his
Eext-bookl  prepared  for  the  Argentine  Bchoolt  have
won  high  praise.  In  1885  he  was  named  Hn  officer
of  the  French  academy,  and  decorated  with  the
-pecial  medal  awarded  to  meritorious  educators.


OM


QKLELEMBND


(iF.NIN


&BLELEMEND. r  (ILL-BUCK.  Delaware

chief,  I',  in  PttUMJ  lvaiiia  in  17:57;  d.  in  Goshen,
Ohio,  in  1H11.  His' name  signifies  "a  leader."  lie
VMOMsf  couusellorof  the  Turkey  tribeof  the  Dela-
ware nation,  ami,  after  the  death  of  Capt.  White
Kvcs,  became  principal  chief.  He  was  a  strenuous
advocate  for  DMM  anions  his  people  during  the
Revolution,  which  drew  uj>on  him  the  animosity  of
those  of  his  countrymen  who  took  up  arms  against
the  Americans.  Gelelemend  united  with  the  Mo-
ravian mission  at  Salem,  Ohio,  in  1788.  and  in
baptism  was  named  William  Henry,  after  Judge
Willi  tin  Ilenrv.  of  Lancaster.  I'a.  A  lineal  de-
scendant is  Moravian  missionary  to  Alaska  (1887).

t.  I-..M  M  I  I.I..  John  Alexander,  Canadian  law-
yer, b.  in  the  County  of  Lankark,  Ontario,  20
March,  1847.  He  was  educated  at  the  Grange
school,  Sunderland,  England,  and  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Glasgow,  Scotland;  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Ontario  in  1871,  and  has  since  practised  as
a  parliamentary  solicitor  in  Ontario.  He  has  ed-
ited and  published  "  The  Canadian  Parliamentary
Companion  "  (1883  and  1885).

GEM  UNDER,  August,  violin-maker,  b.  in  In-

fellingen,  WOrtemberg,  Germany,  22  March,  1814.
[is  father  being  a  violin-maker  and  repairer,  Au-
gust was  brought  up  to  the  business,  to  which  he
succeeded  on  the  death  of  the  former.  In  1839  he
removed  to  Regensburg,  and,  after  residing  in  sev-
eral other  cities  in  Germany,  he  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  1846.  He  remained  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  until  1865,  and  then  established  him-
self in  New  York  city,  where  he  is  still  in  business.
Mr.  Gemilnder  makes  a  specialty  of  copying  the
old  Italian  masters,  especially  the  instruments  made
by  Antonius  Stradivarius,  Joseph  Guarnerius,  and
Paoli  Maggini.  In  1844  he  was  asked  by  a  German
violinist  to  make  a  violin  that  should  not  be  an
imitation,  as  to  tone  or  any  other  quality,  of  the
Italian  masters.  In  executing  the  order,  he  suc-
ceeded in  producing  an  instrument  that  he  has
since  kept  as  a  model.  His  violins  have  been  used
by  some  of  the  leading  soloists.  They  possess  a
pure,  even  quality  of  tone,  respond  easily,  and  are
thought  to  excel  the  Italian  instruments,  from
which  they  are  copied,  in  power.  Mr.  Gemilnder
has  contributed  to  the  trade  journals  a  series  of
articles,  in  which  he  discussed  "  Old  and  New  Vio-
lins," including  a  comparison  of  the  tone  of  those
instruments  with  the  human  voice;  "  The  Cremona
Secret,"  a  disquisition  on  the  wood  used  in  the
manufacture  of  violins ;  "  The  Lost  Secret  and
Common  Sense,"  with  others  on  Italian  varnish,
violin  construction,  etc.  He  was  at  one  time  in
partnership  with  his  brother  George. — His  brother,
George,  violin-maker,  b.  in  Ingelfingen,  Wilrtem-
berg,  Germany,  13  April,  1816,  was  a  pupil  of
Baptiste  Vuillaume,  in  Paris,  and  removed  to  the
United  States  in  1847,  establishing  himself  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.  In  1851  his  violins  obtained  the  prize-
medal  of  the  world's  fair  in  London.  In  1852  he
removed  to  New  York,  where  he  afterward  resided.
Vuillaume,  and  other  European  makers  of  violins,
were  in  the  habit  of  giving  a  pseudo-antiquity  to
their  wood  by  a  chemical  process,  thus  gaining  a
desirable  quality  of  tone ;  but  wood  thus  treated
soon  loses  its  resonance,  and  after  a  time  the  in-
struments become  worthless.  Gemilnder.  however,
succeeded  in  making  out  of  natural  wood  violins
that  met  every  requirement,  and  in  respect  of  vol-
ume, power,  equality,  and  quickness  of  tone  are
said  to  be  equal  to  the  work  of  the  best  old  mas-
ters. In  the  model  and  finish  of  his  instruments,
and  especially  in  the  varnish,  he  was  unusually
successful,  so  faithfully  reproducing  the  distinctive


characteristics  of  the  old  Italian  violins  that  those
made  by  him  are  not  infrequently  mistaken  for
genuine  Cremonas.  One  called  the  ••  Kaiser,"  fin-
ished in  is;;j  and  sent  to  the  Vienna  exhibition,
was  there  pronounced  an  Italian  violin  of  the
<  lassie period,  it  Ix-ing  considered impossible  to

!>roduce  so  fine  a  toYiefrom  a  new  Instrument.  Mr.
iemtlnder  has  also  received  medals  from  exhibi-
tions held  in  Paris  (1867),  New  York  (1870),  Vien-
na (1873),  Philadelphia  (1876— "  hors  concours"),
Amsterdam  (1883),  Nice  (1883-'4),  London  (1884),
New  Orleans  (1884-'5 — "  hors  concours"),  and  Lon-
don (1885).  He  is  the  author  of  "  Progress  in  Vio-
lin-making" (Astoria,  N.  Y.,  1881),  to  which  is  pre-
fixed an  autobiographical  sketch.

GENEST,  I  . I  in. .ml  Charles,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Versailles,  France,  8  Jan.,  1765;  d.  in  Schodac,
Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  July,  1834.  Although  he
had  been  brought  up  at  the  French  court,  and  al-
though his  sisters,  Madame  Auguie  and  Madame
Campan,  were  in  the  service  of  Marie-Antoinette,
he  early  attracted  attention  by  his  republican  opin-
ions. He  was  sent,  in  1789,  as  charge  d'affaires  to
St.  Petersburg,  where  his  situation  soon  became
uncomfortable,  and  in  1791  he  was  informed  by
Count  Ostermann,  the  minister  of  Catherine  II.,
that  he  had  better  not  appear  again  at  court,  in
view  of  the  excitement  then  existing  in  France.
He  remained  in  Russia  until  July  of  the  year  fol-
lowing, when  he  received  his  passports.  On  his
return  to  France  he  was  appointed  minister  to
Holland,  but  before  he  could  proceed  thither  he
was  accredited  to  the  United  States  in  December,

1792.  He  reached Charleston,  S.  C,  in  ApriL

1793,  was  cordially  welcomed,  and  in  the  following
month  had  a  formal  reception  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  was  presented  by  the  citizens  with  an  ad-
dress congratulating  France  on  obtaining  the  free-
dom she  Tiad  helped  the  United  States  to  secure.
Encouraged  by  these  demonstrations  of  popular
feeling,  Genest  thought  he  could  easily  persuade
the  American  people  to  espouse  the  cause  of  his
country,  notwithstanding  Washington's  recently
issued  proclamation  of  neutrality.  He  openly
maintained  that  the  United  States  were  in  duty
bound  to  side  with  France  against  England,  and
bitterly  denounced  the  American  government  for
want  of  sympathy  with  the  young  republic.  He
even  went  so  far  as  to  issue  commissions  to  priva-
teers, and  ordered  that  their  prizes  should  be  tried
and  condemned  by  French  consuls  in  the  United
States.  1 1  e  also  planned  hostile  expeditions  against
Florida  and  Louisiana,  which  were  then  colonies  of
Spain.  In  consequence  of  these  imprudent  meas-
ures, Washington  demanded  and  obtained  his  re-
call. Genest,  however,  decided  not  to  return  to
France,  but  was  naturalized  and  settled  in  the
state  of  New  York,  where  he  married  first  a  daugh-
ter of  Gov.  George  Clinton,  and  afterward  a  Miss
Osgood.  In  his  adopted  country  he  took  great  in-
terest in  promoting  improvements  in  agriculture
and  in  the  arts  and  sciences.  At  the  age  of  twelve
he  translated  the  "Histoire  d'Eric  XIV.,  roi  de
Suede,"  from  the  Swedish  of  Celsius,  for  which  he
received  a  gold  medal  from  Gustavus  III.  (Paris,
1777).  He  also  translated  from  the  same  language
Nicholas  Idman's  treatise  on  the  Finns  and  their
language  (Strasburg,  1778).

GENIN,  John  Nicholas,  merchant,  b.  in  New
York  city.  19  Oct.,  1819;  d.  there.  30  Apr
His  grandfather,  John  Nicholas,  came  to  this  coun-
try from  France  in  1780.  as  clerk  in  the  commis-
sary depart  inent  under  Gen.  Rochambeau.  while  his
uncle.  Thomas  Hbdobs  (Jknin.  was  one  of  the  early
settlers  of  Ohio,  an  active  abolitionist,  a  fn


880


Benjamin  I.mnly.  and  the  author  of  mTIm  tfapo>
laad,w deooriptivo of  NapoWoa'i  ejuapalfl  in  Ku--
sia  (privately  printed,  l888i  Young  uejrfa  was
.  apprenticed  to  the  trade  of  hat-making,  and
in  imi  began  benfaoae  far hlmoalf <>n  11  Sept..

1  In-  liought,  for  ♦'.".'•">.  the  first  scat  wild  for
\  hind's  first  concert  in  the  United  States,
was  ao  universally  < UMBted ■pan  by  the

Erase  that  it  was  estimated  that,  at  currenl  rates,
e  received  over  $80,000  worth  of  gratuitous  ad-
In  tin  autumn  of  1801  it  was  an-
nounced that  Louis  Kossuth  was  on  hit  way  to
this  country,  and  Mr.  Oeniu  proposed  that  loo
wealthy  citizens  should  contribute  $1,000  each  for
the  on  of  the  Hungarian  patriot,  and  gave  that
amount  himself.  He  was  also  an  active  promoter
of  the  pulilic  reception,  which  included  a  military
parade.  Having  OO  hand  a  lot  of  "dead  stock,'"
in  the  shape  of  black  low-crowned  soft  hats,  he
ned  the  left  side  of  the  brim  to  the  crown,  or-
namented it  with  a  black  feather,  and.  hoarding
the  vessel  at  Sandy  Hook,  presented  all  of  the
refugees,  many  of  whom  were  ragged  and  shoeless,
with  "Kossuth"  hats,  which  they  wore  on  the
march  up  Broadway.  Low-crowned  soft  felt  hats
at  once  became  popular,  and  the  manufacturers
subsequently  recognised  Mr.  (brim's  services  in
their  behalf  bv  presenting  him  with  a  silver  service
valued  at  $1,200.  In  1H.J-J,  Miss  Amelia  Bloomer
complained  to  Mr.  (renin  that  she  could  not  find  a
hat  suited  to  her  costume.  The  latter  set  himself
to  invent  one.  and  produced  the  first  round  hat,
not  a  bonnet,  that  was  worn  by  young  women.
During  1853,  the  lower  part  of  Broadway  being  in
a  filthy  condition,  he  proposed  to  the  city  authori-
ties to  erect  a  bridge  opposite  his  store  at  his  own
expense.  The  offer  was  rejected,  but  the  I^eow
bridge,  which  was  subsequently  built  on  nearly  the
same  site,  was  a  fac-simile  of  that  designed  by  Mr.
Benin.  His  most  public-spirited  enterprise  was
the  cleaning,  in  the  spring  of  1854,  of  Broadway
and  other  streets,  which  had  been  left  in  an  almost
impassable  condition  by  the  neglect  of  the  city
officials.  He  employed  over  100  men  and  carts,
the  work  being  done  at  night,  and  continued  to
perform  this  self-imposed  duty  for  one  month,
only  discontinuing  it  on  the  promise  of  the  street
commissioner  to  sweep  Broadway  nightly.  The
labir  cost  $1,543.70.  and  $1,255.33  of  this  amount
having  been  subscribed  by  the  public,  Mr.  Genin
again  received  a  large  amount  of  free  advertising
for  the  small  expenditure  of  $2K8.:{7.  Mr.  Genin
was  the  author  of  a  book  entitled  "  History  of  the
Hat  from  the  Karl iest  Ages  to  the  Present  Time"
17).  It  was  profusely  illustrated,  and  subse-
quently enriched  with  drawings  of  over  one  thou-
sand different  styles  of  ancient  head-dresses.  From
•  he  had  more  than  500  fac-similes  made,  and
exhibited  them  in  connection  with  his  business.

t.l  NNES,  Jullen,  Count  de,  French  navigator.

b.  in  Vitre  in 1852;  d. in Plymouth.  England,  in

1704. He  entered  the  French  navy  under  the  aus-

-  of  the  Marechaldc  Vivonne.  and,  lieingsent  on

nil  missions, acquit t«'d  himself  with  such  credit

lie  was  promoted  captain  and  named  chevalier

of  the  Order  of  St. Louis  in K>77. He  was  also

Eant«»d  large  pensions  and  an  extensive  tract  of
nd  in  Cayenne,  which  the  king  created  a  county
under  the  name  of  Comte  d'Oyac. Some  fllibus-
vho  hail  sailed  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  pro-

■• lines,  on  their  return to Frai ,  to

Bound  a  colony  there. He  (ieiines  went  to  Paris  anil
mixed  a  company  for  this  purpose,  the  king
:  its  disposal. The  ex|iedition.
Under  command  of  De  Gennes,  sailed  from  Lfl
VOL.  II. — 40


chcllc.  :i  .In,,,.,  1«I<»:,,  entered  the  Straits  of  Ma-
gellan. II Feb., MM  and. having doubl.il <

ml.  a bay  not down  on the  charts  ejej  di*-
Itd and UMMd French liny, and the |
emptying  into  it De  Gem  afterward De

(ieiines  decided  to  return  to  France,  leaving  be-
hind a  small  colony.  Afterward  he  was  ■
governor  of  the  Freinh  oart  of  the  island  of  Bt
Christopher,  and  had  only  about  PHI  men  with
which  to  defend  himself  when  the  English  U-gan
hostilities  without  going  through  the  formality  of
declaring  war.  The  latter  having  gathered  a  :
of  over  "J.«  KM)  men,  De  G  en  lies,  after  negotiating,
signed  articles  of  capitulation,  acting  under  tin-
advice  of  twelve  out  of  seventeen  IIIcUiInts  of  a
council  of  war  which  he  had  called  together.  This
advice  was  not  that  of  the  king's  lieutenant.  Val-
ineinicr.  and  bis  ineffectual  protest  was  made  the
basis  of  charges  subsequently  brought  against  the
mor.  After  prolonged  discussions  and  re-
criminations, the  English  finally  took  potJSjsJoa,
16  July,  17<»2.  After  vainly  attempting  to  return
for  a  time  to  Cayenne  until  the  French  court
should  have  Iieen  informed  of  the  truth  regarding
his  capitulation,  he  was  captured  by  a  Dutch
endear,  taken  to  Bt.  Thomas,  and  finally  landed,  m
April,  17(13,  in  Martinique,  the  very  place  he  wished
to  avoid,  ('apt.  de  Machault,  governor-general  of
the  French  West  India  islands,  insisted  on  putting
him  on  trial.  De  (ieiines  defended  himself  ener-
getically, and  would  doubtless  have  been  acquit-
ted, had  he  not  been  imprudent  enough  to  bring
charges  against  three  of  his  judges.  In  August,
1704,  he  was  declared  to  be  guilty  of  cowardice,  de-
graded from  the  nobility,  and  deprived  of  the  cross
of  St.  Louis  and  of  all  the  other  honors  that  had
been  conferred  upon  him.  From  this  judgment  he
appealed  to  the  king,  and  was  on  his  way  to  France
in  the  "  Thetis."  when  that  vessel  was  captured  by
the  English  and  taken  into  Plymouth,  where  De
(ieiines  died  without  being  able  to  establish  his  in-
nocence. No  sooner,  however,  had  Louis  XIV.
learned  of  his  death  than  he  bestowed  large  |>en-
sions  on  his  widow  and  children,  and  restored  De
Gennes's  titles.  Dc  Gennes  had  a  taste  for  mathe-
matics and  mechanics.  Among  his  inventions
were  cannon  and  mortars,  arrows  designed  to  per-
forate and  damage  the  sails  of  vessels  m  battle.
and  watches  without  springs  or  weights — all  made
of  ivory.  He  also  invented  "a  peaoook  that  could
walk  and  digest  food."  and  many  other  curious  de-
vices that  are  said  to  have  greatly  pleased  the  king.
He  wrote  "  Relation  d'un  voyage  fait  en  1805  I
aux  cotes  d'Afriiiue,  detroit  de  Magellan,  etc.."  etc.
(Paris,  1000),  and  "  Des  ties  sous  le  vent,  leurs  res-
sources  et  leur  aveiiir"  (1701).

f.KNTH,  Frederick  Augustus,  chemist,  b.  in
Waechterslwich.  —  el,  17  May,  1820. After

attending  the  gymnasium  in  Hanaii.  he  studied  at
the  I'niversity  of  Heidelberg,  under  Liebig  at
G lessen,  and  finally  under  BuBMB  at  Marburg,
where  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.D.  in  !8fK
For  three  years  he  acted  as  assistant  to  Prof.  Bun-
sen,  and  soon  afterward  came  to  the  I'nited  States.
where  he  has  sines  resided.  In  1872  he  was  called
to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy  in  the
I'niversity of  Pennsylvania,  which place he  still

OOCUpies. He  has  also  held  the  office  of  cllclllist  to

the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania  and  also  to
the  DOOM  of  agriculture  of  that  state.  Prof,
(ieiith  is  a  member  of  many  scientific  societies  in

the  I  llited  States,  and  Was  elected  in  IN?.'  to  inem-
barehip  in  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  Prof.
Benjamin  Sjlliman.  Jr..  spaftkl  of  him  as  having
"  no  sujMTior  in  this  country  as  an  analytical  chem-


OEM


GENTRY


GEOW.1-:


i-t."  and  ha  has  ttimtlj  enriched  Um  literature  of
chemi-trv  with  his  very  many  and  careful  analyses
of  minerals.  His  MM  il  associated  with  the  am-
monia cobalt  btMt  which  he  discovered  in  184(1,
and,  in  joint  authorship  with  Dr.  Wolcott  Gibbs,
he  has  contributed  to  tin-  M  Smithsonian  Contribu-
tions to  Knowledge  "a  monograph  on  "  Researches
OH  the  Ammonia-Cobalt  Bases"  (Washington,
Plot  (icnth  is  the  author  of  nearly  100
separate  papers  on  subjects  in  chemistry  and  min-
eralogy, ami  has  published  "  Tabellarisohe  "Ober-
sicht  der  wichtigsten  Heactionen  welche  DaBBO  in
Salzen  zeigen  "  (Marburg,  1845),  also  the  same  in
relation  to  "Acids"  (IN J.*));  "Minerals  of  North
Carolina,"  being  appendix  "C"  of  the  "  Report  on
the  Geology  of  North  Carolina"  (Raleigh,  1875):
also  "  First  and  Second  Preliminary  Reports  on  the
Mineralogy  of  Pennsylvania"  (Harrisburg.  1875- '6),
and  "Minerals and  Mineral  Localities  of  North  Car-
olina "  (Raleigh,  1881).

GENTRY.  Meredith  Poindexter,  statesman,
b.  in  Rockingham  county,  N.  C,  15  Sept.,  1809;  d.
near  Nashville.  Tenn..  2  Nov..  1866.  In  \HV.i  his
father,  a  wealthy  planter,  removed  to  Williamson
county,  Tenn.,  where  the  facilities  for  education
were  limited.  Meredith's  school-days  ended  at  the
age  of  fourteen,  when  he  had  acquired  little  more
than  the  rudiments. He,  however,  supplemented

these  while
working  on
his  father's
plantation  by
reading  the
standard  Eng-
lish authors.
He  also  took
great  delight
in  perusing
the  congres-
sional debates.
He  early  con-
ceived a  fancy
for  military
life.andjoined
a  militia  com-

Eany,  of  which
e  was soon
^sn  elected cap-

s^X? <f2^Z^, J^~*~  tain,  and  sub-

S'c </  'i*~z/'  sequently  pro-

moted colonel
of  the  regi-
ment. He  became  known  as  a  popular  orator,  and
in  1835  was  chosen  to  a  seat  in  the  legislature,  which
he  retained  until  1839,  when  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, taking  his  seat,  2  Dec,  1839,  and  at  once
joining  Messrs.  Clay,  Webster,  and  Calhoun  m  their
efforts  to  stem  the  tide  of  what  they  held  to  be  the
dangerous  encroachments  of  the  executive.  Mr.
Gentry  was  an  original  Whig,  and  remained  such
until  the  party  ceased  to  exist.  His  first  speech,
which  attracted  universal  attention,  was  in  favor  of
the  reception  of  petitions  praying  for  the  abolition
of  slavery.  Although  himself  a  large  slave-holder,
and  maintaining  that  the  Federal  government  had
no  right  to  interfere  with  slavery  in  individual
states,  he  urged  that  the  petitions,  although  ask-
ing what  could  not  be  constitutionally  granted,
should  nevertheless  be  received  and  considered.
Hi-  ncond  speech,  on  the  bill  to  secure  freedom
of  elections  and  restrict  executive  patronage,  was
one  of  the  ablest  of  that  congress,  and  became  an
effective  campaign  document  in  the  presidential
canvass  of  1840.  Mr.  Gentry  was  re-elected  to
the  27th,  known  as  the  "  Whig  congress,"  but,  on


^?^^^^-


accoiint  of  the  death  of  his  fir-t  wife,  refu-d  to
be  a  candidate  for  election  to  the  88th.  Be  was
however,  returned  to  the  20th,  and  was  also  i
to  the  80th,  81st,  and  88d.  llr.Gcntry'sfirM  speech,
after  his  return  to  congress  in  December,  1846,
was  in  reply  to  the  charge  of  President  Polk  that
the  Whigs  were  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  ene-
my through  their  opposition  to  the  Mexican  war.
Mr.  Gentry,  in  Mialf  of  himself  and  his  political
friends,  indignantly  repelled  the  aspersions  of  the
president.  As  a  result  of  the  Bpeech,  a  resolution
was  introduced  by  the  Whigs  declaring  that,  while
patriotism  required  that  the  armies  should  1»-  -at-
tained, yet  the  war  should  be  waged  only  for  the
purpose  of  obtaining  an  honorable  peace,  and  not
with  any  view  to  conquest.  On  leaving  congress
Mr.  Gentry  retired  to  his  plantation  in  Tern
and  after  the  election  of  Mr..  Lincoln  became  |
secessionist.  He  was  elected  to  the  Confederate
congress  in  1802,  and  again  in  1863.  He  did  not
approve,  however,  of  the  policy  of  the  authorities
at  Richmond.  He  advocated  secession  only  as  a
temporary  expedient.  "  There  were  very  few  men
in  tne  house  of  representatives,"  said  Alexander
H.  Stephens,  "  who  could  compare  with  Mr.  Qas>
try  in  political  knowledge,  and  in  the  readiness
with  which  he  brought  this  knowledge  to  bear  on
any  point  in  running  debate.  His  eulogy  on  Clay,
deiivered  without  premeditation,  was  apt,  power-
ful, and  pathetic.  Socially  he  was  urbane  and
genial,  and  was  possessed  of  high  conversational
powers,  with  a  fund  of  humor  and  anecdote."

GEOFFRION,  Felix  P.  C,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Varennes,  Quebec,  4  Oct.,  1832.  He
was  registrar  for  Vercheres  from  1854  to  1863,  and
has  been  president  of  the  Montreal,  Chamblv,  and
Sorel  railway.  He  represented  Vercheres  in  the
Canada  assembly  from  1863  till  the  union,  w  hen
he  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament.  He
moved  for  a  select  committee  in  1874  to  inquire
into  the  causes  of  the  difficulties  in  the  Northwest
territory,  of  which  committee  he  became  chairman,
and  prepared  the  report  which  was  submitted  to
parliament.  In  July,  1874,  he  was  appointed  min-
ister of  inland  revenue,  and  was  re-elected  by  ac-
clamation. He  resigned  his  portfolio  in  conse-
quence of  illness  in  December,  1876,  retaining,
however,  his  seat  in  parliament.  He  was  re-elect-
ed in  1878,  and  again  in  1882.

GEORGE,  Enoch,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  Va.,  in  1767;  d.  in  Staunton,  Va.,  in  Au-

Sist,  1828.  He  was  under  the  ministry  of  Rev.
evereux  Jarratt,  then  of  the  Church  of  England,
and  was  in  early  life  the  subject  of  deep  religious
impressions ;  but,  having  been  separated  from  Mr.
Jarratt's  ministry,  he  became  negligent  of  his  re-
ligious duties,  till,  after  several  years,  the  place
where  he  resided  was  visited  by  a  Methodist  evan-
gelist, under  whose  exhortations  young  George  be-
came connected  with  the  little  Methodist  society
of  his  neighborhood.  In  1790  he  was  admitted  on
trial  into  the  Virginia  conference  of  the  Method-
ist Episcopal  church,  and  served  for  two  years  as
junior  preacher  in  Caswell  circuit.  After  this  he
went  to  South  Carolina,  and  in  1796  was  presiding
elder  of  Charleston  district,  and  the  next  year,  on
account  of  impaired  health,  he  retired  from  active
work  of  the  ministry.  In  1803  he  entered  tl
timore  conference,  where  he  labored  with  great
zeal  and  success,  till  at  the  general  conf-
held  in  Baltimore  in  May,  1816,  he  was  i
and  ordained  a  bishop,  in  which  office  he
with  zeal  and  effectiveness  for  twelve  years.  Bishog
George  belonged  to  the  primitive  school  of  Ameri-
can Methodist  preachers,  some  of  whom  without


GKH  M.HINI


097


extensive  scholastic  advantages  became  able  and
highl) I  preachers  "f  the  gospaLond  «lso

I | 'P>tl«i<ncv in biblical ami theological
learun  I  especially •  1 1 i-<t  i it lth i>lt«H i  for  t hf

fervor  ami  j w*t f i< »-  <if  his  pulpit  discourses.  Dur-
ing the  yean  of  Mi  wpkmopte)  be  travelled, otdoflj
l»  private  conveyance,  through  all  parts  i>f  the
country,  not  excepting  the  frontier  settlements  of
the  West ami  KNuhwOst,  usually  preaching  nearlv

lay,  at  prearranged  eppolnunenta,  ai  whion

ften  witnessed  remarkable,  manifestations  oJ
the  influence  that  attended  liis  preaching.  He
would  never  allow  his  portrait  to  In-  taken,  and
therefore  his  personal  appearance  is  known  only
lition.  He  is  deseriU-d  a>  of  fair  size  and
well  proportioned,  with  dark  hair  worn  long,  and
complexion  sallowed  bj  exposure.

GKORGK, Henry,  political  economist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  I  Sept!,  1K1!». He  went  to  sea  at  an
early  age,  and,  reaching  California  in 16
niaimd there,  beooming  finally  a  journalist. In
16*79  he  published  "  Progress  and  Poverty,"  which

was  issued  in  the  fol-
lowing year  in  New
York  and  London,
and  soon  acquired  a
world-  wide  reputa-
tion. This  lx>ok  ■
"an  inquiry  into  the
cause  of  industrial
depressionsandof  in-
crease of  want  with
increase  of  wealth,"
in  which  the  previ-
ously held  doctrines
as  to  thedistriltution
of  wealth  and  the
tendency  of  wages  to
a  minimum  are  ex-
amined and  recon-
structed. In  the  fact
that  rent  tends  to  in-
crease not  only  with  increase  of  population  hut  with
all  improvements  that  increase  productive  power,
Mr.  George  finds  the  cause  of  the  well-known  tend-
ency to  the  increase  of  land  values,  and  to  the  de-
crease of  the  proportion  of  the  produce  of  wealth
tli.it  foes  to  labor  and  capital,  while  in  the  specu-
lative holding  of  land  thus  engendered  he  traces
the  tendency  to  force  wages  to  a  minimum  and
the  primary  cause  of  paroxysms  of  industrial  de-
pression. The  remedy  for  "these  he  declares  to  be
the  appropriation  of  rent  by  the  community,  thus
making  land  virtually  common  property,  while
giving  to  the  user  secure  possession  and  leaving  to
the  producer  the  full  advantage  of  his  exertion
and  investment.  In  isso  Mr.  George  removed  to
i  ork.  In  1881  he  published  "The  Irish  Land
!i."  and  In  the  same  year  visited  Ireland
ami  England.  In  lM83-'4  he  again  visited  Bng-
land  and  Scotland,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Eng-
glish  land  reform  union,  making  speeches  on  the
land  question,  and  in  t884-'5  he  made  another  trip
at  the  invitation  of  the  Sottish  land  restoration
.  producing  on  lx>th  tours  a  marked  effect.
$8  he  was  the  candidate  of  the  United  labor
party  for  mayor  of  New  York,  and  received  68,110
votes  against  90,552  for  Abram  S.  Hewitt,  the
Democratic1  candidate,  and  (Ht.-Wi  for  Theodore
Roosevelt,  the  Republican  candidate.  Soon  after
Mr. George  founded  the- Standard,"  a  weekly
newspa|KT.  which  be  still  .-.lit-  lie  has

also published -Social Problems"  (1884), and
etion  or  Free-Trade  The  latter  is

a  radical  examination  of  the  tariff  question, in


(&££~?r^l


^*~-y*


which  i-onnection  is  made  between  the  controversy
on  that  subject  and  the  views  M  to  land  with
which  Mr.  George  has  become  identified.

UEORGE,  James  Zarharlah.  senator,  h.  in
Monroe  conn!  t.  ih-.ni. Be  lost  Ma  fft>

ther  in  infancy,  and  his  mother  removed,  when  he
was  eight  years  of  age.  to  Noxubee  county,  Miss.,
wlerc  he  was  educated  in  the  common  schools.
He  served  as  a  private  in  lie  l-t  Mississippi  volun-
teers, commanded  by  Jefferson  Davis,  during  the
Mexican  war.  and  was  at  the  hattle  of  Monterey.
On  his  return  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
Imr,  and  in  1H,">4  elected  rapOftorof  the  high  court
of  errors  and  appeals.  He  was  re-elected  in  1*00.
He  MTved  as  a  memltcrof  the  state  convention  that
passed  the  ordinance  of  secession,  which  he  voted
for  and  signed.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  20th
Mississippi  volunteers  in  the  Confederate  army,
and  subsequently  colonel  of  the  5th  Mississippi
cavalry,  lie  was, also  appointed  a  brigadicr-gen-
eral  of  militia.  He  was  chairman  of  US  Panto
cratic  state  executive  cominittee.  1n?5-'6.  was  ap-
|H.inted  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  BO  state
in  1870,  and  afterward  elected  chief  justice.  The
latter  otlice  he  resigned  in  February,  1KH1,  to  take
his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  His  term  expired  :{
March,  1S*7.  .ludge  George  prepared  and  pub-
lished ten  volumes  of  the  decisions  of  the  court  of
which  he  was  the  official  reporter,  and  sulwequent-
ly  issued  i'  digest  °t  Hbl  the  decisions  from  the  ad-
mission of  Mississippi  into  the  Union  to  and  in-
cluding the  year  1870.

I.  I  OKGK,  Samuel  Carr,  missionary,  h.  in  Al-
leghany county.  Pa.,  8  July,  1888.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Western  university  of  Pennsylvania  in
1858,  and  at  the  Western  theological  seminary  in
April,  1861.  In  the  following  October  he  was  or-
dained as  a  foreign  missionary,  and  sailed  the  same
month  for  Siam.  He  remained  there  until  the
spring  of  1873,  when  he  returned  to  the  United
States.  In  May,  1875,  he  was  installed  pastor  of
the  Rocky  Spring  and  St.  Thomas  Presbyterian
churches  in  Franklin  county.  Pa,  where  he  still
remains.  In  May,  188G,  he  was  elected  professor
of  the  Sanskrit  and  cognate  tongues  in  Wilson
female  college  at  Chambcrsburg,  Pa.  Mr.  George
founded  in  Wilson  college  a  scholarship  in  memory
of  his  wife,  and  has  presented  to  the  college  his
oriental  library,  comprising  works  written  in  Sans-
krit, Zend.  Pali  Siamese,  and  Burmese.  At  the
solicitation  of  a  London  publishing  firm  he  has
prepared  a  "Grammar  of  the  Siamese  Language,"
which  is  still  (1887)  in  manuscript.

(.KHAIIHM.  Alejandro,  R.  C.  bishop  of  Santo
Domingo,  l>.  in  Amelia,  Italy,  in  1455;  d.  in  Santo
DommgO  in  I0B6,  He  became  a  soldier  in  early
life  and  went  with  his  brother  to  Spain,  where  he
served  against  the  Portuguese  in  1475-'t>.  Be  after-
ward entered  the  church,  and  was  intrusted  with
the  education  of  the  princesses  of  the  royal  family.
While  at  court  he  rendered  an  important  MTvim
to  Columbus,  who  had  come  to  present  to  the  sov-
ereigns of  Castile  and  Aragon  his  plan  for  discov-
ering a  new  world.  Geraldini  says:  "They  were
discussing  this  project  in  a  council  composed  of
men  of  the  most  eminent  rank.  Opinions  wen
divided,  because  several  Spanish  prelates  treated
the  view  of  Columbus  as  manifest  heresy;  they
cited  the  authority  of  Nicolas  de  Lyra,  who  repre-
sents the  terrestrial  globe  as  not  containing  any
lands  on  the  sides,  neither  beneath  nor  beyond  the
Canaries;  and  that  of  St.  Augustine,  who  affirms
that  then-  are  no  anti|>odes.  1  chanced  to  be
standing  then  behind  Cardinal  de  Memlo/a,  a  man
equally  remarkable  for  his  accomplishments  and


c,->*


GERARD


(iKKIIARD


his  learning.  I  represented  to  hira  that  Nicolas  de
Lyra  had  been  ■  rety  able  theologian,  and  St  Au-
gustine, » doctor  of  the  church  illustrious  for  his
doctrine  and  sanctity,  but  that  Ixith  had  shown
themselree  bid  geographers,  for  the  Portuguese
had  roanhnd  a  |*>irit  on  the  other  hemisphere  where
tlirv  had  ln-t  Ught  <>f  the  |M)lar  star  and  had  dis-
eorored  mother  at  the  opposite  pole,  that  they  had
found  all  the  countries  under  the  torrid  zone  well
populated."  This  argument  produced  its  effect,
and  Columbus  was  heard.  Geraldini  was  employed
in  diplomatic  services  in  nearly  all  the  courts  of
Europe,  and  his  zeal  in  the  service  of  the  state  was
rewarded  Drat  with  the  bishopric  of  Volterra  and
Monte  Corvino,  and  finally  with  that  of  Santo  Do-
mingo, which  he  was  the  first  to  hold.  He  em-
barked in  1520  at  Seville  to  take  possession  of  his
see.  He  founded  schools  and  seminaries  in  the
island,  and  did  everything  in  his  power  for  its
spiritual  and  temporal  welfare.  Geraldini  wrote  a
gnat  many  works  on  theology,  collections  of  let-
ters, exhortations  addressed  to  Christian  princes
against  the  Turks,  poetry,  sacred  and  profane,  a
life  of  Catharine  of  Aragon  in  hexameter  verse,
treatises  on  politics  and  education,  and  finally  an
account  of  his  voyage  to  the  Antilles,  which  ap-
peared under  the  title  "Itinerarium  ad  regiones
sub  equinoctiali  plaga  constitutas  Alexandri  Ger-
aldini Amerini,  episcopi  civitatis  S.  Dominici  apud
I  ados  occidentals  "  (Rome,  1631).  This  work  gives
a  detailed  narrative  of  the  voyage  of  Geraldini
along  the  coast  of  Africa  to  the  mouth  of  the
Senegal  and  thence  to  Santo  Domingo.  The  editor
adds  a  sketch  of  the  life  of  the  author  and  a  list  of
his  works,  printed  and  in  manuscript.  The  test
part  of  the  work  is  the  description  of  Santo  Do-
mingo, the  condition  of  which  at  the  time  it  was
written  being  vividly  set  forth.  We  learn  from  it
that  already  the  native  race  had  been  almost  entire-
ly exterminated.  In  one  of  the  letters  annexed  to
his  relation  Geraldini  announces  that  he  is  sending,
among  other  rarities,  two  turkeys.  This  letter  was
written  in  1523,  and  is  consequently  prior  to  the
work  of  Oviedo,  who  had  been  regarded  as  the  first
author  who  mentioned  these  fowls.  Geraldini
wrote  a  curious  treatise  entitled  "  De  viris  Geral-
dinis  qui  in  obsequio  apostolicae  Sedis  per  varia
tempora  insudarunt,"  which  Alacci  read  in  manu-
script and  speaks  of  in  his  "Apes  urbame."

GERARD,  James  Watson,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1794;  d.  there,  7  Feb.,  1874.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1811,  and  soon  after
leaving  college  became  enrolled  in  a  volunteer  com-
pany called  "The  Iron  Greys,"  which  was  raised
for  the  defence  of  the  harbor  during  the  war  with
Great  Britain.  He  then  studied  law  with  George
Griffin,  and  practised  in  New  York  till  1869,  be-
coming (list  inguished  in  his  profession.  Mr.  Gerard
early  turned  his  attention  to  schemes  of  philan-
thropy. In  1823  he  became  a  member  of  the
"Society  for  the  prevention  of  pauperism,"  and
outlined  and  urged  on  the  public  mind  a  plan  for
the  establishment  of  the  institution  now  known  as
the  "  House  of  refuge  for  juvenile  delinquents,"
the  incorporation  of  which  he,  in  connection  with
others,  procured  in  March,  1824.  This  was  the
first  institution  of  the  kind  in  the  United  States.
He  was  the  first  person  in  this  country  to  advocate
a  uniformed  police.  By  letters,  addresses,  and  per-
sistent action,  he  so  impressed  the  importance  of
the  change  on  the  community  that  the  uniformed
system  was  adopted,  and  has  since  been  generally
employed  in  the  various  cities  of  the  United  States.
During  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  he  was  ac-
tively engaged  in  the  cause  of  public  education,


and  held  the  office  of  trustee  or  school-in-pr. dot
for  most  of  that  period.  Mr.  Gerard  invariably
declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  any  other  office*—
II:-  -on,  .lames  Watson,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York
citv,  about  1822,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1843.  He  was  active  in  the  profession  of  the  law
until  1880,  and  successively  occupied  the  oHices;  of
trustee  and  inspector  of  public  schools.  He  was
subsequently  a  state  senator  in  l876-'7.  He  is  the
author  of  several  minor  satirical  works,  including
"The  Pelican  Papers"  (New  York,  1878),  and  of
two  legal  works,  "Title  of  the  Corporation  and
others  to  the  Streets,  Wharves,  Lands,  and  Fran-
chises in  the  City  of  New  York"  (1872),  and
"  Titles  to  Real  Estate  in  the  State  of  New  York  "
(1873).  He  has  also  published  an  historical  work
called  "The  Peace  of  Utrecht"  (1885),  and  has
written  many  historical  papers  and  delivered  ad-
dresses chiefly  relating  to  the  early  colonial  history
of  the  state  of  New  York.

GERARD  DE  RAYNEVAL,  Conrad  Alexan-
dre, diplomatist,  b.  in  France;  d.  in  Strasburg  in
April,  1790.  He  was  one  of  the  secretaries  of  ( joaflj
de  Vergennes,  foreign  minister  under  Louis  XV  I.,
and  as  such  arranged  and  signed  the  treaty  between
France  and  the  United  States,  6  Feb.,  1778.  lie
was  the  first  French  minister  accredited  to  the
United  States,  reaching  Philadelphia  early  in  July
of  that  year.  He  remained  in  this  country  untd
September,  1779,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  the
Chevalier  de  la  Luzerne.  In  the  discussions  with
congress  in  1779  with  regard  to  the  conclusion  of  a
treaty  of  peace  with  Great  Britain,  and  arranging
the  boundaries  of  the  new  republic,  the  Chevalier
Gerard  bore  an  important  part,  enjoving  the  full
confidence  of  Count  de  Vergennes.  fn  1779  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale.

GERHARD,  William  Paul,  sanitary  engineer,
b.  in  Hamburg,  Germany,  30  July,  1854.  He  was
educated  at  the  gymnasium  in  Kiel  and  at  the
polytechnic  school  in  Carlsruhe,  where  he  was
graduated  as  a  civil  engineer  in  1875.  After  a
year  of  military  service  he.  became  an  assistant  en-
gineer in  Hamburg.  In  September,  1877,  he  came
to  the  United  States  and  settled  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
where  he  held  the  offices  of  assistant  engineer  in
the  department  of  public  works,  then  in  the  de-

Sartment  of  water-works,  and  finally  in  the  sewer
epartment.  During  1880  he  assisted  James  B.
Eads  in  the  preparation  of  the  plates  of  the  "  His-
tory of  the  St.  Louis  Bridge,  and  in  1881  be-
came chief  assistant  to  George  E.  Waring  in  New-
port. He  removed  to  New  \  ork  in  1883,  where  for
two  years  he  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Durham
house-drainage  company,  and  since  has  practised
sanitary  engineering,  devoting  himself  particularly
to  the  sanitation  of  buildings  and  towns.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  organizations  both  in  Ger-
many and  in  the  United  States.  During  1885-'6
he  edited  "  Building,"  and,  besides  articles  on  his
specialties  contributed  to  technical  journals,  he  has

Sublished  reports  on  the  sanitary  plumbing  and
rainageof  tenement-houses  in  the  annual  volumes
of  the  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut  state  boards
of  health.  His  larger  works  include  "  Anlagen
von  Haus-Entwasserungen  "  (Berlin,  1880); -Kia-

?ram  for  Sewer  Calculations"  (London  an
ork, 1882); "  House  -Drainage and Sanitary
Plumbing"  (New  York, 1883); "Hints on the
Drainage  and  Sewerage of Dwellings  "
••Sanitary Questions (1884); " Pnnzipien Ml
Haus-Kanalization"  (Leipsic.  1885);  "A  Guide  to.
Sanitarv House-Inspection" (New York.
"The  Prevention  of  Fire"  (1886);  "Not.-  embody-
ing the  Recent  Practice  in  Sanitary  Drainage  of


:  \KI>


GKKONIMO


no


!


1891)] "  l» omcetifl Sanitary  Appli-
:  an. I  "The  Disposal  of

i.i  i;n  \i:n. William  Wood.  phyefcien,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  §8  July. 1809; -I. t  \pril,

Be «m graduated at  DfaMnooa  in  i*26.  ami

^.-<l  the  degree  of  M.  I>.  from  1 1 »•  -  I'liivi-r-it  l
<.f  I*.  iiusylvaniii  in  1889. Aiter  gmluatiott  hocn-

:  the  IN-misylvaiiirt luwpitttl  as  n-i<l.nt  phyai-

where  he  >|H-nt  three  years  in  practical  study.

i  Kur«>|K'.  *|x'tit  several  vears  in  Paris

under  the  private  instruction  of  the  oelebreted  ino*

enltator,  I»r.  Louis,  and  l»'pni  investigations  into

tin-  character  >>f  Asiatic  cholera,  smalfpox,  tulx-r-

enlar  meningitis,  ami  pneumonia  in  tin"  young, Bi

collected  a  portion  <>f  the  materials  for  his

original  work  on  typhoid  ami  typhus  fevers.  which

ifterward  completed  by  establishing  the  speoifk
differences  Itetween  these  two  d'— W9",  After  his
return  to  Philadelphia  he  was  appointed  lecturer
in  the  medical  institute,  one  of  the  visiting  physi-
cians to  the  Blockley  hospital,  assistant  clinical
lecturer  to  the  late  Prof.  Jackson,  ami  subsequent  lv
one  of  the  physicians  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.
where  he  lectured  to  a  large  class  of  students,  and
for  twenty-five  successive  years  was  the  senior  phy-
sician to  that  institution.  He  was  the  author  of
numerous  valuable  papers  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  the  Medical  Sciences"  and  in  the  "  Medical
Examiner,"  of  which  paper  he  was  editor,  but  hit
principal  work  was  the  "  Diagnosis,  Pathology, and
Treatment  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Cheat."  which
first  appeared  as  a  short  treatise  on  the  "  Diagnosis
of  Thoracic  Diseases  "  (1KIT)).  At  the  request  of
many  of  his  pupils  he  added  general  symptoms
and  treatment,  with  additional  lectures  (1846;  en-
larged ed.,  1860).  It  was  again  issued,  being  a
4th  ed.,  in  1860,  revised  and  enlarged  (Phila-
delphia). Be  was  also  the  author  of  "Spotted
Kever,  or  Cerebro- Spinal  Meningitis"  (1863);
•  1  .vers  "  (1867-8) ;  and  a  "  Clinical  Guide  "  (Phila-
delphia). He  edited  Graves's  "System  of  Clinical
Medicines,"  with  notes  and  additions. — His  brother.
Benjamin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1818  :
d.  there,  18  June,  1864,  was  graduated  at  Dickin-
son college  in  1828,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1832.  He  filled  many  responsible  of-
loea  in  his  native  city,  and  during  the  earlv  part
of  the  civil  war  was  appointed  provost-marshal  of
Philadelphia  to  superintend  the  draft,  performing
the  duties  without  compensation.  He  was  also  a
founder  and  an  officer  of  the  Union  league.  His
li  was  hastened  by  his  devotion  to  the  national

-e.  As  a  lawyer  he  ranked  high,  and  pub-
liahed  several  carefully  edited  text-books,  among
which  are  "Staritie  on  Evidence "  and  Joshua
Williams's  "  Principles  of  the  Law  of  Personal
Property  "  (2d  American  edition,  from  the  2d  Ix>n-
don  edition,  edited  by  Benjamin  (icrhard  and
Samml  Wetherill,  Philadelphia,  1855).

GKKIIAKT,  Kin  a  ii  ue  1  Voirel.  educator,  b.  in
Preeburg,  Snyder  Co.,  Pa..  13  June,  1K17. He  was

United  at  Marshall  college.  Merccrsburg,  Pa,  in
1888,  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  a  clergy-
man of  the  German  fie  formed  church.  Be  subse-
quently received  the  decree  of  doctor  of  divinity.

He  was  president  of  Beidelberg  college  at  Tiffin,

Ohio,  and  professor  in the  theological seminary
from  ls.11  tili  is;,:,.  and  of  Franklin  and  Marshall
college  fn.m  1M.V.  till  istMi. In  1868  he  was  chosen
to  be  professor  of  systematic  and  practical  tin.
in  the  seminarv  of  the  Reformed  church  at I

Pa.,  and  president  of  the  faculty.  He  has
been  ■  frequent  contributor  to  religious  literature,
and  for  several  years  edited  the  "  Mcrcer>hurg  Ue-


Ilis  BJQSj important  work  is  •  Philosophy
and  Logic"  (Philadelphia,  I

UERMAINK,  I 'int  Sai  kville,

lab statesman, l>. in Kiiglend.  M  .Ian..  1?1<S;
il.  there,  96  An;'.. 1786, Be  WM the  third  son  of

the  tirM  Duke  of  Docoat Hli  father  being  lonl-

lieuteiianl  of  Ireland,  he  was  educated  at  Irinity
college.  Dublin.  He  enrfOd  in  the  British  army  in
Qennaay,  Sttfllnrrg  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general,
luit  was  cashiered  for  cowardice  at  the  Ixittle  of
Mindeii. lie  entered parliament in  1961,  and  OSJ

the  accession  of  Beorge  III.,  with  whom  be  was  a

favorite,  was  made  colonial  secretary,  in  which
office  he  ba<l  charge  of the  conduct  of  the  war

with  the  colonies, Be  ■eeJooolj  supported  all

vigorous  measures  against  the  colonists,  and  sternly
opjiosed  every  attempt  to  effect  a  termination  of
hostilities.  He  advocated  the  hiring  of  mercena-
ries, urgexl  the  Six  Nations  to  unite  against  the
rebels,  rejoiced  over  the  massacres  by  the  Indians,
praised  British  rapacity  and  cruelty  in  the  colonies,
and  applauded  the  plot  to  buy  Arnold  and  others.
He  was  so  consistently  an  opponent  of  all  lilieral
measure^  that  he  became  highly  unpopular  in  his
own  country,  and  during  the  London  riots  of  1780
he  was  coimicllcd  to  l»arricade  his  house.  In  1788
be  boOMM  Viscount  Sackville.  He  was  one  of  the
■apposed  authors  of  the  Junius  letters.  Bancroft,
in  his  "History  <>f  the  United  States."  represents
Lord  George  as  ambitious,  opinionated,  and  full  of
envy,  arrogant  in  speech  ana  combining  contemp-
tuous haughtiness  toward  his  inferiors  with  mean-
ness of  spirit.  Without  fidelity,  fixed  principles,
or  logical  clearness  of  mind,  and  unfit  to  conduct
armies  or  affairs,  he  joined  cowardice  to  love  of  sU.
perioritj  and  a  dislike  of  those  who  thwarted  him.
"  Apparelled  on  Sunday  morning  in  gala,"  says  the
historian,  "as  if  for  the  drawing-room,  he  con-
stantly marched  out  all  his  household  to  his  parish
church,  where  he  would  mark  time  for  the  singing-
gallery,  chide  a  rustic  chorister  for  a  discord,  stand
up  during  the  sermon  to  survey  the  congregation
or  overawe  the  idle,  and  gesticulate  approbation  to
the  preacher  or  cheer  him  by  name."

«.  I  K.MAN.  Obadiah,  senator,  b.  in  Dutchess
county,  N.  Y„  in  1767;  d.  in  Norwich,  N.  V.,  24
Sept.,1842.  He  received  an  academic  education,
and  removed  in  1792  to  Norwich,  N.  V.  He  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  1798,  1804-'5,  and
1807-'9.  He  was  then  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  22  May.  1809,  till  2
March,  1815.  He  voted  against  declaring  war  with
Great  Britain,  but.  after  hostilities  had  been  begun,
be  did  all  in  his  power  to  support  the  war  measures
of  the  administration.  He  was  again  elected  a
ajembof  of  the  assembly  in  1819,  and  chosen
speaker.  He  was  also  first  judge  of  Chenango
county  for  several  years,  and  was  subsequently  loan
commissioner  and  brigadier  -  general  of  militia.
Iiiiter  in  life  he  became  a  zealous  Whig.

GKKONIMO,  a  chief  of  the  Chiricahuas,  be-
longing to  the  Apache  tril>c  of  North  American
Indians.  As  Geronimo  had  for  some  time  been  at
the  head  Of  a  band  of  "  hostiles."  Lieut. -( Jen.  Sheri-
dan ordered  the  pursuit,  capture,  ami  destruction
of  the  chief  and  his  followers.  The  expedition  was
commanded  by  Ueii.  George  Crook,  and  a  meeting
with  (ieronimo  was  effected  OB  66  March,  l(
Qen. Crook  demanded  his  unconditional  surrender,
with  the  memberi  of  his  band  :  but  the  Indian  de-
clared that  he  would  give  himself  up  only  on  con-
dition that  the  luuid  should  be  sent  cast  for  a
period  not  exceeding  two  years,  with  the  privilege
of  taking  their  families  with  them,  and  that  they
should  ultimately  be  returned  to  the  reservation


680


GKRRY


OERRY


on  tlit-  original  status. The  forms  were  accepted,

ami  the  party  set  <>ut  for  Pari  Bowie.  On  '-'!'  lurch
the  Indians  escaped  t<»  the  mountains.  Gen.  Sheri-
dan bece liaarttsfled,  end,  ee  Gen.  Crook  asked

to  be  I'lii'Vid,  (Jen.  Nflsmi  A.  Miles  took  his  place.
The  instructions  given  to  the  latter  called  for  the
Oeaeeleea  pursuit  t>f  the  hostile  Indians,  and  sug-
flOStod  "the  active  and  prominent  use"  of  the
"regular  troops"  of  the  command.  Then  began
one  of  the  most  ex-
hausting and  pro-
longed Indian  cam-
paigns on  record.
I' In- Cliiricahuas were
followed  with  such
sleuth-like  pertinaci-
ty that  even  the  en-
durance of  the  red
men  found  its  limit.
The  hardy  old  chief
was  given  no  time  to
rest  or  recruit ;  his
followers  were  forced
to  keep  moving  until
they  yielded.  But,
even  when  reduced  to
such  straits,  Geronimo  succeeded  in  making  terms
with  his  captors.  When  the  news  was  received  in
Washington,  it  was  supposed  that  the  surrender
was  unconditional,  and  tne  president,  consequently
ordered  that  the  band  should  be  kept  as  prisoners
until  they  could  be  tried  for  their  crimes  or  other-
wise disposed  of.  It  was  subsequently  ascertained
that  the  "  hostiles  "  had  stipulated  that  they  should
be  sent  out  of  Arizona,  and  Gen.  Miles  had  ordered
them  taken  to  Fort  Marion,  at  St.  Augustine.  This
order  was  countermanded  by  the  president,  and
Geronimo  and  his  fourteen  adult  companions  were
sent  to  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  where  they  now  are  (1887).
GERRY,  Elbridge,  statesman,  b.  in  Marble-
head,  Mass..  17  July,  1744  ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  28  Nov.,  1814.  His  father,  Thomas  Gerry,
came  from  Newton,  England,  to  this  country  m
1780,  and  established  himself  as  a  merchant  in
Marblehead.  Elbridge  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  170T),  and  the  subject  for  master's  degree  as-
signed to  his  class  at  the  annual  commencement
afforded  him  an  opportunity,  under  the  guise  of
discussing  the  right  of  a  people  to  evade  ruinous
innovations  in  trade  and  revenue  laws,  to  give  his
views  on  the  principles  of  the  stamp-act  and  the
other  oppressive  revenue  measures  that  had  been
lately  enacted  by  the  British  government.  Gerry,
on  leaving  college,  entered  commercial  life,  and  in
a  short  time  had  amassed  a  considerable  fortune.
His  public  career  began  in  1773,  when  he  sat  in  the
general  court  of  Massachusetts  bay,  as  the  repre-
sentative of  Marblehead,  and  from  this  time  until
his  death  in  1814  he  was,  with  short  interruptions,
in  continuous  public  life.  In  1773  the  assembly
appointed  a  committee  of  correspondence,  consist-
ing of  Hancock,  Orne,  and  Gerry,  whose  duty  it
should  be  to  keep  informed  on  all  governmental
acts  relative  to  the  British  colonies,  and  communi-
cate with  the  sister  colonies  thereupon.  Gerry
was  an  active  member  of  this  committee,  and
warmly  supported  Samuel  Adams  in  his  dealings
with  Gov,  Hutchinson.  In  1774.  despite  the  pro-
hibitory order  of  Gov.  Gage,  an  assembly  elect  it  ui
took  place,  and  the  delegates  convened  at  Salem.
but  adjourned  first  to  Concord  and  then  to  Cam-
bridge. The  members  organized  as  a  provincial
congress,  and  held  sessions  thereafter  annually  at
Cambridge  and  Walertowu.  Berry  was  a  con-
spicuous member o£  this  revolutionary  body,  and


as  a  committee  of  safety  and  supplies  attended  to
the  collection  of  ammunition  and  proriskms  f«>r
the  militia.  He  drafted  a  bill,  which  was  adopted
in  177').  providing  for  the  fitting  out  of  priv.v
and  the  establishment  of  an  admiralty  court  for
the  adjudication  of  prizes.  The  putting  into
effect  of  this  measure  was  the  initiatory  step  to-
ward a  national  navy.  In  January,  177U.  Mr.
Gerry  was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress.  Associated  with  him  on  the  Massachu-
setts delegation  were  Hancock,  the  Adamses,  and
Paine.  He  acted  on  the  standing  committee  on
the  treasury,  on  that  for  providing  the  means  of
furnishing  supplies  to  the  army,  on  the  issu
bills  of  credit,  on  the  best  methods  of  conducting
the  business  of  legislation  in  congress,  ami  others.
The  committee  on  supplies,  consisting  of  Sherman,
Gerry,  and  Lewis,  attended  Washington  at  his
headquarters  near  New  York,  to  impure  into  the
necessities  of  the  troops  and  the  best  means  of  sup-
plying their  wants,  and  as  a  result  of  their  mission
some  measures  of  reform  in  regard  to  furnishing
clothing,  in  the  system  of  appointments  and  pro-
motions, in  the  enlistment  of  the  militia,  in  the
administration  of  the  quartermaster-general's  de-
partment, and  in  the  plan  of  hospital  establish-
ments, were  approved  by  congress.  Mr.  ( Jerry
early  advocatea  the  scheme  for  declaring  the  inde-
pendence of  the  colonies,  and,  when  the  proposi-
tion was  before  congress,  promoted  the  passage  of
the  measure  with  all  his  powers  of  argument,
seconding  at  the  final  stages  the  motion  for  adop-
tion, and  affixing  his  signature  on  its  enactment.
Congress  convened  at  Philadelphia,  4  March,  1777,
and  Gerry  attended  the  entire  session,  during
which  he  reported  a  resolution  authorizing  the
seizure  of  private  property  on  the  presentation  of
certificates  of  value,  as  a  substitute  for  the  wretch-
ed system  of  supply,  which  had  thrown  on  the
country  a  flood  of  depreciating  currency.  The
congress,  having  little  appreciation  of  the  embar-
rassments of  the  army,  sent  out  a  committee,  com-
posed of  Morris,  Gerry,  and  Jones,  to  examine
Washington  at  his  post  on  the  Schuykill  wit  h  re-
gard to  the  prosecution  of  a  winter  campaign  to
make  up  for  the
losses  of  the  sum-
mer and  autumn

of 1777. Their  A^  'Ifc^

report expressed  ■

some  dissatisfac-
tion, conveying
the  idea  that  a
more  vigorous
exertion  of  the
military  power
might  be  made.
The  plottings  of
the  "Conway  ca-
bal" had,  without
doubt,  an  effect
upon  the  congres-
sional committee,
but  it  is  improba-
ble that  they  con-
templated lend-
ing themselves  to  the  schemes  for  Washington's
overthrow.  The  Massachusetts  members  did  not
escape  from  the  charge  of  complicity,  but  <
correspondence  shows  that  the  imputation  was  un-
founded in  his  case,  although  he  cherished  resent;
ment  at  the  opposition  of  the  army  to  cot
sional  promotions.  Mr.  Gerry  is  credited  with
having,  during  this  session,  devised  the  plan  of
operations  for  Gates's  campaign  against  Burg


fffl?^U^-^rrt


en


Negotiations  for  a  treaty  of  peace  I  hi

the  spring  of  17?'.*.  hikI,  at  the  Instigation  of  .Mr.

it<i'iion  ..f  the fishery rights  was

tipulated  article f<>r  it  settlea lanfc It

while  he  wits  chairman  of  the  beaeiirw  eon>

the  oongrcas  of  ITOOt  i"  which  bod]  be

Iavii  elected  for  the  tlftli  time  in  November,

i,  tliiit M  r.  ( Jerry  came  into  the  conflict with

\rn>>lil.  wIiiim'  account-  he  overhauled  in

it  manner  highly  displeasing  to  that  officer.

-  senalaVeneesas  to  the  rights  of  adale-
revaign  ^t;it.-  involved  liim  In  a  «1  i fli -

cult v  with  LUimiSM in  Februan.  17*0.  w i i i •  •  1 1 led

bimtovaoata  tueaaal  in  that  body,  holding  that  the

it<-  ha<l  Im-«>m  Infringed  In  a  refusal  <>f
gram  to  order  the  yeas  ami  nays  on  a  question  of

(1  l>v  him. He  laid  Ins  < i|>laint  Iteforo

the  legislature,  which  passed  resolutions  of  protest.
This  incident  suspended  Mr.  (Jerry's  congressional
ce  for  about  three  years.  In  178!!,  on  a  joint
ballol  in  the  genera]  court,  he  was  recalled  to  the
position  of  a  representative  in  < gress.  Mean-
while his  constituents  had  given  him  their  siif-
tragee  for  state  senator  and  simultaneously  for
representative,  there  U-ing  at  that  time  no  pro-
vi-iou  against  plurality  ol  office.  He  undertook
only  the  duty  of  representing  his  town  In  the
lower  house,  declining  senatorial  servioa.  The
eongraai  to  which  Gem  was  now  slaotad  eondndad
the  treaty  of  peace  with  (Jreat  Britain,  and  lie  was
on  the  committee  to  arrange  the  matter.  The
states  at  that  time  regarded  their  dolagntaa  in  tha
light  of  ministers  from  independent  sovereignties,
and  the  Massachusetts  legislature  required  from
Mr.  (Jerry  a  fortnightly  report  <»f  his  proceedings.
The  proposition  to  organize  the  Society  ol  the
Cincinnati  met  with  the  determined  opposition  of
(Jerry,  who  lost  no  opportunity  In  public  and  pri-
vate Of  pointing  out  the  dangerona  character  of
such  an  unrcpuhlican  institution.  A  riot  in  Phila-
delphia in  1?n:{  caused  a  removal  of  congress  to
Princeton  in  June  of  that  year.  This  event  brought
up  the  plan  of  a  federal  city,  and  two  committee-.
with  (Jerry  as  chairman  of  each,  were  appointed  to
examine  sites.  In  April,  1  ?*•">.  Mr.  Gerry's  con-
stituents repeated  their  performance  of  designat-
ini:  him  for  two  elective  offices,  while  he  still  held
his  place  in  congress.  His  term  there  expired  in
September,  1785,  and  he  accepted  a  seat  in  the
popular  branch  of  the  legislature  of  his  state.  The
sentiment  of  Massachusetts  as  to  a  constitutional
convention  as  expressed  by  the  legislature  in  1785
was  in  favor  of  establishing  "the  Federal  govern-
ment on  a  firm  basis,  and  to  perfect  the  ("iiion,"
declaring  that  "the  present  powers  of  congress  of
the  1'nited  States,  as  contained  in  the  articles  of
confederation,  are  not  fully  adequate  to  the  great
purposes  they  were  originally  designed  to  effect."
These  resolutions  were  given  to  (Jerry,  lloltcn.
and  King,  in  the  form  of  in-t  met  ions,  but  they
Construed  them  as  merely  advisory,  and  opixwed
y  move  in  the  congress  of  17*5  toward  giv-
ing enlarged  powers  to  the  National  government.
They  wrote  a  letter  to  Gov.  Bowdoin  in  justifica-
tion of  their  action,  saying  that  '"  any  alteration
of  the  confederation  is  premature;  the  grant  of
commercial  power  should  be  temporary;  .  .  .  the
cry  for  more  power  in  congress  comes  especially
from  those  who-.-  views are  extended to an aris-

•y."  Qor.  Bowdoin  replied  to  the  effect  that
if  it  was  hazardous  to  intrust  congress  with  |><>wers
necessary  to  its  well-being,  the  Union  could  not
long  subsist  The  letters  of  (Jerry  and  King  being
Hired  in  by  Samuel  Adam».  then  president  of
senate,  stayed  any  demonstration  of  diaap-


Co||


A  court. Despite  thin  antago-
nistic attitude,  Mr.  Gerrj  was  elected  delegai
tin-  coii\ciitiou. Ha  took  part  in  all  its  dauber*-
lions,  and  succeeded  in  introducing  into  the
attention  soma  of  ins  propoaitiooa,  and  hh

directed  throughout  to  the  prevention  of
inco.-|K.ration  in  the  system  of  any  features  which
he regarded  as monarchical or  tending  to  aria*

tooraoy. At  the  Inal  moment,  nejardhea  of  the

pleading-*  of Washington  and  Franklin.  Oerry,

itandolph.  and  Mason  withheld  their  assent  to
the  constitution  as  adopted  by  the  convention.
(Jerry  returned  to  Massachusetts  to  seek  an  election
to  the  State  federal  convention,  hut  was  defeated
by  Francis  Dana.  The  convention  extended  to
him  an  invitation  to  attend  it-  sessions,  for  the
purtiose  of  answering  queetfoBI  of  fact  in  regard
to  tiie  constitution,  but  at  the  outset  he  created  a
commotion  in  the  assembly  by  offering  in  writing
a  reply  to  a  query,  some  members  thinking  that
be  -ouirht  to  interject  an  argument  under  the
gedaa  of  aueeeiing  a ejneenon. The  letter  which

caused  the  trouble,  together  with  an  account  of
the  scene  in  theconvention.  taken  from  the  "  Massa-
chusetts Sentinel."  is  printed  in  the  edition  of  the
debates  and  proceedings  of  the  convention,  pub-
lished by  the  legislature  iii  1856,  Mr.  (Jerry  stated
eight  objections  to  the  constitution,  all  of  which
he  could  waive,  were  it  not  that  the  National  legis-
lature had  general  power  to  make  "  necessary  and
proper "  laws,  to  raw  "armies  and  money"  with-
out limit,  and  to  establish  "a  star  chamber  a
civil  c -a-.-."  Weary  of  sitting  in  a  body  to  which
he  had  not  been  chosen,  he  soon  withdrew.

After  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  Gerry
was  in  accord  with  the  Republican  party,  which
elected  him  to  the  1st  National  congress  in  1789,  and
n-elected  him  in  1791.  In  1797  President  Adams
nominated  him  as  a  colleague  with  Marshall  and
Pinckney  to  go  on  a  mission  to  France  to  obtain
amends  for  French  depredations  on  our  com-
merce. In  France  they  suffered  many  indignities
at  the  hands  of  Talleyrand,  who  sent  mysterious
agents  with  disgraceful  propisitions,  involving
bribery  and  humiliation.  Marshall  and  Pinckney
soon  became  disgusted,  and  sailed  for  home,  but
(Jerry  thought  it  his  duty  to  hold  on.  in  the  hope
of  preventing  a  rupture  with  France.  (S-e  Ao.wis.
Jou.)  The  affair  aroused  great  indignation  in  the
United  States,  and  his  recall  waa  soon  ordered.

In  1800  the  Bepnbuoan  party  nominated  Mr.
(Jerry  for  governor,  and  in  a  close  election  he  was
defeated  by  Caleb  Strong.  In  1810  his  efforts  for
the  same  office  were  rewarded  with  SOOOaaa,  and  he
Barred  for  two  terms.  Hi-  administration  was  at
aj)eriod  of  high  party  spirit,  ami  he  put  into  full

•  the  Jefferaonian  principles  of  civil  sen
The  inonmbanta  of  the  civil  ofhoes  anara  speedily

removed  from  office,  and  their  places  filled  by
sympathizers  with  the  Republican  party,  causing
a  great  outcry  in  the  opposition  piq>ers.  The  Pad-
em!  press  liecauie  so  vitujierative  in  its  denuncia-
tions that  Gov.  (Jerry  resorted  to  the  extraordinary
step  of  making  the  matter  the  subject  of  a  sjKcial
message  to  the  legislature,  transmitting  at  the
-.•tine  time  a  report  of  the  attorney- and  solicitor-
general  regarding  the  UbaUona  articles.  The  mee-
oanaad  great  anilUaiwnl  and  the  opposition

rescinded  by  charging  the  governor  with  usurping
his  powers. The  disaffection  created  by  these  pro-

oeadinga,  and  the  onpopnlarity  oooaaioned  by  the

jMirtisan  redisricting  of  the  state,  which  was  called
by  the  Federali-ts  the  "(Jerrymander."  effected  an
overturn  at  the  next  election,  the  Fiderali-ts  gain-
ing control  of  the  house,  and  electing  Caleb  Strong


639


GERRY


GESNER


governor.  The  ex-irovernor's  devotion  and  Ber-
rien to  the  Republican  party  were  rewarded  in
1812  ■  itli  the  otiice  of  vice-president,  and  he  held
this  ollice  at  the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred
while  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  capitol.  lie  mar-
ried Ann,  daughter  of  Charles  Thomson,  secretary
of  congress,  who,  with  three  sous  ami  six  daugh-
ters, survived  him. Mr.  Gerrv's  career,  though

characterized  by  de-
votion to  party,  and
such  episodes  as  the
refusal  to  assent  to
a  vote  of  thanks  to
Hancock  on  his  re-
tirement from  the
presidency  of  con-
gress, the  opposi-
tion to  the  Society  of
the  Cincinnati,  and
t he  unhappy  French
mission,  was  honor-
able and  useful ;  and
his  patriotic  services
in  the  Revolution-
ary struggle  entitle
him  to  a  high  place
among  the  statesmen  of  the  early  days  of  the  re-
public. A  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory
in  the  congressional  burial-ground  at  Washing-
ton by  the  government.  (See  accompanying  illus-
tration.) His  messages  to  the  legislature  have  been
published  as  follows:  "Speech  of  His  Excellency
the  Governor  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachu-
setts to  both  Houses  of  the  Legislature,  at  the  Ses-
sion commencing  on  the  Second  Wednesday  in
January,  1812"  (Boston,  1811);  "Legislature  of
Massachusetts.  Speech,  June  7,  1811.  At  twelve
o'clock,  His  Excellency  the  Governor,  attended  by
His  Honor  the  Lieutenant-Governor  and  the  Hon-
orable Council  (completely  attired  in  cloth  of
American  manufacture),  met  the  two  Branches  of
the  Legislature"  (Boston,  1811);  "Message  from
His  Excellency  the  Governor,  February  27, 1812,  re-
garding Libellous  Articles  "  (Boston,  1812).  See  his
life  by  James  T.  Austin  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1828-'9) ;
and  a  sketch,  by  Henry  D.  Gilpin,  in  Sanderson's
"  Lives  of  the  Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence."— His  grandson,  Elbridge  Thomas,
lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  25  Dec,  1837,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1857,  studied  law  with
William Curtis  Noyes,  and  afterward  became  a

Sartner  in  the  firm  of  Noyes  and  Tracy.  On  the
eath  of  Mr.  Noyes,  in  1804,  he  formed  a  partner-
ship with  William  F.  Allen  and  Benjamin  B.  Ab-
bott, which  was  subsequently  dissolved.  He  has
attained  note  at  the  bar,  and  owns  one  of  the  finest
law  libraries  in  the  country,  numbering  12,000  vol-
umes. He  became  counsel  of  the  Society  for  the
prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals  in  1870.  took  an
active  part  in  the  formation  of  the  Society  for  the
prevention  of  cruelty  to  children  in  1874,  and  in
1879  was  elected  its  president.  Mr.  Gerry  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
18(57.  He  was  chosen  commodore  of  the  New  York
yacht  club  in  1886,  and  re-elected  in  1887.

GERRY,  Samuel  Lancaster,  artist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass..  10  May,  1813.  He  was  mostly  self-taught,
and,  with  the  exception  of  three  years  abroad,  his
professional  life  has  been  passed  chiefly  in  Boston.
He  was  an  original  member  oi  the  Boston  art  club,
and  its  president  in  1858.  Among  his  works  are
"  The  Gorge  of  the  Rhine,"  "  The  Old  Man  of  the
Mountain,  "  Pasture  Gate,"  "  Land  of  Beulah  "
(now  owned  by  Wellesley  college),  "Over  the  River."
"  Bridal  Tour  of  PrisciHa  and  John  Alden."  "The


Artist's  Dream  "  (1878),  and  "  American  Tourists,"
sent  to  the  exhibition  at  Philadelphia  in  1876.

GERSTACKER,  Friedrich,  German  traveller,
b.  in  Hamburg,  German v,  16  May,  1816;  d.  in
Vienna,  31  May,  1872.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a
grocer  in  Cassel.  but  in  lH^TengagedMoabin-boyfll
a  vessel  bound  from  Bremen  to  New  York.  In  this
country  he  was  forced  by  poverty  to  become  succes-
sively nreman  on  a  steamboat,  deck-hand,  farmer,
silversmith,  wood-cutter,  merchant,  and  hostler.
After  wandering  through  most  of  the  states  of  the
Union,  spending  some  time  as  a  hunter  and  trapper
in  the  Indian  territory,  and  keeping  a  hotel  at
Point  Coupee,  La.,  in  1842,  he  returned  to  Gcr-
many  in  1843,  and  engaged  in  literary  pursuits,
but  subsequently  made  trips  to  South  America,
Egypt,  and  around  the  world.  Gerstficker  was  a  vo-
luminous writer.  Those  of  his  works  that  relate  to
this  country  include  " Streif-  und  JagdzQge  (lurch
die  Vereinigten  Staaten  Nordamerikas "  (2  vols.,
Dresden,  1841);  "  Die  Regulatoren  in  Arkan
novel  (3  vols.,  Leipsic,  1846):  "  Mississippibilder'
(2  vols.,  Dresden,  1847);  "Die  Flusspiraten  des
Mississippi"  (3  vols.,  Leipsic,  1848);  "Amerika-
nische  Wald-  und  Strombilder"  (2  vols.,  1849);
"  Reisen,"  giving  an  account  of  his  first  journey
round  the  world  (5  vols.,  Stuttgart,  1852-'4);
"  Nach  Amerika  "  (6  vols.,  Leipsic,  1855) ;  "  Unter
dem  Aequator "  (3  vols.,  I860) ;  "  Neue  Reisen
durch  die  Vereinigten  Staaten,  Mexico,  Ecuador,
Westindien  und  Venezuela "  (2  vols.,  Jena,  1868) ;
"  Die  Blauen  und  die  Gelben,"  a  Venezuelan  char-
acter-sketch (2  vols.,  1870);  and  "In  Mexico"
(1871).  Several  of  his  books  have  been  translated
into  English.

GERVAIS,  John  Lewis,  b.  in  Germany,  8  Oct,
1753 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  2  Oct.,  171W.  He  rep-
resented South  Carolina  in  the  Continental  congress
in  1782-'3.  On  10  Sept.,  1782,  he  voted  for  a  mo-
tion that  the  secretary  for  foreign  affairs  be  di-
rected to  obtain  returns  of  slaves  and  other  prop-
erty carried  off  by  the  enemy  during  the  war,  such
information  to  be  used  in  negotiating  a  peace.  In
April,  1783,  he  was  a  member  of  a  committee  to
which  were  referred  letters  from  U.  S.  representa-
tives abroad,  and  on  15  April  of  that  year  favored
instructing  the  commander-in-chief  to  arrange
with  the  commander  of  the  British  forces  for  re-
ceiving possession  of  the  posts  in  the  United  States
that  were  occupied  by  British  troops.

GESCHEIDT,  Louis  Anthony,  physician,  b.
in  Dresden,  Germany,  19  Feb.,  1808;  d.  in  Has-
tings, N.  Y.,  20  Aug.,  1876.  He  was  educated  at
the  Karl-Sen  ule  in  Dresden,  and  was  designed  for
the  church,  but,  displaying  great  talent  for  natural
science,  was  sent  to  Dresden  university,  and  after-
ward to  the  University  of  Leipsic.  On  his  return
to  Dresden  he  became  the  assistant  of  Dr.  A.  (  'arus.
the  physiologist,  and  Dr.  F.  A.  Von  Amraen,  the
oculist,  and  during  the  cholera  epidemic  in  Berlin
was  sent  by  the  Dresden  municipality  to  investi-
gate the  nature  of  the  disease.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1835,  and  settled  in  New  York,  where
he  became  prominent  in  his  profession,  and  in  1870
retired  with  a  fortune.  He  published  a  work  on
••  Diseases  of  the  Eye"  (Dresden).

GESNER,  Abraham,  Canadian  geologist,  b,  in
Cornwallis,  N.  S..  2  May.  1797;  d.  in  Halifax
19  April,  1864.  He  was  a  son  of  Henry  Gesner,  a
loyalist,  who,  during  the  Revolutionary  war.  fled  to
Nova  Scotia,  where  he  received  a  grant  of  land  in
compensation  for  that  confiscated  in  New  Yorfe
The  voung  man  studied  medicine  at  St.  Bartholo-
mew's hospital,  and  surgery  at  Guy's  hospital  in
London,  and.  after  receiving  his  degree,  returned


OHFHAUIU


888


ten
art


in  1*24.  At  fir-t  he  practised  his
nrofiaalon.  but  soon  turned  his  attention  t"  sci-
entific pursuit*. In  1888  !»<•  was  appointed  bj  the

legislatures  of  tin-  lower  prorinoMoi  Hritinh  S< >rt h
tioa  t<>  explore  end  report  on  their  geological
iroea, In  this  connection  In-  made  collections

of  minerals,  of  ■peeiinena  Illustrating  the  ail  i  eja,

ami  <>f  ethnological  implements,  ami  also  gat  hi
■any  other  objects  of  natural  history,  which  now

litute  the  Gesner  museum  In  St.  Johns,  N.  H.
Be  beoeme  familiar  with  numerous  Indian  dial
ami  was  appointed  Indian  commissioner  <>f  Nova
I»r.  (iesncr  lia.l  an  excellent  knowl-
edge of  chemistry,  ami  was  among  those  who  early

ne  connected  with the  development of  arti-
illuminants  from  hydrocarbons. In 1N.">1 he

■  i  men  ted  with  Trinidad  asphalt,  and  obtained
from  it  an  illuminating  oil.  Sul»sequently  he  dis-
tilled an  oil,  suitable  for  boning  in  lamps,  from
eannel  coal  ami  bituminous  shale,  thus  originating
in  America  the  discovery  of  ••  kero-ene,"  the  name
which  he  gare  it.  and  which  since  has  been  ex-
tended to  all  mineral  illuminating  oils.  The  name,
as  he  Hrst  formed  it,  was  "  kcroselain,"  from  the
Greek  &ip6s,  wax.  and  (Kcuor.  oil,  and  was  suggested
by  the  waxy  nature  of  paraffin,  which  is  derived
from  the  distillation  of  l>itumim>us  substances,
coming  over  with  the  oilv  part  of  the  distillate.
Afterward  it  was  shortened  to  ••  kerosene."  In  1881
pr.  Oeroer  came  to  New  York,  and  took  out  sev-
eral patents  for  the  manufacture  of  kerosene  from
ciniI.  but  subsequently  dis|K>sed  of  them  to  the  New
York  kerosene  company,  whose  extensive  works
were  erected  under  his  su|>ervision.  These  soon
ceased  to  be  valuable  in  consequence  of  the  discov-
ery of  petroleum  in  Pennsylvania,  at  which  time
there  were  lifty-six  moil  factories  in  the  United
States.  Shortly  lie  fore  his  death  he  returned  to
Nova  Scotia.  "fH1^  to  till  the  chair  of  natural
history  in  Dolhonaki  college,  but  meanwhile  occu-

Kied  himself  with  literary  work.  He  was  a  inem-
er  of  the  Royal  geological  society  of  London  and
of  other  scientific  associations  in  England,  and  also
maintained  a  continual  correspondence  with  emi-
nent M-ientisis  abroad,  among  whom  were  Sir  Rod-
erick Murchison,  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  and  the  Earl  of
Dundonald.  liesides  scientific  papers  and  reports,
he  pnbUahed  "  Remarks  on  the  Geology  and  Min-
anuogy  of  Nova  Scotia  "<  Halifax,  1837);  "Reports
on  the  Geological  Survey  of  the  Province  of  New
Brunswick  *'  (St  Johns,  1844);  "New  Brunswick,
with  Notes  for  Emigrants'1  (London,  1847);  "In-
dustrial Resources  <>f  Nova  S-otia"(  Halifax,  1849);
"A  Practical  Treatise  on  Coal  Petroleum  and  other
Distilled  oils"  (New  York,  1801).  He  left  an  un-
completed manuscript  on  "The  Fisheries  of  the
Provinces,"  which  has  not  been  published,
i.l  UN.  Uronrr  Washington,  M.ldicr.  I>.  in
town,  l».  C.  2  Oct.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  l*.  S.  military  academy  in  ls|n.  as-
signed to  the  4th  artillery,  and  served  at  Detroit
faring  the  border  disturbances  of  that  year.  After
doiiiu'  garrison  duty  at  various  posts,  he  was  pro-
pjoted  i"  l-t  lieutenant  on  81  Oct.,  1846.  During
tin- M.  \ican war he was brevetted captain,  20

Aug..  1st?,  for  gallantry  at  Contreraa  and  Choru-
nid  was  also  engaged  at  Molino  del  Rev,
Otupullepec,  and  the  assault  and  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  From  this  time  till  the  civil  war
he  was  iii  various  garrisons,  but  fought  against  the
Baminoles  in  l849-'60  and  18S6-*7,  and  took  part
in  qnelling  the  Kansas  disturbances  of  It
He  was  made  aide-de-camp,  with  the  rank  of  liee>


tenant-col< I,  on  86  Sept..  1861,  commanded  the

artillery  in  the  engagements  near  Bodd'a  Perry  in


inUr  and  DeceinU-r  of  that  year,  and  in  the
paajaaajai  aaanaigaof  1888  nom manned  four  i«t-
Vorktown,  Gaines*!  Mill-,  ami  Malvern
Hill.  He  was  at  .South  Mountain  and  AntHtam.
was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  oi
Spt.,  1888,  and  took  |«art  in  the  itappahanm*  k
campaign  of  l866-*8.  being  engaged  at  PlfjbV  I
burg  and  in  the  defence  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  from  11
April  till  .'{  May.  and  receiving  the  •  lien*

tcnant-coloiicl  on  1!»  April  for  his  Barrier*,  lb-
was  hrcvcttc.l  colonel  for  gallantry  at  the  battle
of  the  Wilderness,  whan  he  was  severely  wounded,
-irveil  in  the  defence  of  Washington  in' .luly.  I
and  in  the  Shenandoah  campaign,  being  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteer-.  I  Aug.,  1H04.  for  his
services  at  Winchester  and  Fi-her-  Hill,  ami  brig-
adier-general in  the  regular  army  for  gallantry  at
Petersburg.  He  wa-  at  Fee's  surrender,  ami  on  V.i
March,  1886,  was  brevetted  major-general.  I
army,  for  services  during  the  war.  He  Ix-came
colo'nel  of  the  :17th  infantry  on  88  July.  1H»W1,  was
transferred  to  the  artillery  in  1870,  and  afterward
served  in  command  of  various  districts  and  posts.
He  commanded  the  troops  along  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad  during  the  riots  of  1H?7.  and.
on  2  Oct..  1883,  was  retired  from  active  service.

GEY  KB.  Henry  Sheflle,  jurist,  b.  in  Frederick-
town,  Md..  9  Dec.  1790;  d.  in  St.  Louis.  Mo.,  6
March,  1859.  He  began  to  practise  law  in  his  na-
tive city  in  1811,  and  on  80  May.  1H1:{.  became  l-t
lieutenant  in  the 88th  infantry.  He  was  made  regi-
mental paymaster  on  25  Dec.,  ami  served  till  June,
1815,  when  he  was  mustered  out.  He  then  removed
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  at  that  time  a  frontier  village,  and
was  a  member  of  the  territorial  legislature  in  1818,
and  captain  of  the  first  militia  eotnpany  in  the
territory.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  con-
stitutional convention  of  1820,  and  was  Ave  times
chosen  to  the  legislature  after  the  admission  of
Missouri  to  the  Union,  serving  as  sjn-aker  of  the
first  three  general  assemblies  of  the  state.  In  1825
he  was  one  of  the  revisers  of  the  statutes,  and  con-
tributed largely  to  the  adoption  of  a  code,  which
was  at  that  time  superior  t«>  that  of  any  other
western  state.  He  declined  the  post  of  secretary
of  war,  tendered  him  by  President  Fillmore  in
1850,  and  was  then  elected  F.  s.  senator  over
Thomas  H.  Benton,  on  the  fortieth  ballot,  by  a
majority  of  five  vote-.  He  tarred  from  1851  till
1857,  and  while  in  Washington  was  one  of  the
counsel  fa  the  I>red  Scott  case.  He  was  the  oldest
member  of  the  St.  Louis  l>ar.  l>oth  in  years  and  in

Srofessional  standing.  He  published  "  Statutes  of
Uaaonri  "  (St.  Loola,  ihi7i.
GHEKAKDI,  Bancroft,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Jackson.  La..  10  Nov..  1688.  He  entered  the  navy
from  Massachusetts  as  midshipman.  29  June,  1846,
Barred  on  the  -  Ohio,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,  till
is."i<>,  entered  the  naval  academy  in  1868,  and  was
made  pa-sed  midshipman  on  8  June  of  that  year.
He  Ix-came  master  ami  lieutenant  in  1N.V>.  and  at
tin-  beginning  of  the  civil  war  was  on  the  "Lan-
caster." of  the  Pacific  -quadroii.  He  was  made
lieiitenant-coniinaniler.  M  July.  1888,  t"ok  part  in
the  engagement  with  Fort  Macon  in  that  year,  and
in  lw;:t-'4  commanded  successively  the  gun-lxiat
"Ch<x-orua"  ami  the  steamer  "  Port  Royal."  of  the
West  (iulf  blockading  squadron.  In  the  lattcrves-
scl  betook  part  in  the  kittle  of  Mobile  Hay,  and
distinguished  himself  for  coolness  and  courage.
During  the  action,  by  the  orders  of  (apt.  Thorn-
ton  A.  Jenkins,  to  whose  Teasel,  the  "  Richmond,"

the  ••  Port  Royal  "  wa-  lashed,  Oherardi  anal  off,

and  west in  chase  of the  Confederate  gun-lioats
"  Morgan."  "  Gaines,"  and  '•  Selina." loiter  in  the


o:u


CHoLSON


GIBBKS


war  be  commanded  the  ?Fmm6."  Re  WM  WO-
noted  i"  commander  in  1884  to  captain  in  1874,
■ad  to  oommodora  In  1884,  and  in  [886  served  on
the  tn.ard  <>f  examiners  for  promotion.  In  l*s'''  be
WM  mode  commandant  of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard,
and  on  M  Aug.,  1887,  be  l»eeame  rear-admiral.

GHOLSON,  Samuel  Jameson,  jurist.  I),  in
Madison  eountv,  Ky.,  15)  May,  1808:  d.  in  Aberdeen.
Mis-..  It;  Oct..  1888.  He  went  with  his  family  in  1H17
(0  Alabama,  was  educated  in  the  common  schools  in
that  state,  studied  law  at  Russellville,  Ala.. and  was
admitted  to  the  bur.  He  removed  to  Athens,  Miss.,
in  1880,  and  in  1833-'6  was  a  member  of  the  Mis-
sissippi legislature.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as
a  Democrat  in  January,  1837,  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and
a  few  months  afterward  was  elected  for  a  full  term  :
but  his  seat  was  contested  by  his  opponent,  and  on
31  .Ian.,  1838,  was  declared  vacant  by  the  house.
While  in  congress,  he  had  several  sharp  passages
with  Henry  A.  Wise,  of  Virginia,  and  a  duel  be-
tween the  two  was  at  one  time  prevented  only  by
the  influence  of  John  C.  Calhoun  and  other  friends
of  the  disputants.  Mr.  Qbolson  was  appointed  U.
S.  judge  for  the  district  of  Mississippi  by  President
Van  Buren  in  1888,  and  held  this  office  till  18(51,
when  he  resigned  and  took  an  active  part  in  the
secession  convention.  He  then  enlisted  in  the  Con-
federate armvas  a  private,  was  chosen  captain,  and
after  the  fail  of  Fort  Donelson,  where  he  was
wounded,  raised  another  company  and  was  at  Iuka
and  Corinth,  where  he  was  wounded  again.  He
was  made  major-general  of  state  troops  in  the
spring  of  18(53.  and  on  1  June,  18(54,  was  promoted
to  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate  army,  com-
manding a  cavalry  brigade  in  Alabama,  Missis-
sippi, and  Louisiana.  He  received  two  more  seri-
ous wounds  near  Jackson  in  1864,  and  on  27  Dec.
of  that  vear  lost  his  right  arm  in  the  action  at
Egypt,  Miss.  After  the  war  he  was  again  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  in  18(56  and  1878,  being
speaker  of  the  liouse  in  the  latter  year. — His  cous-
in, William  Yates,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1807;
d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  21  Sept.,  1870,  was  the  son
of  Thomas  Gholson,  member  of  congress  from  Vir-
ginia in  18()8-'1(5.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1825,  studied  law  with  Creed  Taylor,  removed
to  Mississippi,  where  he  practised  for  several  years,
and  then  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  was  judge  of
the  Cincinnati  superior  court  in  1854-'9,  and  of
the  Ohio  supreme  court  in  1860-'5.  He  had  few
equals  at  the  Ohio  bar,  and  was  an  effective  politi-
cal speaker.  He  published  an  "Ohio  Digest." —
Another  cousin,  Tliomas  Saunders,  son  of  Maj.
William  Gholson,  b.  in  Gholsonville,  Brunswick  co.,
Ya..  9  Dec,  1809 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  13,  Dec,
1868,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia
in  1827.  He  became  a  judge  of  the  state  circuit
court  in  1859,  was  president  of  several  railroads,
and  founded  and  aided  to  support  a  public  library
in  Petersburg,  Va.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Con-
federate congress. — His  elder  brother,  James  Her-
hkkt.  b.  in  Virginia  in  1798;  d.  in  Brunswick.  Va..
2  July,  1848,  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1833-'5.

GIHAl'LT,  Peter,  clergyman,  d.  probably  in
New  Madrid,  Mo.,  near  the  end  of  the  18th  century.
He  was  vicar-general  for  the  bishop  of  Quebec
over  Illinois  and  the  adjacent  countries.  In  1770
be  was  sent  to  Post  Vincennesat  the  request  of  the
inhabitants,  and  remained  there  two  months.  He
afterward  resided  in  Kaskaskia,  Cahokia,  and  St.
Genevieve.  For  a  long  time  he  was  the  only  priest
in  Illinois  and  Indiana,  and  the  lalxirs  and  jour-
neys in  which  he  is  said  to  have  engaged  seem  in-
credible. He  embraced  ardently  the  cause  of
American independence. When  Col.  Clark  cap-


tured Kaskaskia.  4  July.  1778,  and  Cahokia  after-
ward. Father  Gibaoll  was  principally  instrumental
in  rallying  the  French  settlers  on  the  Wabash  and
Mississippi  to  the  American  cause.  When  Clark  de-
termined on  taking  Vincennes.  he  sent  Gibaolt  for-
ward to  learn  the  views  of  the  inhabitants.  On  his
arrival  he  assembled  them  in  the  church,  explained
the  object  of  his  mission,  and  aroused  such  enthusi-
asm that  they  rose  en  maxxe  and  took  the  oath  of
allegiance  to  the  commonwealth  of  Virginia.  A
commander,  ("apt.  Helm,  was  elected,  and  Col.
Clark  found  himself  master  of  Vincennes  without
striking  a  blow.  Father  Gibault  did  much  to  ren-
der the  Indian  trills  friendly  to  the  American
government,  and  in  this  way  facilitated  the  mihao
quenl  occupation  of  the  northwest  by  t  he  United
States.  Vincennes  was  retaken  by  the  British,  and
when  Col.  Clark  marched  to  dispossess  them  a
small  body  of  French  Canadians  was  induced  to
join  him  by  Gibault.  Col.  Clark  appeared  before
the  town,  but  hesitated  to  attack  it;  until,  urged
by  Gibault,  he  retook  it,  27  Feb.,  1779.  For  his
patriotism  on  this  and  previous  occasions  Gibault
received  the  thanks  of  the  commonwealth  of  Vir-
ginia. He  then  returned  to  his  missionary  duties,
and  in  1785  fixed  his  residence  at  Vincennes,  finally
leaving  it,  11  Oct.,  1789.  In  1791  he  petitioned  the
governor  of  the  northwestern  territory  for  the  re-
payment of  7,800  livres  by  the  United  States  govern-
ment, which  he  had  advanced  for  the  public  ser-
vice, and  also  for  five  acres  of  the  government  land
near  Cahokia.  Gov.  St.  Clair,  in  his  report  to
Thomas  Jefferson,  secretary  of  state,  dwelt  on  the
services  rendered  by  Father  Gibault  and  the  losses
he  had  suffered ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  his
services  were  recognized  in  any  wav,  or  that  he
was  repaid  the  money  advanced.  "  Next  to  Clark
and  Vigo,"  says  Judge  Law,  "the  United  Slates
are  indebted  more  to  Father  Gibault  for  the  acces-
sion of  the  states  comprised  in  what  was  the  origi-
nal Northwest  territory  than  to  any  other  man.'*
(.1  BBKS.  William  Hasell,  lawyer,  b.  in  (ha  rles-
ton,  S.  C,  16  March,  1754;  d.  in  1831.  His  great-
grandfather, Robert,  was  chief  justice  of  South
Carolina  in  1708,  and  his  father,  William,  was  one
of  the  secret  committee  of  five  of  the  council  of
safety  in  Charleston  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lution. William  Hasell  studied  law  with  John  Rut-
ledge,  and  afterward,  in  1774,  at  the  Inner  Temple,
London.  He  was  one  of  the  thirty  native  Ameri-
cans residing  in  London  who  petitioned  the  king
against  the  series  of  acts  of  parliament  that  were
the  immediate  cause  of  the  Revolution.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  he  escaped  to  Bermuda,  went
thence  to  Charleston,  where  he  became  captain-
lieutenant  of  the  ancient  battalion  of  artillery,  and
fought  at  Beaufort  and  in  the  siege  of  Savannah.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  prior  to  1783,  and
from  that  year  till  his  resignation  in  December,
1888,  was  master  in  chancery.  In  1811  he  was
tried  before  the  state  senate  on  articles  of  impeach-
ment preferred  by  Thomas  Lehre.  senior,  but  was
acquitted. — His  son.  Robert  Wilson,  scienti-t  and
historian,  b.  in  Charleston.  S.  C,  8  July,  1809;  d.
in  Columbia,  S.  C,  15  Oct.,  1866.  was  graduated  at
South  Carolina  college  in  1827,  and  at  the  Medical
college  of  South  Carolina,  Charleston,  in  183b.  after
attending  lectures  in  Philadelphia  in  1827-^  In
1827-'35  he  was  assistant  professor  of  chemistry,

feology,  and  mineralogy  in  South  Carolina  college.
le  was  twice  mayor  of  Columbia,  and  in  18"
was  editor  of  the  "  Daily  South-Carolinian  "  and
the  "Weekly  Banner."  He  was  surgeon-general
of  the  state  from  1861  till  the  close  of  the  war.  and
during  that  time  made  an  examination  of  the  Vir-


(illll


(Hit  RONS


688


ginia  hospitals,  f'-r  which  ee  ww  praised  by  the
Confederate  (jongTiae  iii  1885,  when  Columbia
wait  burned,  he  lost  Ins  hotis«*.  witli  valuable  colles*
tions  of  jMiintings.  fossils,  ami  mineral*.  His  chief
■  title  researches  were  devoted  to  tin-  descrip-
tion "f  organic  remains  from  his  native  state,  and
Include  a  "  Monograph  on  h'o*.«il  SqualidnV'  in  the
journal  of  tin-  Philadelphia  academy  of  sciences,
and  ■  "  Memoir  on  stonossurcs  ami  the  Th

nera,"  in  the  "Smithsonian  Oontribu-

•  Knowledg  Hi' was  llto  the  au-

thor of  an  article  00  "  Typhoid  Pneumonia."  in  tin*
M American  Journal  of  tin Medical  S

hich  revolutionized  the  treatment  of  the  dis-
ease by  opposing  the  use  of  the  lancet,  ami  wrote
■smoirs  of  the  artists  James  I ><■  Veaox  i<  olumbia,

ml  Charles  Frazcr.aml  "Cuba  for  Invalids"
(I860).  Many  of  his  scientific  articles  were  repub-
lished in  Frame  ami  Germany.  His  chief  literary
work,  tin*  material  for  which  he  was  twenty-five
years  in  collecting,  is  a  "  Documentary  History  of
"the  American  Revolution;  consisting  of  Letters
ami  Papers  relating  to  the  Contest  for  Liberty,
chief! v  in  South  Carolina,"  covering  the  years  from

1784  to  1789  (8  vols..  Columbia.  S.  ('."and  New
York.  1858).— Robert  Wilson's  son,  Robert  WH-
MM,  b.  in  Columbia.  S.  C.  1(1  June,  ls:il  ;  d.  there.
23  Oct..  is?.*),  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  col-
lege in  1848,  and  at  the  Medical  college  of  South
Carolina  in  1858,  afterward  spending  two  years
abroad.  He  was  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Uni-
versity <>f  South  Carolina  in  lN72-*3.  and  was  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  literature  of  his  profession.
(.  I  It  HON.  John,  soldier,  b.  near  Hohnssbarg
Pa..  80  April.  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1847,  assigned  to  the  artillery,
and  served  at  the  city  of  Mexico  and  Toluca  till
the  eloee  of  the  Mexican  war.  From  this  time  till
the  civil  war  he  was  largely  on  frontier  and  garri-
son duty,  but  was  assistant  instructor  of  artillery
at  v7esl  Point  iti  1854-'7.  and  quartermaster  there
in  1886-*8.  <  »n  8  Nov.,  1859,  he  became  captain  in
the  4th  artillery.  He  was  chief  of  artillerv  of  Sen.
McDowells  division  from  88  Oct..  1881,  till  :.'  May.
1888,  and  at  the  latter  date  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  commanded  ft  brigade
through  the  Northern  Virginia.  Maryland,  Rappa-
hannock, ami  Pennsylvania  campaign!  in  18G2-*3,
receiving  the  brevets  of  major  in  the  regular  army,
17  Sept.,  ISfJ'J.  for  Antietam;  lieutenant-colonel,
13  Dec,  1888,  for  Fredericksburg,  where  he  com-
manded a  division,  was  wounded,  and  disabled  for
three  months;  and  colonel,  4. Inly,  18(>3.  for  Gettys-
burg, where  he  was  severely  wounded  while  in
command  of  the  2d  army  corps.  He  was  disabled
bv  this  wound  till  15  Nov.,  when  he  commanded
lie  draft  depot  at  Philadelphia  till  21  Match.  1864
-  then  assigned  to  a  division  of  the  8d  corps,
becoming  a  major-general  of  volunteers  on  7  June,
1864,  and  being  engaged  at  the  Wilderness,  sp.tt-
sylvania.  and  Cold  Harbor.  After  15  Jan..  ls»>">.
he  commanded  the  844  h  army  corps,  and  was  before
Petersburg  from  15  June,  1884,  till  8  April.  1885,
taking  pari  in  the  assaults  of  the  last  twodaj
strrying  two  redoubts.  He  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-geiieral  and  uiajor-getieral.  U.S.  army,  to  date
from  18  March.  1865,  was  one  of  the commission-
csrry  into  effect  the  stipulations  for  Lie's
surrender,  and  was  mustered  out  of  volunteer  ssr-
.  15  Jan.,  lsMi.  Sime  the  war  he  has  com-
Handed  various  posts  as  colonel  of  the  30th  infant-
ry in  nd  of  the  7th  infantry  in  18faV88,
sas  superintendent  of  the  general  recruiting
service  in  New  York  city  in  1*73.  had  char-'
tin  Yellowstone  expedition  against  Sitting  Hull  in  |


:.  commanded  in  the  ac-
tion with  the  Sen  Peresi  Indians  si  Mig  Hots  Pass,

Montana,  when-  he  was  wounded.  He  temjiorarily
commanded  the  department  of  Hakotain  1N7N.  and
since  'iti  July.  1kkT>.  that  of  the  Columbia,  having
charge  in  direction  of  the  president,  of

the  suppression  of  the  riots  agslmi  tin-  ChtttSM  in
Washington  territory. On K»  Julv.  l*si;. he  was

promoted  to  brigadier-general. (Jen.  Gibbon  baa

published  "The  Artillerist's Manual"  (New  York.

and  has  contributed  articles  to  current  litem-

tats,  including  DM  on  "Our  Indian  Question"  la

the  Journal  of  the  military  ser\  ice  institution,  for
which  a  prize  medal  was  awarded  him.

GIBBONS.  Edward,  b.  in  RngUnd;  d.  in  Itos-

ton.  Mass..!*  |)ec.  HJ.VJ.  Hi  rcichiil  this  country
as  earlv  as  L888,  and  bsflSJM  a  merchant  in  Bos-
ton, lie  was  representative  to  the  general  court
in  l688-'47,  and  in  1044.  when  the  militia  was
organized,  was  ottOSM  to  command  the  Suffolk
regiment  with  tin-  title  of  sergeant-major.  lb-
was  major-general  of  militia  in  1848-TO,  assist-
ant in  1680  I.  and  captain  of  the  ancient  and
honorable  artillery  companv.  Johnson,  in  his
••  \Yomler-Working  Providences,"  speaks  of  him  as
"a  man  of  resolute  spirit,  bold  as  a  lion,  very  gen-
erous ami  forward  to  promote  all  military  mat'
his  forts  are  well  contrived  and  batteries  strong
and  in  good  repair."  He  advanced  over  BS«600  to
Charles  1a  Tour(y.  v.),  secured  by  mortgage  of  the
hitter's  fort  and  lands  in  Acadia,  and  lost  his  money
on  the  capture  of  the  fort  DY  Aulnay  tie  Charnisc
in  1047. In  1841  Gen,  Gibbons  was  one  of  the

commissioners  that  formed  the  confederation  of
that  year  between  the  colonies  of  Massachusetts,
Plymouth.  Connecticut,  and  New  Haven.

OIHHONS.  James,  educator.  b>  in  West  town.
Pa.,  18  Mav.  173<»:  d.  in  Birmingham,  Chester  co.,
Pa..  17  Oct.,  lN'Jo.  His  great  -grand  fat  her.  John
Gibbons,  was  among  the  SSliiesI  Quaker  settlers  of
Pennsylvania,  James  was  educated  by  his  parents
and  became  an  accomplished  scholar,  linguist,  and
mathematician.  He  was  treasurer  of  Chaster  COBB-
ty  and  a  member  Of  the  general  assembly  of  Penn-
svlvania  for  the  three  years  immediately  preceding
the  Declaration  of  Inde|>endence.  As  a  mcmlierof
the  BotAsty of  Friends  and  a  non-comliatant,  he
retired  from  all  public  service  at  the  outbreak  of
the  Revolution.  Hs  conducted  a  saocessfnl  private
school  at  his  country  home,  and  afterward  in  Phila-
delphia. In  17!»"»  he  sold  his  farm  of  000  acres  to
the  Friends,  and  there  they  established  their  well-
known  "  Westtown  School. '  The  remainder  of  his
life  was  s|K'tit  in  retirement  upon  his  farm  in  Ches-
ter count  v.— His  >on.  William,  phvsician.  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa..  10  An-.  1781;  d."  in  Wilming-
ton. DeL  88  July,  1845,  WSS  educated  by  his  father,
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Cniversity  of
Pennsylvania  in  1885,  and  practised  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.  He  was  first  pfSSMSttl  of  the  Delaware
academy  of  natural  sciences,  of  the  Peace  society.
and  of  the  Delaware  temperance  society,  and  was
an  active  member  of  the  Society  for  preventing  the
kidnapping  of  negroes.  Dr.  Gibbons  established
and  conducted  in  1884-^8.  at  his  own  ex|H'tise,  a
religious  periodiosl  entitled  the  "  Ilercan."  devoted
to  the  principles  of  the  Society  Of  Friends,  ami  took
a  prominent  part  in  the  religious  controversy  that
resulted  in  the  separation  of  the  society  in  1857
into  the  divisions  since  known  as  "  Friends  "  and
"Orthodox  Friends."  He  also  wrote  aUnit  1881,
under  the  signature  of  "  N  index."  a  si>riesof  letters
replying  to  an  attack  on  the  Friends  made  by  a
Presbyterian  clergyman,  which  is  one  of  the  clear-
est  exjtositious  of  (Quaker  doctrines published  in


886


GIBBONS


GIBBONS


modern  times, and  was  tin-  author  of  h  pamphlet  en-
titled "  Exposition  of  Modern  Scepticism,"  assailing
the  doctrines  of  the  social  reformers  led  by  Fanny
Wright.— William's  son,  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Del..  80  Sept..  1soh;  ,1.  then,  5  Nov.,

1884,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  lS'2'.t,  practised  in  Wilmington
till  1841.  and  then  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was
professor  of  the  principles  and  practice  of  medicine
m  the  Philadelphia  college  of  medicine.  Here-
moved  in  1850  to  Sau  Francisco.  Cal..  where  he  be-
came, in  1861,  professor  of  materia  medica  in  the
medical  college  of  the  Pacific  (now  Cooper  medical
college),  being  transferred  to  the  chair  of  the  prin-
ciples and  practice  of  medicine  in  1868.  He  was
president  of  the  California  state  l>oard  of  health
from  its  establishment  in  1873  till  his  death,  and
edited  the"  Pacific  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal"
for  twenty  years.  Ur.  Gibbons  was  a  founder  of
the  California  academy  of  sciences.  He  published
a  prize  essay  on  "Tobacco"  and  several  addresses
and  essays.— Another  son,  James  Sloan,  merchant,
b.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  1  July,  1810,  was  educated
in  private  schools  in  his  native  city,  and  in  early
life  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  became  a
merchant.  He  came  to  New  York  in  1835,  and  has
since  been  connected  with  banks  and  finance  in
that  city.  He  has  contributed  to  various  literary
and  financial  periodicals,  and  has  published  "  The
Banks  of  New  York,  their  Dealers,  the  Clearing-
House,  and  the  Panic  of  1857"  (New  York,  1858),
and  "  The  Public  Debt  of  the  United  States  "  (1867).
His  song,  "  We  are  coming.  Father  Abraham,"
was  very  popular  during  the  civil  war. — James
Sloan's  wife,  Abigail  Hopper,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  7  Dec.,  1801,  is  a  daughter  of
Isaac  T.  Hopper,  the  Quaker  philanthropist.  After
teaching  in  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  she  mar-
ried Mr.  Gibbons  in  1833,  and  in  1836  removed  to
New  York  with  him.  In  1845  Mrs.  Gibbons  aided
her  father  in  forming  the  Women's  prison  associa-
tion, and  in  founding  homes  for  discharged  prison-
ers, and  frequently  visited  the  various  prisons  in
and  about  New  York.  She  was  the  principal
founder  of  the  Isaac  T.  Hopper  home,  and  for
twelve  years  was  president  of  a  German  industrial
school  for  street  children,  the  attendance  at  which
increased  in  four  months  from  7  to  nearly  200.
Throughout  the  war  Mrs.  Gibbons  gave  efficient
aid  in  hospital  and  camp,  often  at  personal  risk,
and  in  1863,  during  the  draft  riots,  her  house  was
one  of  the  first  to  be  sacked  by  the  mob,  owing  to
the  well-known  anti-slavery  sentiments  of  herself
and  her  husband.  The  attention  of  the  rioters  was
first  called  to  the  house  by  some  one  who  pointed
it  out  as  the  residence  of  Horace  Greeley.  After
the  war  she  planned  and  organized  a  Labor  and
aid  association  for  the  widows  and  orphans  of
soldiers.  She  aided  in  establishing  the  New  York
infant  asylum  in  1871,  and  the  New  York  diet
kitchen  in  1873,  and  has  been  one  of  the  active
managers  of  both  these  institutions. — Charles,
another  son  of  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wilmington,
Del.,  30  March.  1814;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  14  Aug.,

1885,  studied  law  in  Philadelphia  with  Charles
Chauncey,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1838.
He  was  for  several  years  a  member  of  the  state
senate  and  its  president  in  1847,  chairman  of  the
first  Republican  state  committee,  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  Union  league,  and  the  author  of  its  con-
st it  ut i< hi.  He  represented  the  government  on  a
commission  in  the  argument  of  prize  cases  in  the
U.  S.  courts  during  the  civil  war.

GIBBONS,  Janes,  cardinal,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  23  .July,  1834. At  an  early  age  he  was  taken


c^^r- ^o-*D. *s*~


/^i*


by  his  parents  to  their  former  home  in  Ireland,
where  his  education  began. When  lie  was
teen  years  old  he  returned  to  his  native  city,  and
after  a brief  experience  as a  clerk cute
Charles's  college.  Maryland. In  Scpteml>er,  1857,
he  was  transferred  to  St.  Mary's  seminary,  Balti-
more, and  on  30.1  une,  1861,  he  was  ordained  pristf
in  St.  Mary's  chapel. Bis  first  mission  was  that  of
assistant  priest  at  St.  Patrick's  church,  Baltimore.
but,  in  the  course
of  a  few  months,
he was made
pastor of St.
Bridget's  church
at Canton, an
eastern suburb
of the city.
While he was

Serforming  the
uties  of  parish
priest  in  that  ob-
scure place,  Arch-
bishop Spald-
ing transferred
him  to  the  ca-
thedral, made
him  his  private
secretary,and  ap-
pointed him  to  the  important  office  of  chancellor
of  the  archdiocese.  When  the  second  plenary
council  of  the  American  Roman  Catholic  church
assembled  at  Baltimore  in  October,  1866,  he  was  as-
signed to  the  office  of  assistant  chancellor  of  that
body,  which  represented  the  entire  hierarchy  of  the
United  States.  In  1868  he  was  made  vicar  a|x>stolic
of  North  Carolina,  with  the  rank  and  title  of  bishop,
being  consecrated  in  the  cathedral  of  Baltimore
by  his  friend  Archbishop  Spalding  on  16  Aug.
North  Carolina  then  contained  a  population  of  one
million,  of  whom  only  one  thousand  were  Roman
Catholics.  But  Bishop  Gibbons  was  equal  t«>  the
duties  of  the  office,  and  in  a  few  years  schools  were
opened,  asylums  built,  churches  erected,  and  the
number  of  priests  increased  from  five  to  fifteen.
In  1872  he  was  translated  to  the  vacant  see  of  Rich-
mond, Va.,  where  his  zeal  and  administrative  a  un-
ity were  soon  made  manifest  by  the  establishment
of  numerous  institutions,  such  as  the  St.  Sophia
home  for  aged  persons,  in  charge  of  the  Little  Sis-
ters of  the  Poor,  St.  Peter's  cathedral  male  acad-
emy and  parochial  school,  the  enlargement  of  St.
Joseph's  female  orphan  asylum,  the  founding  of
parish  schools  in  Petersburg  and  Norfolk,  and  the
erection  of  new  churches  in  various  parts  of  the
diocese.  When,  in  1877,  the  health  of  Archbishop
Bailey,  of  Baltimore,  began  to  decline  he  asked  Pope
Pius  lX.  to  give  him  a  coadjutor,  at  the  same  time
suggesting  Bishop  Gibbons  for  the  office.  His  re-
quest was  granted,  and  on  20  May,  1877.  Dr.  Gil>-
bons  was  appointed  coadjutor  with  the  right  of
succession  to  the  see  of  Baltimore.  On  3  Oct  "f
the  same  vear,  on  the  death  of  Archbishop  Bailer,
he  succeeded  to  the  vacant  see,  and  thus  at  the  early
age  of  forty-three  attained  to  the  highest  ■
astical  dignity  of  his  church  in  the  United  States,
for  Baltimore,  being  the  oldest,  is  therefore  the  pri-
mary American  see.  One  of  the  most  imjxirtaiit
works  accomplished  byhim  in  his  new  see  was  t  he  St.
James  home  for  boys,  the  foundation  of  which  was
placed  in  the  hands  of  Rev.  Edmund  Didier,  pastor
of  St.  Vincent's  church,  Baltimore.  In  1888  Arch*
bishop  Gibbons  was  summoned  to  Rome,  wit  h  ol  her
American  archbishops,  to  confer  upon  the  affairs
of  the  church  in  the  United  States.  During  this
visit  he  was  the  recipient  of  several  marked


<;ii:r


891


fr"in  Pope  Ii«Hi  XIII. Il»>  was  appointed  t<>  preside
the  third  plenary  «-< >i»m  il . >f  Baltimore,  which
acMcinbled in  that city in November, 1884 The
aaj  uf  tin-  oounei]  was  doc  in  a  greel  meaouri
H-  zeal,  MMtgj.  Mini  executive  ability  of  Arch-
i>  (iiiiixms. \\  inn  the  acts  and  dooiooi  "(  the
council  were  transmitted  to  Some,  they  van  after
nature  deliberation  approved  i>y  the  ecclesiastical
Mthoritli  \  I II.  at  tin-  sj»iii..  tiiiu-  expressed

his  appreciation  of  Archbishop  Gibbone'l  services,
■ad,  inortly  afterward,  at  a  sj>ecial  consistory,  nom-
inated bim  for  promotion  t>i  the  high  dignity  of
linal.  and  he  was  imim-diatclv  confirmed.  Upon
this  occasion  the  pope  said:  "Toe  flourishing
Of  Catholicity  in  the  I'nited  States,  which  develops
daily  limn-  and  more,  and  tin-  condition  and  form
according  to  which  the  ecclesiastical  canons  of  that
country  are  formulated,  adriae  OS,  «>r  rather  de-
mand, that  some  of  their  prelates  Im-  received  into
the  HOTsd  college."  When  the  liearers  of  the  offi-
cial  insignia  called  at  the  Vatican  to  take  leave  of
the  |K»pc  In-fore  departing  on  their  mission,  he
charged  them  to  present  his  affectionate  paternal
benediction  to  Archbishop  Qibbona,  adding;  "Ws
mnamber  him  with  sentimentsof  the  most  cordial
esteem,  and  beliere  we  could  not  confer  the  hat
upon  a  more  worthy  prelate."  Archbishop  Gibbon
selected  •*{(>  .June,  jssi;,  the  day  of  his  "silver  jubi-
1  •  •  -  as  a  priest,  as  the  occasion  on  which  he  would
be  invested  with  the  insignia  of  his  rank  as  a  prince
of  the  church.  The  ceremony  was  surrounded  bv
all  the  pomp  and  magnificence  prescribed  for  such
occasions  in  the  Catholic  ritual.  Cardinal  (iihlions
has  endeared  himself  to  all.  Protestants  as  well  as
Catholics,  the  i»<>or  as  well  as  tin-  rich,  by  his  simple
and  unostentatious  life.  He  visited  Koine  in  1HM7,
and  asked  the  ]m)]m-  to  rite  him  a  coadjutor  on  the
■sound  <>f  impaired  health.  He  baa  published  "  Tin-
Faith  of  Our  Fathers."  which  has  been  translated
into  many  modern  languages  (Baltimore,  1871).

GIBBONS.  Joseph,  philanthropist,  b. near  Lan-
caster, Pa.,  14  Aug.,  1M1H;  d.  there.  9  Dec.,  1883.
lie  was  of  a  family  of  English  (Quakers  who  came
from  Wiltshire  about  the  time  of  Penn's  settlement
of  the  colony.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson
medical  college  in  184"),  and  in  the  Mine  vear  mar-
ried Phebe,  eldest  daughter  ol  Thomas  Barie,  who
was  the  first  candidate  of  the  Liberty  party  for
vice-president  of  the  Tinted  States  in  1840,  the

£  residential  candidate  being  James  G.  Birney.  Dr.
ibbons's  life  was  chiefly  identified  with  the  prac-
tical side  of  the  anti-slavery  movement.  He  was
instrumental  with  his  father  in  aiding  over  1,000
runaway  slaves  to  freedom  by  the  system  quaintly
known  as  the  "  Underground  railroad."  Some  ac-
count of  this  peculiar  institution  may  1k>  found  in
William  Still's  "  Cmlerground  Railroad"  (Philadel-

Ehia. 1872),  and Dr.  Smedleys  "History  of the
nderground  Railroad  in  Chester  and  the  Neigh-
boring Counties of Pennsylvania" (Lancaster.
Dr.  Gibbons  was  also  an  earnest  tem|>crance
advocate,  and  did much  to  popularise  the  public-
school  system  of  Pennsylvania  in  its  infancv. He
was  regarded  asoneof  the  founders  ol  the  ttepub-
lican party in his  native  state, and enjoyed the
friendship  and  esteem  of  Charles  Sumner.  Thad-
Stevens,  Joshua  H.  Giddings,  David  Wilmot.
and  Henry  Wilson. He  established  the  "  Friends
Journal  "  in  lw?:i.  and,  though  partially  deprived  of
li  by  apoplexy  soon  afterward,  conducted  it
until  his  death.

GIBBONS, William, member  of the  Conti-
nental congress. He  was  one  of  the  Sons  ,.f  111
appointed  to  draft  resolutions,  in  1774,  expn
of  syiupathy  with  the  northern  colonies,  also  a  iiiem-


f  the  Provim  ial  OOO0Nithofl  met  in  SavHtiuah,
•ii  t  July,  177">.  ana  In  December  of  the  mm
was  appointed  a mcmlier  of  the  council  of

IiIm.hs was made  a nicmU-r  of  the

alive  council  in  July.  1 T 71*.  and  wa*  presiding

offleOf  of  the  contention  held  in  May,  17x7,  for  the

final  revision  of  the  constitution  of  Georgia, lb-

also  sjit  in  the  Continental  congress  during  i784-'6.

BIBBS,  George,  mineralogist,  h.  in  Newport,

\i.  I..  7  Jan.,  17  7*1;  d.  on  his  estate  of  Sunswick,
Ij.  I.,  0  Aug.,  \KV.i.  lb-  s|M-nt  several  years  while  a
FOMg  man  in  travel  abroad,  and  devoted  much  of
his  time  and  wealth  to  the  collection  of  minerals.
On  his  return  to  Bhoda  Island  he  brought  with
him  the  most  extensive  and  valuable  collection  ever
seen  in  the  I'nited  States  up  to  that  time.  It  000>
I  of  tin-  <  -ol  led  ion  of  (Jigot  d't  )rcy,  containing
l.iHH)  specimens,  and  that  of  Count  (Jregoire  de
Hayjiinowsky,  containing  ti.(HM»  specimens.  These,
with  the  resunaof  Ueown  gathering,  fnimil  a  cabi-
net of  more  than  20,000  minerals.  Tin- collection
was  first  exhibited  in  Newport.  B.  I.,  and  among
the  many  visitors  was  Prof.  Benjamin  Silliman  the
elder,  who  spent  several  weeks  in  studying  and  I  \-
ainining  it. He  formed  a  warm  jM-rsonal  friendship

with  Mr.  (iibbs.  who  offered  to  flepooil  his  ooUee*

tion  at  Vale,  provided  that  ph. ms  should  bt  fitted  up
for  its  reception.  In  1H25  he  offered  it  for  sale  at
$20,000,  giving  the  preference  to  Vale.  The  funds
were  raised  through  the  influence  of  Prof.  Silliman,
and  the  largest  and  finest  collection  of  minerals
then  in  the  I'nited  States  U-came  the  property  of
that  university.  It  is  still  unequalled  by  any  col-
lege collection  in  the  country.  Mr.  <iib(>s  contin-
ued his  interest  in  this  science,  making  extensive
journeys  and  developing  new  mineral  localities.
As  an  incentive  to  students  he  offered  prizes  at
Yale  for  superiority  in  mineralogy,  and  for  services
rendered  to  the  science  by  useful  discoveries  and
observations.  In  1822  he  was  elected  vice-president
of  the  New  York  lyceuin  of  natural  history, lb-

Sublished  valuable  papers  l>oth  in  the  "American
lineralogical  Journal  and  the  "American  Jour-
nal of  Science."  and  did  much  by  his  counsel  and
co-operation  to  support  these  publications.  He
married  Laura,  daughter  of  Oliver  Wolcott.  secre-
tary of  the  treasury  during  the  administrations  of
Washington  and  John  Adams. — Their  son.  George,
antiquarian,  b.  in  Sunswick.  now  Astoria,  L.  L  17
July,  1815;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  !•  April.  18
received  his  early  education  at  Bound  Hill  school
in  Northampton.  Mass.,  under  George  Bancroft
and  Joseph  G.  Cogswell.  He  spent  two  vears  in
foreign  travel,  and  then  was  graduated  at  Harvard
law-school  in  lttJN.  Subseqiientlv  he  practised  in
New  York  city  with  PresCOti  Hall,  and  devoted
himself  to  the  historical  branch  of  convevancing.
making  valuable  collections  of  titles  and  abstracts.
He  also  at  this  time  occupied  himself  with  the  prep-
aration of  the  "  Memoirs  of  the  Administrations  of
Washington  and  John  Adams,"  edited  from  the
pa|>ers  of  his  grandfather.  Oliver  Wolcott  (New
York.  1K4»»).  His  early  fondness  for  outdoor  life
continued  as  long  as  he  lived,  and  soon  after  the
discovery  of  gold  in  California  he  marched  with
the  mounted  rifles  overland  from  St.  Louis  to  the
Pacific  coast,  establishing  himself  in  Columbia,  Ore-

t:on.  In  1854  he  received  the  appointment  of  00t>
aotOf  of  Astoria,  which  he  held  for  several  years,
and  on  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office  remained
in  the  west,  devoting  his  attention  to  the  study
Of  Indian  dialects  and  to  geology  and  natural  his-
tory. LofeOI  he  was  attached  to  the  C.  S.  govern-
ment Uiundary  roimnissioii.  wli.-te  his  knowledge
of  natural  history  made  his  services  of  great  value.


888


GIBBS


GIBBS


and  ho  waa  also  gnologfcsl  under  (Jen.  Isaac  I.
Sltvtiis  on  the  survey  of  the  (forth  Pacific  rail-
road. In  1807  be  ffu  appointed  t..  the  north-
w.-l  I >< >uit< lury  survey,  and  at  tin-  0I0M  <>f  its  work
prepared  an  elaborate  report  OB  the  (BOlogJ  and
natural  hNtory  of  the  country.  He  returned  to
N.w  Vi>rk  in  [800,  lad  VM  active  in  his  efforts  to-
ward prevent  ing  secession.  In  1801  he  volunteered
and  did  military  duty  in  Washington.  During  tin-
draft  riots  in  New  York,  two  years  later,  he  offered
to  defend  the  residence  of  (ien.  .lohn  ('.  Fremont
when  a  ni^'ht  attack  was  threatened.  Subsequently
he  wius  secretary  of  the  Hudson  bay  claims  com-
mi'-ioii  in  Washington,  and  also  was  engaged  in
the  arrangement  of  a  mass  of  manuscript  bearing
on  the  ethnology  and  philology  of  the  American
Indians.  His  services  were  used  by  the  Smithso-
nian institution  to  superintend  its  labors  in  this
held,  and  to  his  energy  and  complete  knowledge  of
the  subject  it  greatly  owes  its  success  in  this  branch
of  science.  lie  was  an  active  member  of  the  New
York  historical  society,  and  was  its  secretary  from
1842  till  1848.  His  papers  on  Indian  dialects  con-
tributed to  the  various  Smithsonian  publications
include  numerous  titles,  and  his  separate  publica-
tions are  "  The  Judicial  Chronicle  "  (Cambridge,
1834) ;  "  Instructions  for  Research  relative  to  the
Kthnology  and  Philology  of  America  "  (Washing-
ton, 1803);  ''A  Dictionary  of  the  Chinook  Jargon
or  Trade  Language  of  Oregon  "  (1803) ;  "  Compar-
ative  Vocabulary  "  (1803);  and  "  Suggestions  rela-
tive to  Objects  of  Scientific  Investigation  in  Rus-
sian America  "  (1807). — Another  son,  Oliver  Wol-
cott,  chemist,  b.  in  New  York  city.  21  Feb.,
1822,  after  passing  through  the  grammar-school
attached  to  Columbia,  was  graduated  at  that  college
in  1841.  A  few  months  were  then  spent  in  the  labo-
ratory of  Dr.  Robert  Hare  in  Philadelphia,  after
which  he  returned  to  New  York,  and  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1845.
Subsequently  he  went  abroad,  and  studied  chemis-
try at  first  under  Rammelsbcrg  and  then  under
Heinrich  Rose  in  the  University  of  Berlin,  spending
a  year  and  a  half  in
these  two  laborato-
ries. Later  he  passed
five  months  in  Gies-
sen,  studying  organic
chemistry  under  Lie-
big,  and  afterward  at-
tended the  lectures
on  physics  in  the  Col-
lege of  France  by
Regnault.  In  1848
he  returned  to  the
United  States  and
gave  a  short  course
of  lectures  at  Dela-
ware college,  Newark,
Del.  From  1849  till
1803  he  held  the  chair
of  physics  and  chem-
istry in  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and
then  was  elected  to  the  Rumford  professorship  in
Harvard  university  with  the  charge  of  the  labora-
tory of  the  Lawrence  scientific  school,  which  chair
he  has  since  held.  On  the  reorganization  of  the
university  subsequent  to  the  election  of  Charles  W.
Eliot  to  the  presidency  the  teaching  of  chemistry
was  transferred  to  the  collegiate  department,  and
the  subjects  of  heat  and  light  were  assigned  to  Dr.
(Jibbs.  During  the  years  when  he  directed  the
chemical  laboratory  the  school  attained  its  greatest
celebrity,  and  many  of  its  most  distinguished  grad-
uates acquired  their  knowledge  of  chemistry  from


Wju^*- Vju*


his  teaching.  Like  his  colleague,  Louis  Agassiz,  he
attracted  to  him  students  who  became  hi-  personal
friends  ami  who  have  ever  maintained  a  filial  re-
gard tor  him.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  actively
associated  in  the  hilars  of  the  U.  S.  sanitan  com-
mission, and  was  a  member  of  its  executiv<
m  it  tee  in  New  York  city.  The  members  of  this
organisation  were  compelled  to  meet  each  other
almost  daily,  and  out  of  their  work  grew  the  Union
league  clubof  New  York.  Dr.  (Jibbs"  was  the  first
to  suggest  that  the  idea  on  which  the  sanitary  com-
mission was  formed  needed  to  take  the  form  of  a
club  which  should  be  devoted  to  the  social  or-
ganization of  sentiments  of  loyalty  to  the  Union."
The  original  meeting  to  consider  "the  feasibility  of
the  plan  was  held  at  his  residence  on  30  Jan..  L80B,
He  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  the  Vienna  ex-
hibition in  1873,  and  contributed  to  the  government
reports  a  valuable  paper  on  his  examination  of  the
instruments  of  physical  research.  Dr.  Gibbs  is  the
only  American  honorary  member  of  the  German
chemical  society,  and  one  of  the  two  American  hon-
orary members  of  the  London  chemical  society.  I  le
was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  was  for  some  time  its  vice-
president,  and  has  declined  an  election  to  the  presi-
dency. At  present  he  is  its  foreign  secretary.
He  is  also  a  member  of  other  American  scientific
societies,  and  was  elected  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence in  1800.  In  1873  he  received  the  honorary
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia.  He  announced
his  intention  in  1851  of  preparing  for  the  columns
of  the  "American  Journal  of  Science"  abstracts
of  the  more  important  physical  and  chemical  papers
contained  in  foreign  scientific  journals,  accom-
panied by  references  and  by  such  critical  observa-
tions as  the  occasion  might  demand.  This  purpose
was  steadily  carried  out  until  1873,  and  these  ab-
stracts cover  over  500  closely  printed  pages.  Much
of  his  original  investigation  has  apj>eared  in  the
"  Contributions  to  Chemistry  from  the  Lawrence
Scientific  School,"  and  he  has  published  very  elabo-
rate memoirs  on  the  platinum  metals,  on  the  ammo-
nia cobalt  bases,  on  new  analytical  methods,  and  on
complex  inorganic  acids,  discovering  platino-tung-
states,  vanadio-tungstates  and  molybdates,as  well  as
other  exceedingly  complicated  compounds  in  inor-
ganic chemistry.  In  physics  he  has  published  pa-
pers on  the  wave-lengths  of  light,  on  vapor  densi-
ties, improved  methods  of  gas  analysis,  and  on  the
theory  of  the  dynamo-electric  machine.  These
have  appeared  principally  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science"  and  the  "American  Chemical
Journal."  Dr.  Gibbs  has  published  no  book,  but
as  an  indefatigable  original  investigator  in  the  do-
main of  chemistry  and  physics  he  has  no  superior
in  the  United  States. — Another  son,  Alfred,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Sunswick,  L.  I.,  22  April,  1823 ;  d.  in
Fort  Leavenworth.  Kan.,  20  Dec.,  1868.  His  fam-
ily, disappointed  in  their  wish  to  obtain  a  military
appointment  for  their  second  son.  persisted  in  the
effort,  and  as  the  one  grew  beyond  the  age  within
which  the  candidate  is  eligible,  the  claim  for  ap-
pointment was  transferred  to  the  next,  and  as
persistently  urged.  The  second  son  was  compelled
to  give  up  his  ambition,  but  the  third  n
the  long-sought  commission.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  assigned  to
the  mounted  rifles,  and  received  two  brevets  during
the  Mexican  war — that  of  1st  lieutenant  for  gal-
lantry at  Cerro  Gordo,  where  he  was  wounded,  and
that  of  captain  for  his  services  at  Garita  de  Helen,
city  of  Mexico.  He  was  also  at  Vera  Cruz,  Con-
treras,  Churubusco,  and Chapultepec. He  was


(ill!


680


Smith  in M

California,  and  Texas  in  1M4)1  promoted  to

Hi,  :ii Ma  .1  served  on  the

frontier  till  tin-  civil  war,  Doing  severely  Wounded

;,inni-ii with Apache Indians  nt  Cooke's

Spring,  N.  M„  H  March,  1  Ho  7.  and  taking  |>art in

dition  of I860, lie  was  « 1«-| « «t -

tommisaary  »t  Albuquerque,  N.  M.,  in  lsim  *Lwsj

pfOtnoted  to  ' iptain,  18  Mai .  1861,  and  "ii  87  Aug..

1882,  was  taken  priaooar  i>y  the  <  onfedcratesat  Baa
Augustine  Springs,  N.  M.  He  was  paroled  till  ex-
iiml  mi  <>  Sept.  I>ccaiuc  colo-
nel "f  tin-  180tfi  New  York  regiment.  He  was  en-
gaged  in  the  OfUflfiOiH  about  Suffolk,  Va..  till
unl  in  July  and  August  of  that  year
mixing  his  command  ae  a  caTiiry  regiment,
which  was  afterward  known  sj  the  b*j  New  York
dragoons.  In  1861  ^heoommandad  a  cavalry  re-
serve brigade,  ami  Mrred  under  Gen,  Sheridan  on
several  of  US  cavalry  raiils.  Hi  was  lncv.it. .1
major.  11  .lime.  1864,  for  gallantry  at  Trevillian
Station,  Va..  lieutenant-colonel  for  services  at  the
Iwttlc  <>f  Winobeeter,  and  on  10  Oct.,  is(»4,  beoanM
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  lie  commanded
a  cavalry  brigade  in  the  final  attack  and  imrsuit  of
the  A rin v  of  Northern  Virginia  in  March  and
April,  1886,  and  on  18  March  received  all  the  brev-
ets up  to  and  including  that  of  major-general,  U.S.
army,  for  his  services  during  the  war.  lie  was  mus-
tered OUt  of  Volunteer  service,  1  Fell.,  1806.  Iiecame
major  in  the  ?th  cavalry  on  88  -Inly,  and  served  in
various  forts  in  Kansas  till  his  death.

HI  BBS.  .Insiali  Millard,  philologist,  h.  in  Sa-
lem.  Mass.,  30  April,  1T!M);  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..
25  March.  1861  Me  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  lsn'.i.
and from 1811  till 1K15  was  connected  with  the

college  as  tutor. Subsequently  botpani  aocne  yean

at  Andover.  where  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  Hebrew  and  hfbHeal  literature,  producing  at  this
time  some  of  his  most  Important  works.  In  IBM
he  was  called  to  New  Haven,  and  became  professor
of  sacred  literature  in  the  theological  school  of  Vale
college,  which  chair  he  retained  until  his  death,
lie  also  held  the  office  of  librarian  from  \H'2i  till
1843,  and  in  1853  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I).
from  Princeton.  Prof.  Oibl*  was  a  constant  con-
tributor of  articles  on  points  of  biblical  criticism,
archa-ology  and  philological  science  to  the  "Chris-
tian Spectator,"  *  Biblical  Bepoeitor  t,w  **  Maw  Bf>
lander."  and  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science."
He  was  particularly  fond  of  grammatical  and  philo-
logical studies,  and  attained  a  high  reputation  for
thoroughness  and  accuracy  in  them. His  work  ap-

C»ars  in  several  of  the  most  important  philological
x>ks  published  during  the  century,  and  among
others  in  the  revised  edition  of  Webster's  "Un-
abridged Dictionary"  and  Prof.  William  C.  Fow-
ler's ••  Knglish  Language  in  its  Elements  and  its
Forms  "  iN.w  V..rk,  1850),  For  some  years  he  was
one  of  the  publishing  committee  of  the  American
oriental  society.  Prof.  Gibbs  published  a  transla-
tion of  Stoir's  "  Historical  Sense  of  the  New  Testa-
ment "'  (Boston,  1H17);  a  translation  of  (Jesenius's
44  Hebrew  Lexicon  of  the  old  Testament*1  (An-
dover. 1884;  London.  1887);  an  abridged  form  of
Geeenius's  ''Manual  Hebrew  and  Knglish  lexi-
con" (1828);  "Philological  Studies  with  Knglish
Illustration.  •  i  N.w  Haven.  1856);  "A  New  Latin
:  ami  "Teutonic  Ktymology  "
His  son,  Josiah  Millard,  scientist,  b.'in
Ran  Han  ii.  <  •..nil..  11  Feb.,  1N30,  was  graduated
at  Vale  m  1888,  and  subsequently  pursued  mathe-
matical and  other  studies  at  that  university,  for
which  in  IWM  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  I>.  For
the  three  following  years  he  was  a  tutor  in  Vale,  and


then  s|„ -nt  several years  in  study  nt  the  univerri-

f  Pan*.  Berlin,  and  Baidajnan  ;i  he

became  profssaorof  mathematical  Wjsioi  in  Vale,

a  chair  which  he  lias  since  held,  also  ledum
the  .lolms  Hopkins  university  in  1880.  His  w..rk
has  been  principally  in  the  development  Of  graph-
ical and  analytical  methods  in  thermodynamics,
and  for  his  researches  in  this  d'laotloil  he  was  hon-
ored by  the  American  academvof  arts  and  sell
with  their  Kumfoid  medal.  He  was  elected 1  mem-
bsjrof  the  National  academy  of  mien.  ■■  .  '>.  and

in  lMHtl  was  vice-president  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  <>f  scieinre,  for  the  sec-
tion of  mathematics  and  astronomy,  delivering  an
address  on  "  Multiple  Algebra."  His  published
papers  include  memoirs  on  "  Graphical  Methods  in
the  Thermodynamics  of  Fluids"  (1878)j  "A  Math*
...I  of  (ieomeirii-al  Representation  of  the  Thermo-
dynamic Properties  of  Substances  by  Means  of  Sur-
faces" (1M73):  u Equilibrium  of  Heterogeneous
Substances,"  Part  L  (1876);  Part  11.(1878);  and
scvend  "  Notes  mi  the  Klect ro-inagnet ic  Theory  of
Light  "(1882-'8).  He  has  also  applied  the  methods
of  thermodynamics  to  chemical  dissociation,  and
has  developed  a  system  of  vector  notation  simpler
than  that  of  ijuaternions  and  more  approximating
to  the  Herman  notation,  notably  that  of  Hrassmaun.

HI  BBS,  Sir  Samuel.  British  soldier,  d.  near
New  Orleans,  Im..  B  Jan.,  1*1").  He  bsjNUM  BBjsjgl
in  the  10Jd  foot  in  Oetobar,  17K',  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  Kith  West  Indian  regiment  in  1808,
brevet  colonel  in  July,  1810.  ami  major-general  in
June.  1818,  He  served  at  the  capture  of  the  Cape
of  Hood  Hojh>  in  1790.  was  taken  prisoner  at  Os-
i.iui  in  1708,  commanded  the  11th  regiment  at  the
attack  of  St.  Martin's  in  the  expedition  against
the  Danish  and  Swedish  islands,  and  led  a  brigade
in  Travancore  and  the  expedition  to  Java.  He  was
second  in  command  to  Sir  Kdward  Pakeiiliam  in
December,  1N14.  and  was  killed  in  the  Itattle  of
New  Orleans  in  the  following  month.

GIBSON,  James,  merchant,  b.  in  London  about
1600;  d.  in  the  West  Indies  in  17.">2.  In  early
vouth  he  entered  the  British  army  ami  served  in
Barbadoes,  where  he  married  a  native  heiress  of  Ja-
maica, retired  from  the  Barrios,  and  settled  as  a
merchant  in  Boston.  Mass.  In  174")  he  joined  the
Louisburg  expedition  to  Cape  Breton  with  4,000
New  England  colonists,  under  Sir  William  Pan-
percll.and  as"  gentleman  volunteer  "  served  at  the
si.ge,  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  the  French
garrison,  and  superintended  the  removal  of  the
prisoners  to  France.  In  1748  parliament  voted  him
1~>I 7.155  as  a  reimbursement  of  Us  cxi>eiises.  but
this  money  was  never  paid.  He  returned  to  Boston.
engaged  in  the  West  India  trade,  and  died  while
on  a  visit  to  the  islands.  In  174.")  be  published  an
account  of  the  Louisburg  expedition,  which  was
republished  bv  a  descendant  under  the  title  <>f  ■•  a
Boston  Merchant  of  1745  "  (Boston,  1841  ,

GIBSON,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Milford.
.  Del.:  d.  in  Fort  Krie.  Canada,  18  Sept.,
1S14.  Be  SJM  graduated  at  the  I'.  S.  military
academy  in  180^.  appointed  captain  in  1810»asjjfc*>
ant  inspector- general  in  18(8,  colonel  and  in-
spector-general in  Julv  of  the  same  vear,  and
colonel of the 4th  ri tie's, 81 Feb.. 1814. He was

engaged  in  the  battle  of  Qpaenetown  Heights,  ||

<».!.,  1818,  and  served  with  distinction  in  the  cam-
paign on  the  Niagara  frontier  in  1S14.  During  the
months  Of  August  and  September  Of  this  vear  Hen.
Dniniinond.of  the  British  army,  U'siegcd  Fort  Krie,
which  was  held  by  the  Americans  under  Hen.  Jacob
Brown.  On  17  Sept.  (Jen.  Brown  made  a  sudden
sortie  with  2,000  men  against tin;  U'siegers,  dis-


640


GIBSON


GIBSON


mount. -.1  their  guns,  and  destroyed  their  works.  In
this  attack  Col.  (iilison  received  |  wound,  from
which  he  died  the  next  day.

GIBSON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ijancaster.  Pa,
ti  Mnv.  1740;  d.  at  Hraddock's  field,  near  Pitts-
hurtr,  10  April.  L8SS.  He  received  a  clas-i.  al
education,  and  in  1757  joined  the  expedition
against  the  Indians  in  which  Fort  Duquesne  was
captured,  lie  settled  at  Fort  I'itt  as  a  trader,  was
taken  prisoner,  and  rescued  from  the  stake  by  a
squaw  that  adopted  him.  He  married  the  nw
of  Logan,  an  Indian  chief,  ami  became  familiar
with  the  Indian  manners,  language,  and  customs.
At  the  close  of  hostilities,  Gibson  again  settled  at
Fort  Pitt,  and  in  1774  acted  a  conspicuous  part  in
Lord  Dunmore's  expedition  against  the  Shawnee
towns.  In  the  treaty  that  followed  the  battle  of
Point  Pleasant,  he  negotiated  between  Logan,  the
Shawnee  chief,  and  Lord  Dunmore,  and  through
his  mediation  many  captive  Indians  were  set  at
liberty.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he
was  appointed  to  command  a  regiment,  served
with  the  army  in  New  York  and  in  the  Jer-
sey retreat,  and  commanded  the  western  military
department  from  1781  until  peace  was  established.
In  1788  he  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
convention,  subsequently  was  associate  judge  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Alleghany  county,
and  major-general  of  militia.  President  Jefferson
appointed  him  in  1801  secretary  of  the  territory
of  Indiana,  and  he  held  this  office  until  Indiana
became  a  state,  when  he  was  acting  governor  from
1811  till  1813. — His  brother,  George,  soldier,  b.  in
Lancaster,  Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1747;  d.  in  Port  Jefferson,
Ohio,  14  Dec,  1791,  received  an  academic  educa-
tion, entered  a  mercantile  house  in  Philadelphia,
and  made  several  voyages  as  supercargo  to  the
West  Indies.  When  the  Revolution  began,  he
raised  a  company  of  one  hundred  men,  and  was
appointed  captain  of  a  state  regiment.  His  sol-
diers were  distinguished  for  good  conduct  and
bravery,  and  were  known  in  the  army  as  "  Gib-
son's Lambs."  In  order  to  obtain  a  supply  of
gunpowder,  he  descended  the  Mississippi  river
with  twenty-five  picked  men,  and  after  a  hazardous
journey  succeeded  in  accomplishing  his  mission.
On  his  return  he  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  a  Virginia  regiment,  joined  Gen.  Washington
before  the  evacuation  of  New  York,  and  was  en-
gaged in  all  the  principal  battles  of  the  campaign
of  1778.  He  retired  to  his  farm  in  Cumberland
county,  Pa.,  after  the  war,  and  was  county  lieutenant
until  1791,  when  he  took  command  of  a  regiment
in  the  St.  Clair  expedition  against  the  Ohio  Indians.
At  the  battle  of  Miami,  4  Nov.,  1791,  he  received
a  mortal  wound. — His  son,  George,  soldier,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
29  Sept.,  1861,  entered  the  army  from  civil  life,
and  was  appointed  captain  of  infantry,  3  May,
1808:  was  promoted  major  in  1811,  and  served
throughout  the  war  of  1812,  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  5th  infantry. In  1816  he  was  appointed

Juartermaster-general,  served  with  Gen.  Andrew
ackson  during  the  Florida  campaign,  was  pro-
moted commissary-general  in  1818,  and  in  1826
brevetted  brigadier-general  for  faithful  service.
He  served  throughout  the  Mexican  war,  and  was
brevetted  major-general,  10  May,  1848,  for  meri-
torious conduct.  Gen.  Gibson  was  at  the  head  of
the  commissary  department  more  than  fifty  years.
—  His  brother.* John  Bannister,  jurist,  b.  in  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  8  Nov.,  1780;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3
May,  185:',.  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in
1800,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Cumberland  county,  Pa.,  in  1803,  and  practised  in


the  counties  of  Carlisle  and  Beaver,  and  in  Ha.
town,  Md.  In  1810-'l  he  represent.  <1  Carlisle  in  the
state  legislature,  and  in  1813  was  appointed  judge
of  the  11th  district  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1816  be
was  promoted  to  the  supreme  court,  and  in  18S?
became  chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania.  I'.y  |
change  in  the  constitution  in  1861,  an  amendment
made  the  judiciary  elective,  and  he  was  retunfed
by  a  large  majority  to  the  supreme  bench,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  Chief-Justice  Gibson
was  eminent  as  a  Shakespearian  authority,  and  re-
lieved the  tedium  of  his  professional  studies  by
readings  from  his  favorite  dramas.

GIBSON,  John  Morison,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.
in  the  township  of  Toronto,  York  co.,  Ontario,  1
Jan.,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  University  col-
lege, Toronto,  in  1863,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1867.  He  entered  the  law
course  at  the  University  of  Toronto,  receiving  the
degree  of  LL.  D.,  and  the  gold  medal  of  the  fac-
ulty in  1869,  and  was  examiner  in  that  faculty  for
the  years  1871-'2.  He  was  elected  a  member  of
the  senate  of  Toronto  university  in  1873  and  1878.
He  is  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers,  has  been
an  active  member  of  that  force  since  1860,  and  was
with  his  regiment  at  Ridgeway  in  1866.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Canadian  Wimbledon  rifle-teams
in  1874-'5  and  1879,  winning  prizes  on  these  occa-
sions. In  1879  he  won  the  Prince  of  Wales's
prize  (a  badge  and  £100).  In  1881  he  commanded
the  Canadian  Wimbledon  team  that  defeated  the
British  team  in  the  contest  for  the  Rajah  of  Kolo-
pore's  cup,  and  was  also  a  member  of  the  Canadian
team  at  Creedmoor  in  1876  and  1880.  He  is  a
Liberal  in  politics,  and  was  elected  to  the  Provin-
cial parliament  in  1879  and  again  in  1883.

GIBSON,  Randall  Lee,  senator  b.  at  Spring
Hill,  Woodford  co.,  Ky.,  10  Sept.,  1882.  His  grand-
father, Randall  Gibson,  was  a  Revolutionary  sol-
dier, who,  after  the  war  of  independence,  removed
with  his  kindred  to  the  southwest,  and  finally
made  his  home  at  Oakley,  Warren  co..  Miss.  He
built  the  first  church,  and  founded  the  first  col-
lege (Jefferson)  in  the  Mississippi  valley..  His  fa-
ther, Tobias  Gibson,  was  a  large  sugar-planter  in
Terre  Bonne  parish,  Louisiana  Randall  was
graduated  with  honors  at  Yale  in  1853,  and  was
also  class  orator.  He  was  graduated  in  1855  at
the  law  department  of  the  University  of  Louisi-
ana (now  Tulane  university),  of  which  he  is  at
present  (1887)  the  official  head,  being  president
of  the  board  of  administrators.  He  then  studied
at  Berlin,  travelled  in  Russia,  and  spent  six
months  as  an  attache  of  the  American  legation  at
Madrid.  On  his  return  he  engaged  in  sugar-plant-
ing, until  the  civil  war,  when  he  joined  the  Con-
federate army  as  a  private,  but  was  made  a  cap-
tain in  the  1st  Louisiana  artillery,  and  stationed
at  Fort  Jackson,  below  New  Orleans.  Not  long
afterward  he  was  elected  colonel  of  the  13th
Louisiana  infantry.  At  Shiloh  he  commanded  a
brigade,  which  attacked  the  "hornet's  nest"  in
front,  and  was  four  times  repelled  with  great
slaughter,  but  he  held  on,  was  in  the  front  line  at
sunset,  and  was  distinguished  in  the  fighting  next
day.  Gibson  was  with  Bragg's  army  in  the  Ken-
tucky campaign,  and  was  recommended  for  pro-
motion for  skill  and  gallantry  at  Perryville.  where
one  third  of  his  brigade  were  killed  or  wounded.
and  at  Murfreesboro  and  Chickamauga  He
all  the  battles  in  Gen.  Joseph  E.Johnston's  retreat
from  Dalton  to  Atlanta,  and  at  Jonesboro  lost  half
his  command.  In  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Hood  at
Nashville  he  successfully  covered  the  retreat.  In
Canby's  campaign  against  Mobile,  Gibson  was  de-


GIBSON


OIDD


641


tiw-i  .< h»  dmo  i"  Bpaolsfa  Port,  where  he

bald  the  National  force*  at ba) f<>r  two  weeks,
ami then withdrew Ml rutin* command,  under
r  of  darkness,  threading  a  pathway  only  cigh-
mches  widt  through  a  marsh. Hi  was  flnan-
)  ruined  bj  the  war.  but,  resuming  hi-*  profes-
sion in  New  Orleans,  noon  acquired  a  lucratixc
tics. In  1878  be  waa  elected  t<>  congress  as  a
ocrat,  Imt  was  not  admitted  to  a  seat. He
was  again  elected  in  1H7J.  l*;.;,  1878,  and I

raa  sent  to  the  United  States  senate  In
ami  was  re-elected  in  1HKH. He  may  fairly  be  said
to  bare  been  the  father  <>f  the  poUey  f"r  the

improvement  of  the  Mississippi  river,  which  he
mated,  and  has  consistently  advocated  and
successfully  guided,  tie  baa  bean  the  most  pro-
nounced opponent  in  the SOQth of  all  forms  of  finan-
cial inflation  and  irredeemable  issues.  Asa  mem-
ber of  the  ways  and  means  committee  be  steadily
advocated  moderate  measures  of  revenue  reform,
and  reaiated  alike  the  extreme  protectionists  and
the  free-traders  In  1SM2  be  was  selected  by  Paul
Tulane  as  president  of  the  board  of  administra-
tors who  wen-  to  manage  his  gift  for  education  in
New  Orleans,  now  estimated  at  $1,500,000.  Under
ispiies  Tulane  university  was  founded.

GIBSON,  Tobias,  pioneer,  b.  in  Liberty,  S.  C,
in  Nov.,  1771;  d.  in  Natchez,  Tenn.,  10  April,
1804.  Nothing  can  be  learned  of  the  history  of
his  early  years;  in  1792  he  entered  the  itinerant
ministry  of  the  Methodist  church,  travelled  and
preached  throughout  the  most  important  districts
of  the  Carolinas,  and  in  1800  went  to  Natchez  as  a
missionary.  After  penetrating  the  forest  alone,
for  six  hundred  miles,  he  reached  the  Cumberland
river,  took  a  canoe  and  paddled  himself  eight  hun-
dred miles  from  that  stream  to  the  Ohio, and  thence
down  the  Mississippi.  He  made  four  trips  while  a
missionary,  through  the  wilderness,  to  the  Cum-
berland, and  laid  the  foundations  of  Methodism  in
the  southwest.  He  continued  alone  upon  this  sta-
tion till  1808,  when,  in  a  dying  condition,  he  pre-
sented himself  before  the  western  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  and  asked  for  further
aid  in  the  prosecution  of  his  work.  The  council
responded  favorably  to  this  application,  and  sent
other  missionaries  to  his  assistance.  His  early
death  was  the  result  of  privation  and  exposure.

MB  SON.  William,  surgeon,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  in  1788;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga..  2  March.  1868.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1806,  took  his
medical  degree  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  in
1809,  and  was  the  pupil  and  associate  of  Sir  Charles
Bell,  the  eminent  Scotch  surgeon.  After  his  re-
to  the  United  States  he  began  practice  in  Bal-
timore, and  was  one  of  the  earliest  professors  of
surgery  in  the  University  of  Maryland.  In  1812
lered  essential  service  in  the  Baltimore  riots,
revisjt.-d  Europe  in  1814,  and  fought  on  the  side  of
the  allied  forces  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  where
he  was  slightly  wounded.  He  was  intimate  with
the  surgeons  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  Velpcau,  Aber-
nethy,  Hastings,  and  Halfonl,  and  was  the  friend
and  companion  of  Lord  Byron.  In  l*i<i,  having
returned  to  the  United  States,  he  succeeded  Dr.
Physick  in  the  chair  of  surgery  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  where  In-  remained  more  than
thirty  years.  l>r.  Gibson  made  frequent  visits  to
Europe,  and  also  travelled  in  remote  regions  of
id  Africa.  At  the  age  of  seventy,  having
acquired  a  fortune,  he  retired  from  practice  and
MDOVed  to  Newport,  li.  I.  He  was  the  first  to
perform  the  Cawarean  operation  twice  successfully
to  Ixith  mother  and  child  oo  the  same  patient  His
works include  ••  Principles  and Practice  of Sur-

VOL.  II. — 11


gery"< Philadelphia.  1-  toblsi  in  Europe/

containing  skotohes  of  smtaeol  surgeons  (1889);
sod  "Lectors  on  Eminent  Belgian  Surge
I'hvsi.iaiis  "  i  Nr  ■  (  harlr*

Iteii.  mrgeoo,  l».  in  Baltimore,  Md..  1<>  Feb..  1mik:
d.  in  Richmond,  Vs.,  88  April.  1865, studied  medi-
cine in  Philadelphia  under  his  father,  lie  »a<
professor  of  surgery  at  Washington  medi-
cal college.  Baltimore,  in  1848,  and  in  1840
pled  the  SUM  chair  in  the  Medical  QollSflU  of  Rich-
mond. \'a.  When  that  state  seceded  OS  waa  made
surgeon-general.  U-cainc  the  chief  consulting  sur-
geon and  oiH-rator  in  Richmond,  and  died  from  heart
nisnsnri  induced  l>y  excessive  labor  and  fatigue.  He
published  among  other  papers  a  widely  circulated
pamphlet  entitled  "Statement  of  Facts  in
of  Dislocation  of  the  Femor  "  (Richmond,  l

GIHSON,  William  Hamilton,  artist  and  au-
thor, b.  in  Bandy  Hook,  Conn..  8  <><t..  i*.v>. lie

studied  at  the  Gunnery  school  at  Washington,
Conn.,  and  subsequently  in  the  Polytechnic  insti-
tute, Brooklyn,  and  determined  to  devote  himself
to  art  as  an  illustrator.  He  began  work  in  New-
York  in  1H?0,  after  various  discouragements,  ol>-
tained  a  foothold  as  a  specialist  in  hofalrfoal  draw-
ing, and  beOMDS  connected  with  the  "American
Agriculturist "  and  "  Hearth  and  Home."  He  also
drew  hundreds  of  natural  history  subjects  for  the
"  American  Cyclopaedia."  He  afterward  became
dissatisfied  with  work  of  this  character,  and  fur-
nished illustrations  for  sundry  magazine  articles
on  natural  history.  For  a  vear  he  was  next  en-
gaged on  the  "  Art  Journal,"  and  was  also  one  of
the  corps  of  illustrators  of"  Picturesque  America."
His  first  notable  appearance  in  the  magazines  was
in  connection  with  an  article  in  "  Harper's  Maga-
zine "  on  "  Birds  and  Plumage."  which  he  had  pro-
posed to  the  editor  under  the  title  of  "  The  Plu-
mage of  Fashion."  The  initial  design,  a  full-page
peacock's  feather,  won  high  praise.  This  was  fol-
lowed by  "A  Winter  Idyl,'  "Springtime,"  and
other  similar  essays,  which  have  been  collected  in
his  published  volumes.  Mr.  Gibson  has  been  a
regular  exhibitor  at  the  water-color  exhibition  in
New  York  since  1872,  and  became  a  rueinl>er  of
the  water-color  society  in  1885.  His  large" Au-
tumn Study"  was  shown  in  the  first  American
water-color  exhibition  in  London  in  1873,  and  in
Edinburgh  the  same  year.  He  is  also  a  member
of  the  Authors  club  and  the  Art  union.  The
books  that  he  has  illustrated  include  "The  Heart
of  the  White  Mountains "(1882);  "Nature's  Serial
Story "  (1885) ;  and  various  collections  of  poems,
among  others  the  "  Pictorial  Edition  of  Longfel-
low" and  "  In  Berkshire  with  the  Wild  Flowers,"
by  Dora  and  Elaine  Goodale.  The  works  of  which
he  is  both  author  and  illustrator  are"  Camp-Life  in
the  Woods"  and  "Tricks  of  Trapping  and  Trap-
making"  (New  York,  18701;  "Pastoral  Davs,  or
Memories  of  a  New  England  Year"  (1NS1);  "  high-
ways and  Byways,  or  Saunterings  in  New  Eng-
land **  (1883);  and  "  Happv  Hunting-Grounds,  a
Tribute  to  the  Woods  and  Fields"  (1886).

GIDBiNGS.  Joshua  Reed,  statesman,  b.  in
Athens,  Bradford  CO,  Pa..  6  Oct..  1796]  d.  in  Mon-
treal, Canada.  27  Mav.  lst>4.  His  parents  removed
to  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1H06  to  Ashtabula
county,  Ohio,  where  the  boy  worked  on  his  father's
farm,  and  by  devoting  his  evenings  to  hard  study
made  up  somewhat  lor  bis  limited  educational  ad-
-.  In  1M12  he  enlisted  in  a  regiment  com-
manded by  Col.  Richard  Hayes,  being  the  youngest
member,  and  was  in  an  SXpsditiOD  sent  to  the  DOB*
insula  north  of  Sandusky  bay.  There,  20  Sept..
1812,  twenty-two  men,  of  whom  he  was  one,  had  a


949


GIDDINGS


GIODINGS


skirmish  with  Indians,  in  which  six  of  the  soldiers
were  killed  and  mx  wounded.  Mr.  Giddingl  after-
ward erected  ■  monument  there  to  the  memory  of
his  fallen  comrades.  After  the  war  he  became  ■
teaelier.  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bai-
rn ls,M).  He  was  elected  t<>  the  Ohio  legislature
in  lS-Jil.  served  one  term,  and  declined  a  re-elec-
tion. In  1838  he  was  elected,  as  a  Whip,  to  con-
gress, where  he  had  hardly  taken  his  seat  before  he
became  prominent  as  an  advocate  of  the  right  of
petition,  and  the  abolition  of  slavery  and  the  do-
me -t  ie  slave-trade.  He  had  been  known  as  an  ac-
tive abolitionist  baton  his  election.  His  first  at-
tempt to  discuss  the  subject  on  the  floor  of  eon-
Eress,  11  l'Yb.,  1839,  was  thwarted  by  the  gag  rule;
ut  two  years  later,  9  Feb.,  1841,  he  delivered  ■
notable  speech  on  the  war  with  the  Indians  in
Florida,  in  which  he  maintained  that  the  contest
was  waged  solely  in  the  interest  of  slavery,  the  ob-
ject being  to  enslave  the  Maroons  of  that  state,
who  were  affiliated  with  the  Seminoles,  and  break
up  the  asylums  for  fugitives.  This  subject  he  set
forth  more  elaborately  years  afterward  in  his  "Ex-
iles of  Florida"  (Columbus,  Ohio,  1858;  new  ed.,
New  York,  1803).  In  the  autumn  of  1841  the  "Cre-
ole" sailed  from  Virginia  for  Louisiana  with  a  car-
go of  slaves,  who  got  possession  of  the  vessel,  ran
into  the  British  port  of  Nassau,  N.  P.,  and,  in  ac-
cordance with  British  law,  were  set  free. In  the

excitement  that  fol-
lowed, Daniel  Web-
ster, secretary  of
state,  wrote  to  Ed-
ward Everett,  U.  S.
in  i n  ister  at  London ,
saying  that  the  gov-
ernment would  de-
mand indemnifica-
tion for  the  own-
ers of  the  slaves.
Thereupon  Mr.  Gid-
dings,  21  March,
1842,  offered  in  the
house  of  represent-
atives a  series  of
resolutions  in  which
it  was  declared  that,
as  slavery  was  an
abridgment  of  a
natural  right,  it  had
no  force  beyond  the
territorial  jurisdiction  that  created  it ;  that  when
an  American  vessel  was  not  in  the  waters  of  any
state  it  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United
States  alone,  which  had  no  authority  to  hold  slaves ;
and  that  the  mutineers  of  the  "  Creole"  had  only
resumed  their  natural  right  to  liberty,  and  any
attempt  to  re-enslave  them  would  be  unconstitu-
tional ami  dishonorable.  So  much  excitement
was  created  by  these  resolutions  that  Mr.  Gid-
dings,  on  the  advice  of  his  friends,  withdrew  them,
but  said  he  would  present  them  ag.lin  at  some
future  time.  The  house  then,  <ui  iVotion  of  John
Minor  Botts,  of  Virginia,  pa&ed  a  resolution  of
censure  (125  to  69),  and  by  mmrw  o*  the  previous
question  denied  Mr.  Giddings  an  opportunity  to
speak  in  his  own  defence.  He  I  at  once  resigned
his  seat  and  appealed  to  his  constituents,  who  re-
elected him  by  a  large  majority.  In  the  discus-
sion of  the  "Amistad"  case  (see  Cinque),  Mr.
Giddings  took  the  same  ground  as  in  the  simi-
lar case  of  the  "  Creole,"  and  in  a  speech  a  few
years  later  boldly  maintained  that  to  treats  human
being  as  property  was  a  crime.  In  1843  he  united
with  John  Quincy  Adams  and  seventeen  other  j


members  of  congress  in  issuing  an  sddreei  to  the

people  of  tlie  country,  declaring  that  the  annexa-
tion of  Texas  "would  be  identical  with  dissolu-
tion"; and  in  the  same  year  he  published,  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Pacificus,"  a  notable  series  of
political  essays. A  year  later  he  and Mr.  Adams

iirescnted  a  report  discussing  a  memorial  from  the
ilassachusetts  legislature,  in  which  they  d<
that  the  liberties  of  the  American  people  w  en-
founded  on  the  truths  of  Christianity.  On  the
Oregon  question,  he  held  that  the  claim  of  the
United  States  to  the  whole  territory  was  just,  and
should  lie  enforced,  but  predicted  that  the  1'olk
administration  would  not  keep  the  promise  on
which  it  had  been  elected — expressed  in  the  motto
"  Fifty- four  forty,  or  fight" — and  his  prediction
was  fulfilled.  In  1847  he  refused  to  vote  for  Rob-
ert C.  Winthrop,  the  candidate  of  his  party  for
speaker  of  the  house,  on  the  ground  that  his  posi-
tion on  the  slavery  question  was  not  satisfactory  ;
and  the  next  year,  for  the  same  reason,  he  declined
to  support  the  candidacy  of  Gen.  Taylor  for  the
presidency,  and  acted  with  the  Free-soil  party.
In  1849,  with  eight  other  congressmen,  he  refused
to  support  any  candidate  for  the  speakership  who
would  not  pledge  himself  so  to  appoint  the  stand-
ing committees  that  petitions  on  the  subject  of
slavery  could  obtain  a  fair  consideration ;  and  the
consequence  was  the  defeat  of  Mr.  Winthrop  and
the  election  of  Howell  Cobb,  the  Democratic  can-
didate. Mr.  Giddings  opposed  the  compromise
measures  of  1850,  which  included  the  fugitive-slave
law,  and  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise,
taking  a  prominent  part  in  the  debates.  In  18501,
being  charged  with  wrongfully  taking  important
papers  from  the  post-office,  he  demanded  an  inves-
tigation, and  was  exonerated  by  a  committee  that
was  composed  chiefly  of  his  political  opponents.
It  was  shown  that  the  charge  was  the  work  of  a
conspiracy.  In  1850,  and  again  in  1858,  he  sud-
denly became  unconscious,  .and  fell  while  address-
ing the  house.  His  congressional  career  of  twenty
years'  continuous  service  ended  on  4  March,  1859,
when  he  declined  another  nomination.  In  1861
President  Lincoln  appointed  him  U.  S.  consul-
general  in  Canada,  which  office  he  held  until  the
time  of  his  death.  One  who  knew  him  personally
writes:  "  He  was  about  six  feet  one  inch  in  height,
broad-shouldered,  of  very  stalwart  build,  and  was
considered  the  most  muscular  man  on  the  floor  of
the  house.  Whenever  he  spoke  he  was  listened
to  with  great  attention  by  the  whole  house,  the
members  frequently  gathering  around  him.  He
had  several  affrays  on  the  floor,  but  invariably
came  out  ahead.  On  one  occasion  he  was  char
lenged  by  a  southern  member,  and  promptly  ac-
cepted, selecting  as  the  weapons  two  raw-hides.
The  combatants  were  to  have  their  left  hands
tied  together  by  the  thumbs,  and  at  a  signal  casti-
gate each  other  till  one  cried  enough.  A  look  at
Mr.  Giddings's  stalwart  frame  influenced  the
southerner  to  back  out."  Mr.  Giddings  published
a  volume  of  his  speeches  (Boston,  1853),  and  wrote
"The  Rebellion:  its  Authors  and  Cause-."  a  his-
tory of  the  anti-slavery  struggle  in  congress,  which
was  issued  posthumously  (New  York,  1804).

GIDDINGS.  Salmon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hart-
land,  Conn.,  2  March,  1782:  d.  in  St.  Louis.  Mot,
1  Feb.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1811,  studied  theology  at  Andover  seminary,  and
was  ordained  to  the  ministry  in  1814.  In  lNM-7>
he  was  tutor  at  Williams,  and  occasionally  pn
among  the  neighboring  Congregational  churches
Deciding  to  become  a  missionary,  he  set  out  on
horseback,  in  December,  1815,  for  St.  Louis,


GIFFORD


GIGNOI \


618


was  than  regarded  no  in  the  far  Mt lb-  ittahad
i  \  in  April,  1816,  aasetnbled  ■  small  congrc-

.  .md  IjtH'Minc  the  pioiH-.r  missionary  of  the
•iTiuii church li>  the country west  of the
M ippL In  l*l<i  Mr.  Qiddings  organland  I
i  tcrian  church  at  Bcllevuc  settlement,  eighty

miles  southwest  of  si.  bonis,  and  daring  the  ntn
irs  funned  eleven  ot her  congregation!  five
nuri.  und  six  in  Illinois.  In  the  spring  of
1888  he  explored  Nebraska  ami  Kansas  territories,
preparatory  to  establishing  missions  among  the
Indians.  On  this  t«>ur  of  many  weeks,  without
white  companions,  ami  hundreds  of  miles  from  any
white  settlement,  he  visited  several  Indian  nations,
held  councils  with  their  chiefs,  and  was  n
with  hospitality.  In  1888  Mr.  Qiddings  was  in-
stalled pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  St.
I/>uis  lie  was  an  active  member  of  the  first  Bible.
Sunday-school,  and  tract  societies  of  Missouri,  and
of  the  first  colonization  society  in  that  state.

(.1  ITOKl).  Archer,  lawyer.  1..  in  Newark,  N.  J..
in  L787;<L there,  19 May,  1809.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1814,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818,
and  began  to  practise  in  his  native  town,  where  he
continue"  1  to  reside  till  his  death.  lie  was  appointed
by  President  Jackson  collector  of  customs  for  the
port  of  Newark  in  1886, and  held  this  office  during
the  following  twelve  years,  without  suffering  it  to
interfere  materially  with  an  extensive  practice.  He
published  a  "  Digest  of  the  Statutory  and  Consti-
tutional Constructions  delivered  in  the  Supreme
Court  and  Court  of  Errors  and  Appeals  of  New
psjBjM  "  (1888),  "  Unity  of  the  Liturgy,"  and  con-
tributed to  periodical  literature.

GIFFORD,  Robert  Swain,  artist,  b.  in  Nau-
shon,  Mass.,  2:t  Dec.,  1840.  He  studied  under
AlU-rt  Van  Beest,  the  Dutch  marine  painter,  opened
a  studio  in  Boston  in  1804,  and  resided  there  till
he  settled  permanently  in  New  York,  in  1800.  He
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1867,  and  an  academician  in  1878.  He  made  an
extensive  sketching  tour  in  Oregon  and  California
in  1M«»9,  and  furnished  views  in  these  states  to
"  Pict  uresque  America  "  (1872-'8).  He  went  to  Eu-
rojH'  in  ls?o.  spent  1K74  in  Algiers  and  the  Great
Desert,  and  in  1875  made  a  sketching  tour  in  Brit-
tany anil  southern  France.  He  has  been  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  society  of  painters  in  water-
colors  since  its  organization  in  1860,  is  a  member
of  the  New  Fork  etching  club,  the  British  society
of  painter-etchers,  the  Artist's  fund  society,  and
the  Society  of  American  artists.  He  is  best  known
through  his  pictures  of  oriental  life.  Among  his
oil-paintings  are  "Scene at  Manchester,  Cape  Ann  "
•  Mount  Hood"  (1870);  "  Halting  for  Wa-
ter" and  "  Passenger  Boats  on  the  Nile"  (1874);
"The  Rossetti  Garden "  (1878) ;  -The  Mosque  of
Mahommed  Ali."  which  was  awarded  a  medal  at  the
Centennial  (1876);  "The  Borders  of  the  Desert,"
Kngland  Cedars "  (1877);  "Salt  Boats  at
Dartmouth."  exhibited  at  the  Paris  salon  (18?S).
Deserted  Whaler,"  in  the  water-color  exhi-
bition (18(17),  excited  much  favorable  comment.
Other  water-colors  1>\  his  hand  are  "  Day  on  the
I  ;  'Block  Hones  at  Bastport"
(1874);  "Venetian  Companions"  (1H7<!>;  "The
' '  f  HI iach,  Algeria" (1877).  His  recent  works
include  '•  Nonquitt  Cliff"  (1882);  "New  Zaanda-
»tn"  (1883);  "The  Shores  of  Buzzard  Bav."  and
"  Near  the  Coast,"  for  which  he  was  awarded  $2."><K>
in  the  First  prize  fund  exhibition  of  the  American
art  association  (188/»);  and  "  Autumn  in  New  Kng-
land "  (1886).— His  wife,  Frances  Eliot,  artist,  b.
>  Bedford,  Mass.,  1H44.  received  her  art  edu-
cation at  the  Cooper  institute.  Mew  York  city,  and


under  Samuel  Gerry,  in  Boston. She  has  made  a

-|m<  nilty  of painting  liirds with landscape*,  and
ntributed  illustrations  to  the  magaaii
GIFFORD.  Sand  ford  Kohliis,,,,,  painter,  b.
in  Qrsonneld,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  v.,  m  July,  IH

d. in  k.  •».»  Aug.. Ikho. He  studied  at

Brown  in  ml,  removing  to  New  York  in

1846,  was  a  pupil  in  |»crsi>cctivc,drawing.and  anat-
omy in  the  studio  of  John  Rulx-ns  Smith,  also
attending  lectures  on  anatomy.  At  this  time  he
began  to  paint  portraits.  fn  1*4(1  he  made  a
|K-destrian  tour  in  the  Catskill  mountains,  and
among  the  Berkshire  hills,  where  his  attention
was  directed  for  the  first  time  t<>  landsca|K-s.  In
lHol  he  was  elected  an  associate  and  three  years
later  a  mcndicr  of  the  National  academy.  In
1855-'7  ho  studied  in  Europe.  When  the  civil  war
began,  he  joined  the  7th  New  York  regiment.
and  some  sketches  of  bivouac  and  battle  are  remi-
niscences of  his  six  months'  cx|>criencc  in  the
army.  During  the  next  ten  years  he  flatted  Colo-
rado, California,  I'tah,  Oregon,  British  Columbia,
and  the  Rocky  mountains.  He  was  a  mcinljer  of
the  Century  and  Union  league  clubs,  and  his  asso-
ciates were  attached  to  him  for  qualities  that  he
possessed  distinct  from  his  merits  as  an  artist.  At
a  meeting  of  the  Century  club,  held  the  day  after
his  death,  John  F.  Weir  delivered  an  address  on
his  life  and  character;  Worthington  Whittredge,
another  entitled  "  Reminiscences  of  Gifford  ";  Jer-
vis  McKntee,  one  on  "Gifford.  the  Friend,  the  Art-
ist, the  Man  " ;  and  poems  were  read  by  Edmund  C.
Stedman  and  Richard  H.  Stoddard.  Mr.  Gilford's
paintings  are  remarkable  for  tenderness  of  tone  and
brilliancy  of  color.  His  picturcsarc  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  profounder  sentiments  of  nature  rather
than  of  her  siqicrticial  aspects.  His  most  success-
ful works  are  "  Baltimore  in  1802 "(1802);  "Morn-
ing in  the  Adirondack^ "  (1807);  "Mount  Mans-
field" (180!>);  "San  Giorgio,  Venice"  (1870);
"Tivoli"  (1871);  "  Fishing- Boats  "  (1873);  "Pal-
lanza,"  " Sunset  on  the  Sweet  Water,  Wyoming,"
M  Venetian  Sails"  (1874);  "At  Ben  i-  Hassan  "  and
"Near  Palermo"  (1870);  "  Leander's  Tower."
"  Sunset  on  the  Hudson,"  and  "  Fire  Island  Beach ''
(1877);  and  "Sunset,  Bay  of  New  York"  (1878).
At  the  Centennial  of  1870  Mr.  OifTord  was  com-
mended for  his  landscape  paintings.  His  "San
Giorgio,"  "Venice,"  and  "Mount  Renier"  were
exhibited  at  the  Paris  salon  (1878).

GIGEK,  George  Musgrave.  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  6  June,  1822:  d.  there.  11  Oct.,
1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1841,
studied  theology  there,  and  in  1800  was  ordained
by  the  New  Brunswick  presbytery.  He  was  then  ap-
pointed tutor  in  Princeton  college,  elected  adjunct
professor  of  Greek  in  1840.  and  professor  of  I^atin  in
1K.V1.  Failing  health  eooapeUed  his  resignation  of
this  chair  in  1806.  Prof.  Giger  expended  much
time  and  effort  for  the  education  of  the  negroes,
to  whom  he  preached  regularly  in  Witherspoon
church  at  Princeton.  He  ItequCHthcd  his  books
and  thirty  thousand  dollars  to  that  college.

GIGNOrX,  Francois  Regis,  landscape  paint-
er, b.  in  Lyons,  France,  in  181d;  d.  in  Par
Aug..  186ft  He  was  educated  at  Fril>ourg.  and
studied  art  in  the  Academy  of  St.  Pierre.at  Lyons,
loiter  he  entered  the  School  of  fine  arts  at  Paris,
and  was  also  a  pupil  of  Paul  Delaroche.  In  1844
he  removed  to  the  United  States  and  opened  a
studio  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  I80I  he  was  elected
a  mcmtier  of  the  Academy  of  design,  and  was  the
president  of  the  Brooklyn  art  academy.  In
l*?n  he  returned  to  France,  where  he  resided  un-
til his  death. The  best  known  of  his  landscapes


644


CHIOS'


GILIIKUT


arc  "  Niagara  Fulls,"  ••Virginia  in  Indian  Suiii-
tin -r."  "Tlic  First  Snow."  ••  Four  BWOU  in  Aiii.-r-
■Tha  Dismal  Swamp."  "  Mi«>nli«_rht  on  the
Si,'iicnav."  "  .Mount  Washington."  which  was  ex-
bibited  at  the  Paris  salon  of  lxiiT.  and  "Spring."
at  the  Philadelphia  exposition  of  1H76.

(tlllON,  Albert  Leary,  surgeon,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  0  June,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Philadelphia  high-school  in  1850,  and  was
professor  in  the  Philadelphia  medical  college  in
1853-'4.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1855  as
aeaMant  surgeon,  became  surgeon  in  1861,  medi-
cal htspeotot  in  1872,  and  medical  director,  with
the  rank  of  captain,  in  1879.  He  is  now  (1887)
stationed  at  Mare  Island,  California.  His  pub-
lished works  are  "Practical  Sagged  ions  in  Naval
1 1  rgiene  "  (New  York.  1871) : "  The  Need  of  Sanitary
Reform  in  Ship  Life"  (1877);  "Sanitary  Com-
monplaces Applied  to  the  Navy "  (1877) ;  and
the  "  Prevention  of  Venereal  Disease  by  Legisla-
tion "  (1882),  and  is  a  constant  contributor  to
magazines  and  newspapers.

GfL,  Geronimo  Antonio  (hil),  Spanish-Mexi-
can engraver,  b.  in  Zamora,  Spain,  in  1732;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico,  16  April,  1798.  He  was  one  of
the  first  scholars  of  the  Academy  of  San  Fernando,
which  enabled  him  to  continue  his  studies  in  Mad-
rid under  Tomas  Prieto.  In  1756  he  was  awarded
the  first  prize  for  the  second  class  in  painting,  and
in  the  same  year  he  engraved  the  copper-plate
copies  of  the  medals  that  his  teacher  had  used  for
the  premiums  of  the  academy,  and  that  institute
made  him  an  honorary  member.  In  1757  he  went
to  Home  to  continue  his  studies,  and  on  his  return
was  awarded  the  engraving  of  the  medals  for  the
agricultural  exposition  of  Malaga.  In  1760  he  was
appointed  chief  engraver  of  the  mint  in  Mexico,
and  established  a  drawing-school.  From  1764  till
his  death  he  was  director  of  the  Academy  of  San
Carlos.  His  most  noteworthy  works  are  the  med-
als that  he  engraved  for  the  proclamation  of  the
reign  of  Charles  IV.,  and  a  medal  representing  the
equestrian  statue  of  that  monarch,  executed  by
Manuel  Tolsa  for  the  Pnseo  do  Iiucareli  in  the  city
of  Mexico.  He  also  executed  over  6,600  punches
and  8.000  matrices  for  the  type-foundry  for  the
royal  library,  one  of  the  best  outfits  in  existence.
In  Rome  and  Madrid  there  are  fine  prints  of  cop-
per-plates executed  by  Gil,  the  most  original  being
a  portrait  of  Charles  III.,  with  an  allegorical  fig-
ure, and  a  plate  of  Palafox,  ex-bishop  of  Puebla.

GILBERT,  Abi jah.  senator,  b.  in  Gilbertsville,
Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  June,  1806  ;  d.  there,  23  Nov.,
1881.  His  grandfather,  Abijah,  settled  in  Otsego
(then  Montgomery)  county  in  1787,  and  his  father,
Joseph,  was  engaged  there  in  manufacturing  and
other  business.  The  son  entered  Hamilton  college,
but  did  not  complete  his  course,  owing  to  illness.
He  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  the  country,
and  afterward  in  New  York  city,  but  retired  in
1850.  In  politics  he  was  a  strong  Whig,  and  after-
ward a  Republican,  and  was  an  early  advocate  of
the  abolition  of  slavery.  After  the  civil  war  he
removed  to  St.  Augustine,  Pla.,  and  took  an  active
part  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  state.  He  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  and
served  from  1869  till  1875,  after  which  he  retired
to  private  life,  continuing  to  reside  in  St.  Augus-
tine till  just  before  his  death.

GILBERT.  Benjamin,  author,  b.  in  Byberry,
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1711 ;  d.  on  St.  Lawrence  river,
8  June,  1780.  He  carried  on  an  extensive  milling
business  in  Northampton  county.  Pa.  In  April,
1780,  he  and  his  family  were  taken  prisoners  by
the  Indians. He  was  carried  to  Niagara,  surren-


dered to  Col.  Johnson,  and  sent  by  him  in  an  open
lioat  to  Montreal.  He  died  while  descending  the
St.  Lawrence,  and  was  buried  on  the  banks  of  the
river.  A  narrative  of  his  captivity  and  suffering
was published by  Joseph Cruikshank  (Philadel-

|)hia,  17S4).  His  mind  was  of  a  religious  bent,  and
le  published  several  volumes  on  theological  sub-
jects, including  "Truth  Defended"  (1748);  "dis-
courses on  Perfection  "  (1769);  and  "Further  Dis-
courses on  Sin,  Election,  Reprobation,  and  Bap-
tism"  (1770).  See  also  "History  of  Byben
Moreland."  bv  P.  Middleton  (Philadelphia,  1867).

GILBERT,  Charles  Champion,  soldier.  I.,  in
Zanesville,  Ohio,  1  March,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  and  assigned
to  the  3d  infantry.  He  served  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  was  in  the  garrison  at  Vera  ( 'ruz  in  1
in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1848,  and  then  engaged  in
frontier  duty  until  1850.  He  l>eeame  an  a-
professor  at  West  Point  on  28  Feb.,  1850,  was  pro-
moted to  a  1st  lieutenancy  on  10  June,  and  ful-
filled his  duties  until  28  Sept.,  1855,  after  which  he
was  on  duty  at  various  forts  in  Texas  until  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war.  He  distinguished  him-
self in  conflicts  with  Indians,  and  was  advanced  to
a  captaincy  on  8  Dec.,  1855.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  in  the  southwest,  and  was  wounded
at  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek  on  10  Aug.,  1861.
On  21  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  inspector-general  of  the
Department  of  the  Cumberland  and  of  the  Army  of
the  Ohio  until  25  Aug.,  1862.  During  this  time  he
was  engaged  in  the  march  to  Pittsburg  Landing
in  March  and  April.  1862,  and  in  the  battle  of
Shiloh  on  7  April,  when  he  was  brevetted  major.
He  was  promoted  to  a  brigadier-generalship
volunteers  on  9  Sept.,  1862,  became  acting  majo
general  in  command  of  the  Army  of  Kentucky,  e:
gaged  in  the  battle  of  Perryville  on  8  Oct.,  1862,
and  for  his  gallantry  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the
regular  army.  Taking  command  of  the  10th  di-
vision of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  he  guarded  the
Louisville  and  Nashville  railroad  through  the
winter,  when  he  became  assistant  to  the  provost-
marshal  at  Louisville  until  2  June,  1863.  He  was
then  commissioned  major,  and  served  at  various
forts  until  21  Sept.,  1866,  when  he  was  transferred
to  the  28th  infantry.  He  became  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  7th  infantry,  8  July,  1868,  colonel  of  the
17th  infantry  on  19  May,  1881,  and  was  retired
from  active  service  on  1  March,  1886.

GILBERT,  Edward,  editor,  b.  in  Albany,  N.
Y. ;  d.  in  California  in  1862.  He  received  a  pub-
lic-school education,  and  became  a  member  of
Col.  Stevenson's  New  York  regiment.  He  after-
ward removed  to  California,  settled  in^  San  Fran-
cisco, and  served  as  representative  in  congress
from  11  Sept.,  1850,  till  3  March,  1851,  when  he
returned  to  his  adopted  state  and  engaged  in  the
practice  of  law.  He  soon  after  founded  and  be-
came editor-in-chief  of  the  daily  "Alta  Califor-
nia." thus  being  the  pioneer  of  the  daily  press  of
San  Francisco.  Certain  editorial  criticisms  on  the
action  of  the  governor  of  the  state  provoked  a  re-
tort from  Gen.  James  W.  Denver,  then  secretary
of  state  of  California,  and  a  challenge  followed.  A
duel  with  rifles  resulted,  and  Gilbert  fell.

GILBERT,  Grove  Sheldon,  artist,  b.  in  Clin-
ton. N.  Y.,  5  Aug.,  1805;  d.  in  Rochester.  V V..
23  March,  1885. He  was  educated  at Middlebury
academy,  and  for  a  time  studied  medicine. An
early  fondness  for  drawing  had  given  him  a
to  be  an  engraver,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty.
a  portrait  for  the  first  time,  he  at  once  decided  t<<
become  an  artist. Subsequently  obtaining
colors  from  a  sign-painter,  he  made  a  portrait  of


of

5


(ill.!.


(ill.HEUT


610


r


hi*  »ist<T  < -ti  tin-  h'l  <>f  a  chest,  whirl)  |<r<>\

•  J  likeness.  POT  HTWml  vc.»rs  In-  painted
igara  Mid  Toronto  flnslljr  settllne  •»
Boohester  in  1884,  where  he  Afterward  remained.
II.-  then  deToted  himself  esolusiveri  t<>  portrait
painting,  and  was  eminently  ■uooamruL  In  iHls
he  was  dr.  ted  !..  honorary  memliership  in  tin-  Na-
scedemrof  design,  and  in  iku»  became  an
honorary  memlx-r  <>f  (In*  Albany  academy  of  arts.

i.  r<>\  p Karl,  rist.  b.  in I.

ter.  N.  V..  ii  Mav.  I*j:t.  wax  graduated  at  the.  di-
versity ..f  Rochester  in  1882,  and  ■nbceoncntly  de-
lis  attention  to  geology,  being  for  a  time
•  ■.1  with  Prof.  Henry  A.  Ward,  the  natural-
ist, in  Rochester.  In  IHO'.I  he  l.ccame  a  volunteer
assistant  on  the  Ohio  geological  survey,  and  in
wived  the  H|>|M>intmenl  of  geologist  t<>  tli<'
survey  west  of  the  100th  meri<lian  under  Lieut.
George  M.  Wheeler.  Three  vears  later  he  was
made  assistant  geologist  under  Maj.  John  W.
Powell  in  the  geographical  ami  geological  survey
of  the  Rocky  mountain  region,  ami  held  this  a|>-
pointment  until  July.  IMTJI.  when  he  became  geolo-
gist to  the  [J,  S.  geological  survey,  having  charge
at  first  of  the  division  of  the  Great.  Basin,  and
more  recently  of  the  Appalachian  division.  He  i-
a  Bomber  of  scientific  ejciotles,  and  was  one  of
the  vice-presidents  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science  in  1887,  having  charge
of  the  section  on  geology  and  geography.  Mr.
Gilbert  was  president  of  the  American  society  of
naturalists  in  1885-'0,  and  in  1883  was  elected  a
meinU-r  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He
has  been  a  large  contributor  to  technical  journals
and  to  the  proceedings  of  societies.  His  papers
treat  principally  of  the  sculpture  of  the  land  by
rain  and  rivers,  the  genesis  of  the  topography  of
lake-shores,  ami  the  quaternary  history  of  the
(Jreat  Basin.  Many  of  these  have  appeared  in  the
volumes  of  the  official  reports  of  the  Ohio  and  the
government  surveys.  He  wrote  the  "  Report  on  the
QaclogJ  of  the  Henry  Mountains  "  (\\  ashington.
1877).  and  edited  and  partially  wrote  the  "  Report
on  the  Geology  and  Resources  of  the  Black  Hills
Of  Dakota"  (1880).

GILBERT.  Sir  Humphrey.  Knglish  navigator,
b.  in  Dartmouth.  England,  in  1539;  lost  at  sea,  10
Sept.,  1584.  He  was  a  half-brother  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh.  After  studying  at  Eton  and  Oxford,  he
chose  t  he  military  pro-
fession, fought  in  the
north  of  England  and
Scotland  against  the
Roman  Catholics,  and
was  given  command
of  an  army  sent  to
subjugate  the  Irish.
Eor  nis  successful
conduct  of  the  cam-
paign he  was  knight-
ed and  made  governor
of  Minister  in  1570.
Soon  after  his  return
to  England  he  com-
manded a  Beat  that
was  sent  to  blockade
Flushing.  Ob  his  re-
^__^^  turn he published  a

fL  f-  y>^m^~~fY  pamphlet  entitled  '  A

y  %^~ CJsHv&n Dhoourw  <»f  DfeooT<
_2f  jy  cry  for  a  New  Passage

to  Cataia."  Ho  was
one  of  the  most  anient  advocates  of  the  theory  of
a  northwest  passage,  and  after  aiding  Krohishcr  and
oilier  mariners  with  his  fortune  and  influence,  de-


termined to  bSOOaM  an  explorer  himself.  He  ob-
tained lettere-petenl  from  Queen  Elirabeth,  author-
ising him  t<>  make  discoveries  <luring  sjx  years  in
all  luirliarous  countries  not  in  the  poweasion  of
Christians,  and  to  OOOUpJ  and  disjM.s,.  of  them  in
favor  of  English  subjects  under  the  crown,
llrst  expedition  was  undertaken  in  1081,  but  a  teni-
|ms|  desl  roved  one  of  his  vessels,  and  OOmpaUed  the

admiral  to  return to  port with tl then,  which

were  badly  damaged.  He  mortgaged  hi*  estate  to
■OQM  for  a  new  expedition,  which  started  M
11  June,  l"»x:!.  for  Newfoundland.  It  consisted  of
two  decked  vessels  and  three  sloops,  manned  D
men.  Walter  Raleigh,  who  commanded  the  largest
ship,  Ihk'iimic  alarmed  at  the  amount  of  sieknaw
0B  Maid*  Ud  <»n  the  third  day  put  back  lot  Eng-
land. (JillM-rt  arrived  at  the  coast  of  Newfound-
land, after  several  narrow  aMapsj  from  storms  and
He  landed  at  St.  John,  ami,  despite  the
presence  of  thirtv-six  vessels  of  various  nationali-
ties, took  possession  of  the  countrv  in  the  name  of
his  sovereign,  lie  expelled  the  Portuguese,  who
had  settled  on  the  island,  and  published  statutes
providing  that  the  religion  of  EM  country  should
follow  the  English  rite,  that  whoever  rebelled
against  the  sovereignty  of  the  queen  should  be
punishable  with  death  as  a  traitor,  and  that  any
person  who  spoke  disrespectfully  of  the  queen
should  have  his  ears  cut  off  and  his  land  or  vessels
confiscated.  His  colony  turned  out  disastrously.
A  large  number  of  sailors  deserted,  Othen  mil  sick,
and  finally  (iilbert  set  sail  for  Xorumbega,  after-
ward called  New  England.  A  tempest  dispersed
the  flotilla,  and  the  principal  vessel  foundered.
Sir  Humphrey's  feme!  went  down  in  a  storm  off
the  Azores  while  on  the  course  to  England.  Rob-
ert Clarke  returned  to  Newfoundland  alive,  after
great  sufferings.

GILBERT,  John  Gibbs,  tutor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass..  87  l-vi...  lsit):  d.  there,  17  June,  1889.  He
was  educated  in  a  public  school,  and  at  the  age  of
fourteen  placed  in  a  dry-goods  store,  where  he  re-
mained four  years.  After  some  experience  in  pri-
vate theatricals  he  appeared,  28  Nov.,  1828.  at  the
old  Tremont  theatre,  as  Jaffier  in  "  Venice  Pre-
served." This  was  followed  by  Sir  Edward  Morti-
more  in  "The  Iron  Chest."  and  Shvlock  in  "The
Merchant  of  Venice."  But  Mr.  Gilbert  soon  became
a  stock  actor,  on  the  pay  of  three  dollars  per  week.
and,  dissatisfied  with  his  condition,  sought  an  en-
gagement with  Caldwell,  manager  of  the  New
Orleans  theatre,  and  for  about  four  years  plaved
'•  general  utility"  in  the  southwestern  theatres,
Sul.sc, pie nt  ly  he  acted  for  five  vears  in  Boston,  one
year  in  New  Fork  city,  and  again  five  years  in  Bos-
ton. In  1847  Mr.  Gilbert  went  to  London  and
joiied  the  company  of  the  Princess's  theatre,  hav-
ing been  engaged  to  represent  the  parts  of  old  men
in  standard  comedies. His  first  enpoirsnos  thcill

was  as  sir  Robert  Bramble  in  "The  poor  Gentle*
man."  After  the  close  of  the  London  season  he
visited  Paris,  for  the  purpose  of  study.  In  1M*
Mr.  (iilbert  returned  to  this  country,  and  appeared
under  the  management  of  Hambiin.  at  the  New
York  Park  theatre.  His  last  performance  at  this
place  was  in  the  part  of  Admiral  Kingston  in
"Naval  Engagements,"  the  evening  before  it  was
destroyed  In  fire,  after  a  few  months  of  unsuccess-
ful management.  Thereafter  he  joined  Hamlilin's
company  at  the  Bowery  theatre.  Eroin  the  latter
place,  in  1881,  he  went  to  Philadelphia  for  five  \.
and  thence  to  Boston  until  1897,  when  he  returned
to  Philadelphia,  remaining  until  IMS,  In  1881
Mr.  Gilbert  joined  the  company  of  Wallm  k's  thea-
tre in  New  \  ork  city,  with  which  he  was  ever  after


646


GILBERT


GILBERT


gonmrflitfl  Be  had  bam  twin  married.  Hi- -e<-
..n<l  wife.  DM  Sarah  II.  (Javett.  is  living.  Mr.  (iil-
bsrfl  career  of  sixty  year-  before  1 1 » « -  public  had
been  unmarked  cither  l>y  vicissitudes  or  adven-
tures. Away  from  I  he  theatre  his  life  had  Wen
.[iiiet  and  retired.  He  was  one  of  the  few  perform-
ers Ufi'te  the  public  whose  career  compassed  more
than  two  generations,  from  the  days  when  he
played in connection with ('oojM?r,  Junius B.

Booth,  and  the  Kem-
bles. His  range  of
characters  had  ban
wide,  in  comedy  and
tragedy,  and  at t In-
time of his death
he  was  among  the
few  who  were  able  to
portray effectively
the  fine  old  English
gentleman  of  other
days. Among his
most popular per-
sonations were  Sir
Peter Teazle. Sir
Anthony Absolute,
^-y J$,ys ^ Lord Ogleby, Job
(^^ cJ%^«*-^> Thornberry  and  Old
Dornton. His  abil-
ity to  learn  new  parts  was  unimpaired,  and  after  a
few  readings  of  old  ones  that  were  favorites  with
him  many  years  ago.  he  was  able  to  recite  them
with  precision. With all his  experience he  in-
formed the  writer  of  this  notice  that  on  first  nights
ho  was  usually  more  or  less  nervous,  and  in  former
years  was  several  times  overcome  by  stage-fright.
Although well nigh  an  octogenarian,  he  looked
more  like  a  man  of  sixty,  and  ascribed  his  freedom
from  many  of  the  ailments  of  advanced  age  to  con-
stant bathing  and  cold-water  treatment.

GILBERT,  Linda,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  18  May,  1847.  She  removed  to  Chicago,
IU.,with  her  parents  when  she  was  about  four  years
old,  and  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  convent  in
that  city.  She  became  interested  at  an  early  age
in  efforts  to  improve  the  condition  of  prisons  and

Srisoners,  and  has  endeavored  '•  to  remove  the  con-
itions  that  produce  crime,  by  a  wholesome  sys-
tem of  industry  and  culture."  She  has  succeeded
in  placing  in  various  prisons  libraries  of  from  1,500
to  2,000  volumes  each,  and  aggregating  .'50,000  vol-
umes. In  1876  the  "Gilbert  library  and  prisoners'
aid  society  "  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the

state  of  New  York,
and  Miss  Gilbert  be-
came president  of  its
board  of  managers.
The  objects  of  the
society  are  to  im-
prove prison  disci-
pline, to  place  libra-
ries in  every  prison
and  jail  in  the  coun-
try, to  look  after  the
prisoner's  family  if
in  need  and  worthy
of  aid,  and  to  help
convicts  to  lead  up-
right livesafter  their
discharge.  Although
lack  of  funds  has
prevented  the  so-
ciety from  doing  any
work  since  1883,
Miss  Gilbert  continues  to  labor  as  an  individual.
She  has  patented  several  devices,  including  a  noise-


less rail  for  railroads,  and  a  wire  clothes-pin.  and
has  used  these  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  money
to  carry  on  her  philanthropic  work.  For  the  BUM
purpose  she  has  established  u Linda  Gilbert's  Tax
and  Trade  Kecord."

GILBERT,  Mali  I  on  Norris,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Morris,  N.  Y.,  28  March,  1848.  His  early  edu-
cation and  training  were  obtained  at  Fairfield
seminary,  N.  Y.  He  entered  Hobart  college  in
I860,  but,  owing  to  pulmonary  troubles,  was  com-
pelled to  leave  before  the  end  of  the  course.  He
spent  two  years  in  Florida  for  the  benefit  of  Ins
health,  after  which  he  took  charge  of  the  School  of
the  Good  Shepherd,  at  Ogden,  Utah.  He  entered
Seabury  divinity-school,  Faribault,  Minn.,  in  1872,
was  graduated  in  1875,  and  was  ordained  deacon
by  Bishop  Whipple.  Shortly  afterward  he  went
to  Montana  and  took  charge  of  a  large  mission
field  at  Deer  Lodge,  in  the  western  part  of  the  ter-
ritory. He  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop  Tuttle
in  October,  1875,  and  continued  his  labors,  partly
at  Deer  Lodge  and  partly  at  Helena,  for  five  or  six
years,  meeting  with  abundant  success.  In  January,
1881,  he  was  called  to  the  rectorship  of  Christ
church,  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  and  also  established  mis-
sions at  White  Bear,  Fort  Snelling,  Merriam  Park,
and  Randolph  street.  He  has  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Seabury  divinity-school  and  also
from  Racine  college.  Dr.  Gilbert  has  been  active-
ly engaged  in  diocesan  work,  was  a  deputy  to  the
general  convention  of  1886,  and  was  elected  assist-
ant bishop  of  Minnesota  in  the  same  year.  He  was
consecrated  on  17  Oct.,  1886.

GILBERT,  Nathaniel,  lawyer.  He  was  speaker
in  the  house  of  assembly  in  Antigua,  West  Indies,
and  is  distinguished  as  the  founder  of  Methodism
in  those  islands.  While  in  England  in  1758,  he
and  two  of  his  slaves  heard  Wesley  preach,  and  all
became  converts.  On  his  return  to  the  West  In-
dies, Gilbert  held  religious  meetings  in  his  own
house,  became  a  Methodist  preacher,  and  founded
a  society,  chiefly  of  blacks,  which  was  the  begin-
ning of  the  Weslevan  missions  in  the  archipelago.

GILBERT,  Raleigh.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  and  commanded  a  vessel  contain-
ing 120  colonists  in  the  expedition  to  settle  at  the
mouth  of  the  Kennebec  river  in  1607.  Arriving
at  Monhegan  island  on  11  Aug.,  a  fort  was  built  at
Cape  Small  Point,  now  apart  of  Phippsburg,  Me.,
ana  named  St.  George.  Gilbert  was  appointed  ad-
ministrator. Becoming  by  the  death  of  his  brother
the  heir  to  the  family  estates  in  England,  and  the
storehouse  of  the  colony  being  burned,  he  re-
turned to  England  the  following  year,  the  whole
colony  accompanying  him.

GILBERT,  Rhfns  Henry,  inventor,  b.  in  Guil-
ford, N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1&32;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10
July,  1885.  He  served  an  apprenticeship  with  a
manufacturing  firm  in  Corning,  N.  Y.,  studied
medicine  with  Dr.  Willard  Parker,  of  New  York
city,  and  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  joined  the  Duryea  zouaves  as  surgeon,
and  served  through  the  war,  performing  at  the
battle  of  Big  Bethel  the  first  surgical  operation
that  was  made  under  fire  during  the  struggle.  He
was  afterward  made  medical  director  and  superin-
tendent of  the  U.  S.  army  hospitals.  His  health
becoming  impaired,  he  gave  up  active  practice  and
became  assistant  superintendent  of  the  New  Jersey
central  railroad.  While  thus  occupied  he  was  led
to  study  the  question  of  rapid  transit  in  New  York
city.  His  attention  was  drawn  to  this  subject  on
account  of  his  experiences  as  a  physician,  and  in
view  of  the  excessive mortality  in  overcrowded


OILB


CII.CIIRIST


•  17


fanamnnt ho— Hi>  Irri  notion  nsn  «  pnan-

<•  tube,  Mid  this  was  afterward  slsJbotntSfl  Into
t Ik-  present  elevated  railroad  system.  Hi  devised
■even  different  plana,  and  in  1878  obtained  ■
•barter  ;n  Albany  f«»r  an  oTertiaad  rnlritlar  DM**
Balk  railway,  under  the  title  of  tbewOilbff1  an>

l  railroad  company,"  for  which  be  was  unable

btain  a  franchise. The  original  elevated  rail-
. mild from Battery  place  through

nwich  street  and  Ninth  avenue  t<>  Thirtieth

i.  The  horse-car  companies  fought  against
the  projecl  "iili  every  weapon,  looking  <>n  the
company  as  coni|>etitors  and  intruder!  upon  their
vested  privileges.  The  contest  ended  in  favor  of
I>r.  Gilbert.  The  roatl  was  begun,  l>ut  the  work
soon  stopped,  ami  eighteen  months  of  litigation
followed.  It  was  not  until  October,  1*77.  that  the
« ipany  were  enabled  to  proceed.  The  Sixth  ave-
nue road  was  built,  ami  Dr.  Gilbert  was  at  li r-t  a
large  holder  of  the  Stock,  lie  was  superseded  in
the  management  in  1878,  and  the  name  of  the  com-
pany was  changed  to  the  Metropolitan  elevated
railroad  company.  His  stink  passed  out  of  his
hands,  extensive  litigation  followed,  charges  of
fraud  were  made  against  his  associates,  ami  his

h  was  hastened  by  anxiety  ami  dmpp"intment.
«.  I  I.IIKKT.  Thonias.  soldier.  1..  about  1714:  d.
in  New  Brunswick  in  1796.  His  ancestor.  John.
came  from  Devonshire  early  in  the  17th  century,
and  was  one  of  the  first  two  representatives  from
Taunton,  Mass.,  to  the  general  court.  Thomas  was
a  captain  at  the  memorable  siege  of  Ixmisburg
in  171"),  and  in  the  French  war  of  1755  held  a
beutenant-colonelcy  in  the  Massachusetts  forces
under  Gen.  Buggies.  He  was  engaged  in  the  at-
tempt against  Crown  Point,  and  after  the  fall  of
Col  Williams  in  the  Itattle  with  the  French  under
Baron  I  Heakau,  he  succeeded  to  the  command  of
the  regiment.  On  retiring  from  the  service  at  the
dose  of  the  war  he  declined  to  receive  half  pay.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  struggle  he
raised  and  commanded  a  body  of  800  royalists  at
the  request  of  Gen.  Gage.  In  April.  1775,  the  con-
gress of  Massachusetts  declared  him  an  enemy  to
his  country,  and  a  few  days  later  he  fled  to  a  ves-
sel lying  in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  and  sailed  to
Boston,  then  in  possession  of  the  British.  He  ac-
companied the  royal  troops  to  Halifax  in  177(1,  and
in  1«78  was  proscribed  and  banished.  He  contin-
ued to  serve  in  the  British  army  during  the  war,
went  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1783,  and  subsequently  set-
tled in  New  Brunswick.

1. 1 1. B KBT.  Walter  Bond, musician,  b.  in  Exe-
ter, England,  21  April,  1829.  He  gave  early  evi-
dence of  musical  talent,  and  when  quite  young  was
S laced  under  Mr.  Angel,  organist  01  Exeter  cathe-
ral,  as  an  articled  pupil  fur  five  years,  after  which
he  studied  the  organ  under  Dr.  Wesley,  of  Win-
chester, and  orchestration  under  Sir  Henry  Bishop.
He  took  the  degree  of  bachelor  in  music  at  Ox-
ford in  1854,  became  fellow  of  the  College  of  organ-
fats  in  1868,  and  in  1886  received  the  honorary
degree  of  doctor  in  music  from  Trinity  college,  To-
ronto, Canada.  In  1869  he  was  appointed  organ-
ist of  Trinity  chapel,  New  York,  which  place  he
187)  holds.  His  compositions  and  publica-
tions are  numerous, and  include  two  oratorios.  "St.
John  "  and  •'The  Restoration  of  Israel."
cil.BKRT,  William Kent, physician,  b,  in

rsburg,  Pa.,  28  Dec.,  \x\i>;  d.  in  Philadelphia.

me,  1880. His  father.  David  (1808-'68),

was  for  some  years professor  of  surgery  In  the

•al  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. The  son  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania
college.  Gettysburg,  in  1840,  and  at  the  Pennsyl-


lical college in lH.-,;>. .\  •  •,„„.

siH-nt  in  Kurope  lie  I  mm  a  me  resident  physician  to
the  Philadelphia  hospital,  holding  that  appoint-
ment for  two  years.  He  then  Utflad  in  Philadel-
phia as  a  regular  pructitioner,  ami  continued  so
until  his  death.  For  MM  time  he  was  consulting
phvsician  to  the  hospital  committee  of  the  Phila-
delphia hospital,  and  from  1878  till  \ss\  faj  held
the  office  of  coroner  of  Philadelphia  county.  Dr.
(iili»crt  was  a  member  of  the  College  of  physicians.

of  several  medical  societies,  of  the  Academy  of
natural  sciences,  and  of  the  Pennsylvania  hfatorfaaj
society.  He  spent  many  years  in  making  a  col-
lection of  iHMiks.  papers,  autograph  letter*,  and
manuscripts  relating  to  American  medical  history,
biography f  and  literature,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  left  an  unpublished  work  as  the  result  of  his
researches.  —  His  brother,  Din  id  MrConauirln,
clergyman,  b.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa..  I  Feb.,  U
received  his  classical  and  theological  education  in
Pennsvlvania  college  and  seminary,  at  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1857.  He  WIS  or-
dained to  the  Lutheran  ministry  in  lMiio,  and  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  1).  from  Roanoke  college,
Va..  in  1880.  He  has  ban  pastor  of  Lutheran
congregations,  at  Staunton,  \  a.,  in  1n59-'6U,  Sa-
vannah, Ga.,  in  1863-'7I.  again  at  Staunton.  Va..
in  lH71-'3,  and  at  Winchester.  \'a..  since  April  of
the  latter  year.  He  is  a  leader  in  ecclesiastical
affairs  in  the  southern  church,  and  has  held  various
places  of  honor  and  trust  in  the  southern  Lutheran
Synods,  For  the  past  five  years  he  has  beSB  proi-
dent  of  the  Kvangclical  Lutheran  synod  of  Vir-
ginia. In  1884-'5  he  took  an  active  part  in  the
efforts  to  unite  the  Lutheran  synods  in  the  south
on  a  purely  confessional  basis,  and  when,  on  25
.June,  1886,  the  united  synod  in  the  south  was  or-
ganized, he  was  chosen  its  first  president.  His
published  works  include  "The  Lutheran  Church
in  Virginia,  1776-1876"  (New  Market.  Va.,  1876);
"  The  Praises  of  the  Ijord  in  the  Story  of  our
Fathers,  a  Sketch  of  the  Lutheran  Church  at  Win-
chester" (1877);  "The  Synod  of  Virginia,  Its  His-
tory and  Work "(1879);  "The  Annihilation  Theory
Briefly  Kxamined "  (1879);  and  "Muhlenberg's
Ministry  in  Virginia,  a  Chapter  of  Colonial  Lu-
thero-Episcopal  Church  History  "  (1884).  Besides
these,  he  has  published  various  articles  and  ser-
mons, doctrinal  and  practical.

GILCHRIST.  John  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Med-
fonl.  Mass.,  it;  Feb..  1809;  d.  in  Washington,  D.CL,
29  April,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1828.  and  studied  law  with  William  Briggs  in
Charlestown.  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school.  After
his  admission  to  the  bar  he  settled  in  Charlestown,
N.  11.,  where  he  practised  in  partnership  with  Gov.
Henry  Hublmrd,  whose  daughter  he  married.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature
and  also  register  of  probate  for  Sullivan  county.
In  1840  he  was  appointed  an  associate  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  New  Hampshire,  and  in  1848
became  chief  justice.  He  was  appointed  one  of
the  justices  of  the  United  States  court  of  claims
in  1855,  and  continued  in  that  office  until  his
death.  Judge  (iilchrist  published  a  "Digest  of
New  Hampshire  Reports (Concord.  1840).

Ml. MIR  I  ST.  Robert  Budd.  jurist,  b.  in
Charleston.  S.  ('..  2N  S-pt..  17!M;  d.  then-.  1  May,
1850.  He  studied  in  Columbia  college.  New  York,
and,  after  entering  the  junior  class  in  the  Smth
Carolina  college,  was  graduated  in  1814.  He  then
Studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818.
In  1KH  he  Iteeame  district  attorney  for  Smth
Carolina,  and  was  the  prosecuting  official  it)  the
••  Bond  case,"  in  which  the  constitutionality  of  the


MS


GILCHRIST


GILES


tariff  was  investigated.  In  1868  he  became  judire
of  the  district  court  of  South  Carolina,  which  offloa
he  held  until  his  death.

GILCHRIST,  William  Wallace,  musician,  b.
in  ,1,'M'V  City,  N.  J.,  in  184(J.  He  removed  with
his  parents  to  Philadelphia,  and  at  nine  years  of
age  >K'gan  a  course  of  musical  study  under  Prof.
II.  A.  Clarke, of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1H?2  he  went  to  Cincinnati  and  became  organist
of  the  New  Jerusalem  church.  In  1883  he  returned
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He
DM  won  three  prizes  for  compositions  from  the
Mendelssohn  glee  club  of  New  York  city,  and  in
1882  the  Cincinnati  May  festival  prize  was  awarded
hy  Reinecke,  Saint  SaSns,  and  Theodore  Thomas
to  his  setting  of  the  46th  Psalm.

I.I  I.IMR.  William  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  at  Brandy  Sta-
tion, Va.,  13  April,  1864.  His  father,  John  Gilder,
was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and
laid  the  corner-stone  of  Girard  college.  The  son
was  educated  at  Wesleyan  university,  and  after-
ward received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Dickinson.
At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he  became  a  preacher
in  the  Methodist  church,  and  was  afterward  or-
dained. In  1836  he  made  an  equestrian  tour  of
the  southern  states,  going  as  far  as  New  Orleans.
In  1840  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Phila-
delphia Repository,"  a  literary  monthly,  but  dis-
continued it  at  the  end  of  a  year.  Subsequently
he  published  for  a  few  years  in  Philadelphia  the
"  Literary  Register,"  a  quarterly  review.  Mr.  Gil-
der in  1842  established  Bellevue  female  seminary
in  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  which  in  1848  he  removed
to  Flushing,  L.  L.  and  in  1857  it  was  chartered  as
a  college.  In  1859  he  removed  to  Redding,  Conn.,
and  thence  to  Fair  Haven,  to  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  and
to  Bordentown.  He  became  chaplain  of  the  40th
regiment  of  New  York  volunteers  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  and  remained  in  active  service
until  his  death,  which  resulted  from  small-pox  con-
tracted during  attendance  upon  a  military  small-
pox hospital.  He  published  a  "  New  Rhetorical
Reader"  (New  York). — His  son,  William  Henry,
explorer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  16  Aug.,  1838,  enlist-
ed as  a  private  in  the  5tn  New  York  volunteers  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  was  afterward
transferred  to  the  40th.  But  during  a  large  part
of  the  war  he  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Thomas
W.  Egan,  and  on  being  mustered  out  at  its  close
was  brevetted  major. In  June,  1878,  he  accom-

E anicd  Lieut.  Schwatka,  as  second  in  command,  on
is  expedition  to  King  William's  Land  in  search
of  the  relics  of  Sir  John  Franklin.  This  expedi-
tion was  marked  by  the  longest  sledge-journey  on
record — 3,251  statute  miles.  In  June,  1881,  he  ac-
companied the  "  Rodgers  "  expedition  in  search  of
the  "Jeannette,"  and  when  the  "Rodgers"  was
burned,  30  Nov.,  he  made  a  midwinter  iourney
from  Bering  strait  across  Siberia,  to  telegraph
news  of  the  disaster  to  the  secretary  of  the  navy.
He  then  joined  in  the  search  on  the  Lena  delta  for
the  survivors  of  the  "  Jeannette."  Mai.  Gilder
spent  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1883  in  Tonquin,
where  the  French  and  Anamese  war  was  in  prog-
ress, and  in  1884  was  one  of  the  first  to  visit  the
scene  of  the  earthquakes  in  Spain.  On  these  occa-
sions, as  well  as  in  his  arctic  expeditions,  he  acted
as  correspondent  of  the  New  York  "  Herald."  He
has  published  "Schwatka's  Search"  (New  Sfork,
1881)  and  "Ice-Pack  and  Tundra"  (1883).  The
latter  has  been  translated  into  French,  under  the
title  *  L'ex  pod  it  ion  du  Rodgers  k  la  recherche  de
la  Jeannette." — Another  son,  Richard  Watson,
editor,  b.  in  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  8  Feb.,  1844,  was


educated  mainly  in  his  father's  school.  As  a  mem-
ber of  Landis'.s  Philadelphia  batterv,  he  enlisted
for  the  "emergency  "campaign  in  the  summer  of
isflH.  when  the  Confederate  army  invaded  Pennsyl-
vania, and  took  part  in  the  defence  of  Carlisle,  lie
joined  the  staff  of  the  Newark.  N..I..  "  Advert  i-er"
in  1868,  and  in  1868,  with  Newton  Crane,  established
the  Newark  "Morning  Register.''  In  1869  he  be-
came editor  of  "  Hours  at  Home."  and  when  that
magazine  was  merged  into  "Scribner's  Monthly"
(now  the  "  Century  ")  he  was  made  associate  editor
of  the  new  periodical.  On  the  death  of  Dr.  J.  G.
Holland  in  October,  1881,  Mr.  Gilder  sue
him  as  editor-in-chief.  He  received  the  de-
LL.  D.  from  Dickinson  college  in  1883.  He  hM
published  four  volumes  of  poems, "  The  New  Day  "
(New  York,  1875);  "The  Poet  and  his  Master"
(1878) ;  "  Lyrics,"  which  is  largely  made  up  of  the
two  previous  volumes  (1885);  and  "The  Celestial
Passion  "  (1887).  He  is  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Authors  club  in  New  York.

(.  1 1  IM  RM  T  i:  V  i:.  Basil  Lanneau,  educator,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  23  Oct,  1831.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1849,  and  then  studied  at  the
universities  of  Berlin,  Bonn,  and  GOttingen  in
Germany,  taking  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at  the  lat-
ter institution  in  1853.  Soon  after  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  was  elected  professor  of
Greek  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  where  he  re-
mained from  1856  till  1876,  also  occupying  the
chair  of  Latin  in  that  university  from  1861  till
1866.  On  the  establishment  of  the  Johns  Hopkins
university,  he  was  called  to  the  professorship  of
Greek  there,  and  has  since  held  that  appointment.
He  has  received  the  degrees  of  LL.  D.  from  Will-
iam and  Mary  in  1869,  and  from  Harvard  in  1886,
and  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  University  of  the  south
in  1884.  Prof.  Gildersleeve  has  taken  high  rank  as
a  Greek  scholar,  and  has  edited  the  "American
Journal  of  Philology,"  which  was  founded  in  Bal-
timore in  1880.  He  has  published  six  Latin  text-
books (New  York,  1867-83)  and  editions  of  " Per-
sius"  (1875);  "Justin  Martyr"  (1877);  and  the
"  Olympian  and  Pythian  Odes  of  Pindar"  (1885).

(.  I  I.IHRSl.Ki:  V  i:.  Benjamin,  editor,  b.  near
Norwalk,  Conn.,  5  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Tazewell  coun-
ty, Va.,  20  June,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Mid-
dlebury  college  in  1814,  and  after  teaching  in
Mount  Zion,  Ga.,  until  1817,  he  entered  Princeton
theological  seminary,  where  he  remained  a  year.
He  became  editor  of  "  The  Missionary  "  in  1819,
and  was  ordained  an  evangelist  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  August,  1820.  His  editorial  labors  con-
tinued, and  he  had  charge  of  "  The  Christian  Ob-
server "  from  J826  till  1845.  He  then  removed  to
Richmond,  Va,,  and  became  sole  editor  of  "  The
Watchman  and  Observer"  until  1856,  when  for  the
four  ensuing  years  he  was  associated  with  the  Rev.
Moses  D.  Hoge,  D.  D.,  and  Rev.  Thomas  V.  Moore,
D.  D..  in  the  editorship  of  "  The  Central  Presby-
terian." During  his  residence  in  Virginia  he
preached  whenever  it  was  possible,  especially  in  the
Virginia  penitentiary,  where  his  work  was  very
successful.  In  advanced  years  his  sight  failed
him,  but  he  continued  his  ministry  long  afterward.

GILES,  Chauncey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charle-
mont,  Mass.,  11  May,  1813.  He  was  educated  at
Williams,  but  failing  health  compelled  him  to
leave  during  his  junior  year.  Subsequently  he  was
engaged  in  teaching,  and  continued  so  occupied
until  1853,  when  he  became  a  clergyman  of  the
church  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  For  ten  year-  he
preached  in  Cincinnati,  then  for  fifteen  yean  in
New  York,  after  which  he  became  pastor  of  the
first  New  Jerusalem  society  in  Philadelphia. In


OIL!


640


:  he  was  consecrated  t<>  Un  ning

minister,  oomsponding  t « t  bishop  in  other  churches,
and  in  1x7.')  was  elected  president  «»f  the  general
convention  of  theohurch  «if  tin-  Niw  Jerusalem  in
United  States.  This  ..Mice,  the  highest  in  tin-
gift  nf  In-  church,  he  baa  rinea  bald  bf  annual  ra-
tion. During  his  residence  in  New  York  ha
adlted  the  "Children*!  New  Church  Magazine"  for

Boor  years  ami  tin-  "  New  Church Messenger  "  f«>r

Mars. Hi-  has  published  about  two  hundred

>urses  as tracts, many of which  have Ihcii

translated  into  French,  (ierinan.  and  Italian. His

Oiber  poblicatiims  include-  Man  as  a  Spiritual  Bc-

which  lias  been  translate  into  l-'nmli.  Qsr*

nian.  Norwegian,  ami  Swedish  (New  York,  lv

hildren  "  (18(H)  "I"':  "The  Incar-
nation" (1870):  •'Heavenly  Blessedness**  (Lon*
dun.  The  Second  Coming  of  the  Lord"

(Philadelphia,  1879);  "Perfect  Prayer*'  (1880);
ami  ••  Valley  of  Diamonds ** (London,  1881).

GILKS,  Henry,  clergyman,  i».  in  Crakflotd,
County  Wexford,  Ireland,  l  Nor.,  1noj>;  d.  near

•II,  Ma--..  10  July, 1HH'2. He  was  educate*!  in

tlie  Royal  academy  at  Belfast,  and  was  brought  ii I >
in  tlu>  Roman  Catholic  faith.  Subsequently  lie
united  with  the  Unitarian  church  and  became  a
minister  of  thai  denomination,  preaching  tor  two
years  in  Qroonook,  Scotland,  and  then  for  three
years  in  Liverpool,  England.  In  1839  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  controversy  between  the  Fni-
tarians  and  Episcopalians,  and  delivered  four  of  a
course  of  thirteen  lectures  in  Liverpool  in  that
connection,  the  other  Unitarian  lecturers  being
James  Martiiiean  and  John  11.  Thom.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1840,  and  soon  established  for
himself  a  reputation  as  a  brilliant  lecturer.  He
addressed  many  literary  societies  and  library  as-
sociations, and  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  be-
fore the  Lowell  institute  on  "The  Genius  and
Writings  of  Shakcs|M-are."  Ho  preached  occasion-
ally, but  daring  the  latter  part  of  liis  life  dwelt  in
retirement  in  the  suburbs  of  Boston.  Mr.  (iiles
wrote  much  for  periodicals,  and  was  the  author  of
essays  that  were  marked  by  ingenuity  of  thought,
fulness  of  diction,  and  fervor  of  style.  These  in-
clude "  Lectures  and  Essavs"  (2  vols.,  Boston.  1845);
"Christian  Thought  on  'Life"  (1*50);  "illustra-
tions of  Genius  in  some  of  its  Applications  to  So-
ciety and  Culture  "(1854);  "Human  Life  in  Shake-
speare "(1868);  and"  I.«ectures  and  Essays  on  Irish
and  other  Subjects"  (New  York,  1860).

GILES,  William  Branch,  statesman,  b.  in
Amelia  county,  Va.,  12  Aug.,  1762;  d.  in  Albe-
marle county,  Va.,  4  Dec.,  1830.  He  was  educated
at  Hampden  Sidney  college,  and  at  Princeton,  and
then  studied  law  with  Chancellor  George  Wythe.
After  his admission  to  the  bar  he  practised  for

ml years  in Petersburg. Va., when he was

ted  to  congress,  and  served  continuously  from
6  De...  1791,  till  :i  March.  1808,  except  during
the  0th  congress  (1700-1N01).  His  opposition  to
the  hill  creating  a  bank  of  the  United  States  led
to  bu  estrangement  from  tbe  Federal  party  and  to
his  affiliation  with the  Democrats. <>n  'J.'l  Jan.,

I,  he  made  an  attack  <>n  Alexander  Hamilton,
then  secretary  of  the  treasury,  charging  him  with
corruption  and  peculation.  Hamilton  vindicated
himself  in  a  report,  and  (iiles  replied  by  proposing

Utiona  censuring  the  secretary  for  undue  as-
sumption of  power,  and  for  want  of  respect  to  the
bouse.  In  1796  Giles  strongly  opposed  the  ratifica-
tion of  John  Jay's  treaty  with  (ireat  Britain,  and
in  1796  the  proposed  war  with  France,  for  her  out-

-  on  American  commerce.  In  the  latter  \ . ; i r
he  became  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legislature.


and  co-operated  with  James  Madison  in  procuring
tin-  passage  of  the  celebrated  resolutions  of :
-  r\  ing  also  as  a  presidential  elector  in 180L In
l he was  ai>|>ointcd I  ttor,  to  succeed

Nicholas,  and  with  subsequent
timis  served  until  •'!  March.  I M 1 .1.  when  he  resigned.

Bo  at  oom  took  the  position  ol  itin  loader

in  Mm  senate,  am!  held  it  until  lull,  when  he
ojMiily  manifested  his  opposition  to  the  adminis-
tration of  President  Madison.  Mr.  tides  then  re-
tired from  public  life,  and  continued  so  until  !
when  he  was  again  a  candidate  for  the  V.  S.  sen-
ate, but  was  defeated  by  John  Randolph.  In  18M
he  was  induced  to  btOOMJ  I  Mtthsf  a]  the  legisla-
ture of  Virginia,  prinoipsilj  from  his  strong  op-
position to  the  project  of  calling  a  convent  inn  to
revise  the  constitution  of  the  state.  In  the  MM
year  he  was  elected  governor  of  Virginia,  and  held
that  office  until  18M.  The  bill  for  calling  a  con-
vention was  revived,  and  passed  at  the  session  of
|sj;-'H,  and  Mr.  (riles  while  governor  was  chosen
a  memlicr.  The  convention  sat  in  lH20-':i().  and  he
took  a  distinguished  part  in  its  deliltcrations.  As
a  parliamentary  tactician  he  was  unrivalled.  "  Mr.
(iiles  was  considered  by  John  Randolph  to  bt  in
the  house  of  representatives  what  Charles  Fox  was
admitted  to  l>e  in  the  British  house  of  commons
— the  most  accomplished  debater  that  hisiottntry
had  ever  seen.  But  their  acquired  advantages  were
very  different.  Fox  was  a  ripe  scholar:  Giles
neither  read  or  studied.  Fox  perfected  himself  in
the  house,  speaking  on  every  subject ;  Giles  out  of
the  house,  talking  to  everybody."  He  published  a
speech  on  the  embargo  laws  (1808);  political  let-
ters to  the  people  of  Virginia  (1813);  a  series  of
Utters,  signed  "  A  Constituent."  in  the  Richmond
"  Enquirer,"  against  a  plan  for  general  education
(1818);  a  singular  letter  of  invective  against  Presi-
dent Monroe  and  Henry  Clay  for  their  "  hobfai
the  South  American  cause,  the  Greek  cause,  in-
ternal improvements,  and  the  tariff  (1824);  and  a
letter  to  Judge  John  Marshall  disclaiming  the  ex-
pressions, not  the  general  sentiments,  in  regard  to
Washington  ascribed  to  him  in  the  debate  of  1706
in  Marshall's  "  Life  of  Washington  "  (1825).

GILFEKT,  Charles,  theatrical  manager,  b.  in
Germany  in  1787;  d.  in  New  York  city.  W  July,
1829.  He  began  his  career  in  the  I'nited  States  as
a  composer  and  teacher  of  music,  and  became  a
manager  of  concerts  and  oratorios.  'Eventuallv  he
led  the  orchestra  of  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York
city,  and  was  the  conductor  of  the  Musical-fund
society.  In  1815  he  relinquished  his  musical  career,
and  became  lessee  of  the  theatre  in  Charleston.
S.  C.  At  the  close  of  an  unsuccessful  season,  he
went  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  with  his  wife,  and  for  sev-
eral years  managed  the  theatre  in  that  citv.  In
1826.  when  the  noted  New  York  or  Bowery  theatre
was  built,  he  was  offered  the  management,  and  be-
came its  lessee.  Here  he  produced  in  rapid  succes-
sion spectacular  novelties,  ballets,  and  operatic  en-
sembles ■Uperiot  to  any  that  had  Ih-cu  MB  in  this
country.  But  he  was  of  an  over-sanguine  tem-
perament, regardless  of  obligation,  and  reckless  in
money  matters.  As  a  consequence,  his  affairs  be-
came disordered,  he  was  continually  harassed,  and
not  seldom  imprisoned  for  debt  within  the  "jail
liU'ities"  of  his  theatre.—  His  wife.  Agnes,  actress,
b.  in  England  in  1  ?!»:{.  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa..  18
April.  1KVJ,  fir.st  played  at  the  Haymarkct  theatre
in  London,  in  1811,  in  the  character  of  Belvidera,
in  "  Venice  Preserved."  In  1M2  she  came  to  this
city  with  her  father.  Joseph  (ieorge  llolmaii.  ap-
peared at  the  New  York  Park  theatre  in  the
••  Provoked  Husband."  made  the  tour  of  the  large


<•>;■<>


GILF1LLAN


GILLESPIE


cities,  imrl  lnvame  so  great  a  BftVoritS  a*  to  com-
mand ♦-<><>  [mt  night  for  her  UMfutllWMML In

[818  she  WM  niarrit-,1  to  Mr.  (Jilfert.  Thereafter
her  public  eareer  was  merged  in  that  of  her  hus-
band. Sharing  his  many  vicissitudes,  at  (lie  time
of  his  death  she  retired  from  the  theatre.  Her
friend-  then  psrauaded  her  to  open  a  young  ladies'
seminary  in  New  York  city.  Mrs.  Gilfert  con-
tinued teaching  for  about  seven  years,  with  in-
ditlereiit  lUOCeSS.  and  reluctantly  returned  to  the
stage,  with  the  hope  of  recovering  some  of  her
former  popularity.  Her  new  opening  was  at  the
Chatham  theatre.  Hut  time  had  wrought  its
changes  with  her  personal  appearance;  she  had
lost  her  spirits  and  gayety.  and  fresher  attrac-
tions had  captivated  the  public.  After  a  contin-
ued struggle  with  disappointment  and  poverty,
she  was  last  seen  on  the  stage  of  the  Park  theatre
in  New  York  city,  on  20  Julv,  1831,  in  Shakespeare's
"King  John."  "Broken  in  health  and  professional
reputation,  she  retired  to  Philadelphia,  where  she
soon  died  in  obscurity  and  neglect.  As  Miss  IIol-
man.  in  the  flush  of  youth,  beauty,  and  success,
she  had  l»een  a  welcome  guest  in  the  best  society.
In  high  comedy  parts,  in  her  early  days,  she  was
rarely  equalled,  and  probably  never  excelled.

GILFILLAN,  James,  jurist,  b.  at  Bannock-
burn,  Scotland,  9  March,  1829.  He  was  brought
to  the  United  States  in  infancy,  and  spent  his
youth  at  New  Hartford  and  Utica,  Oneida  co.,
N.  Y.  He  attended  only  the  country  district
schools,  but  studied  the  classics  and  higher  mathe-
matics privately.  After  a  law  course  at  the  state
and  national  law-school  at  Balston  Spa,  N.  Y.,  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Albany  in  December,
1850,  and  went  immediately  to  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and
practised  till  the  spring  of  1857.  He  then  went
to  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He
entered  the  military  service  in  August,  1802,  as
2d  lieutenant  of  the  7th  Minnesota  regiment,  was
commissioned  captain  in  September,  and  served  in
1802-'3  against  the  Sioux  Indians.  He  then  served
in  the  south  till  the  end  of  the  civil  war,  and  in
October,  1804,  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the
11th  Minnesota.  After  the  war  he  continued  in  the
practice  of  law  at  St.  Paul  till  July,  1809,  when  he
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme
court,  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  till  January,
1870.  He  waa  again  appointed  to  fill  a  vacancy  in
the  same  oflice  in  1875,  elected  in  the  autumn  of
that  year,  and  re-elected  in  1882.

GILL,  Theodore  Nicholas,  naturalist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  21  March,  1837.  He  was  educated
in  his  native  city  in  private  schools,  and  under
special  tutors.  His  attention  was  early  turned  to
natural  history,  and  for  some  time  he  was  asso-
ciated with  J.  Carson  Brevoort  in  the  arrangement
of  the  latter's  entomological  and  ichthyological  col-
lections. In  1803  he  went  to  Washington  and  be-
came an  assistant  in  the  Smithsonian  institution.
His  work  there  consisted  in  the  study  and  classi-
fication of  the  material  that  had  been  collected  un-
der the  auspices  of  the  institution,  and  his  atten-
tion wits  first  given  to  mammals,  and  later  to  fishes,
in  which  departments  he  is  recognized  as  one  of
the  foremost  authorities.  More  recently  he  has
devoted  considerable  thought  to  mollusks.  He
also  held  the  office  of  librarian  in  the  Smith-
sonian, and  for  some  vears  was  senior  ■lint mil
librarian  of  congress,  From  1884  till  1887  he  was
professor  of  zoology  in  the  Columbian  university.
Washington,  I).  C,  from  which  institution  he  has
received  the  honorary  degrees  of  A.  M.,  M.  D.,  and
Ph.  1).  Dr.  Gill  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,
and  in  1873  was  elected  to  the  National  academy


of  sciences.  His  publications  include,  btsJdSi  SOBBf
400  separate  papers  on  scientific  subjects  contrib-
uted to  the  publications  of  various  (earned  socie-
ties of  which  he  is  a  member,  "Arrangements  of
the  Families  of  Mollusks"  (Washington,  1871):
"Arrangement  of  the  Families  of  Mammals"
(1872);  "Arrangement  of  the  Families  of  Fishes/1
(1872);  "Catalogue  of  the  Pishes  of  the  Bast  Coast
of  North  America"  (1H75):  •*  Bibliography  of  the
Pishes  <>f  the  Pacific  of  the  United  Slates  to  the
End  of  1879"  (1W2):  and  since  1879  has  prepared
the  "  Reports  on  Zoology  '*  for  the  annual  volumes
of  the  Smithsonian  institution.

GILLEM,  Alvan  Cnllem,  soldier,  b.  in  Jack-
son county,  Tenn.,  29  July,  1830;  d.  near  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  2  Dec,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1851,"  and  served
against  the  Seminoles  in  lH51-'2.  He  Ijecame  a
captain  on  14  May,  1801,  served  as  brigade  quarter-
master, was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  at  Mill
Springs,  and  was  in  command  of  the  siege  artillery,
and  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio
in  the  Tennessee  campaign,  being  engaged  at  Shi-
loh  and  in  the  siege  of  Corinth.  On  13  May,
1802,  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  10th  Tennes-
see volunteers,  was  provost-marshal  of  Nashville,
commanded  a  brigade  in  the  Tennessee  operations
during  the  first  half  of  18013.  and  afterward  served
as  adjutant-general  of  Tennessee  till  the  end  of  the
war,  being  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers on  17  Aug.,  1803.  He  commanded  the  troops
guarding  the  Nashville  and  Northwestern  railroad
from  June,  1803,  till  August.  1804,  and  then  took
command  of  the  expedition  to  eastern  Tennessee,
being  engaged  in  many  combats,  and  gaining  the
brevet  of  colonel,  U.S.  army,  for  bravery  at  Marion,
Va.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  convention  of  9
Jan.,  1805,  to  revise  the  constitution  and  reorganize
the  state  government  of  Tennessee,  was  a  member
of  the  first  legislature  that  was  elected,  and  after-
ward commanded  the  cavalry  in  east  Tennessee,
and  participated  in  the  expedition  to  North  Caro-
lina and  the  capture  of  Salisbury,  for  which  he  was
brevetted  major-general  in  the  regular  army,  hav-
ing already  received  two  brevets  for  services  during
the  war.  He  was  promoted  colonel  in  the  U.  S.
army  on  28  July,  1800,  commanded  the  district  of
Mississippi  in  1807-8,  served  on  the  Texas  frontier
and  in  California,  and  led  the  troops  in  the  Modoc
campaign,  being  engaged  in  the  attack  at  the  Lava
Beds  on  15  April,  1873.

GILLESPIE,  Eliza  Maria,  mother  superior
(in  religion,  Mother  Mary  of  St.  Angela),  b.  near
West  Brownsville,  Washington  co.,  Pa.,  21  Feb.,
1824;  d.  in  St.  Mary's  convent,  Notre  Dame,  Ind.,
4  March,  1887.  When  she  was  quite  young  her
family  removed  to  Lancaster,  Ohio.  She  was  soon
afterward  placed  at  school  with  the  Dominican
sisters,  Somerset,  Pern'  co.,  and  was  next  sent  to
the  convent  of  the  Visitation,  Georgetown,  D.  C,
where  she  finished  her  studies.  At  the  time  of  her
graduation,  Thomas  Ewing,  her  godfather,  was  sec-
retary of  the  treasury  under  President  Harrison,
and  Miss  Gillespie's  beauty  and  accomplishments
at  once  made  her  a  leader  of  society  in  Washing-
ton. During  the  Irish  famine,  by  the  aid  of  tapes!  ry
work  and  of  a  magazine  story,  written  in  conjunc-
tion with  her  cousin,  afterward  the  wife  of  (ien,
William  T.  Sherman,  she  collected  a  large  sum  of
money  to  send  to  the  sufferers.  Afterward,  during
the  epidemic  of  1849,  she  nursed  the  sick  and  dying
who  had  been  deserted  from  fear  of  the  diseasi
In  1853  she  entered  the  congregation  of  the  Holy
Cross,  under  the  name  of  Mother  Mary  of  St.  An-
gela. After  taking  the  habit,  she  sailed'for  Europe,


(ill. 1. 1


UILLKTT


en


Ii.t  noritiate  in  France,  and  at  the  and  bI
tli.'  roar  t<»ok  t h»*  rows  of  religious  profession  at
the  hand*  of  *  1  >•  -  tannin  of  the  order,  Patbei

In  January,  1855,  she  returned  to  the  United
>•*,  and  wn-t  amafetwariof  of  tin-  Academy  <>f
.  Bertrand,  Mich. In  the  following  mn>
BeraVetiaaafarnd  the  academy  to  the  praetol

«>f  St Man'-,  liiil.,  ami  lf%tffilrH a  charter fur  it

from  the  legislature. Bhe  laid  the  foundation  <>f

the  present  conservatory  <»f  music,  and  SJtahHaheil
tin-  future  of  the  Institution  on  a  firm  fbttndatioh,
hen  founded  other  academies  in  different  parts
of  the  United  States,  until  nt  her  dentil  she  had  es-
tablished nearly  thirty,  including  thOM  of  Salt  I<ake
city.  Utah,  and  Austin.  Texas,  When  the  civil
war  began, she  left  St.  Mary's  in  charge  of  eoa>

patent  aide,  organiaed  a  corps  of  sisters,  ami  hur-
ried to  the  front  to  Care  for  the  sick  and  wounded
soldiers. She  established  bospitals,  both  temporary

and  permanent,  and.  when  generals  failed  loaaawt

needed  aid  for  the  sick  ana  sronnded  soldiers,  she
made  flying  trips  to  Washington  in  their  behalf.
Her  headquarters  were  at  Cairo,  and,  in  ill-provided
buildings  used  for  hospitals,  she  and  her  sister-.
were  obliged  to  rise  early  and  cook  gruel  often  for
fourteen  hundred  men  before  the  roll-call  sum-
moned the  con  va  I  events  to  battle.  The  close  of
the  war  left  her  enfeebled,  and  she  never  afterward
fully  reooTcred  her  strength.  After  the  war  the
order  of  the  IIolv  Cross  in  the  United  States  was
separated  from  the  order  in  Europe,  and  she  was
made  mother  superior.  She  filled  this  office  for
two  terms,  when  failing  health  compiled  her  to
laekra.  she  then  became  adftreai  of  novices  at
St.  Mary's,  ami  prepared  to  pass  the  remainder  of
her  days  in  the  society  of  her  mother  and  many
warm  friends  who  lived  near.  Mother  Angela
wrote  sketches  for  Soman  Catholic  periodicals,  in-
cluding some  interesting  reminiscences  of  her  ex-
periences during  the  war,  for  the  "Ave  Maria,"
Kublished  in  Notre  I>ame,  Ind. —  Her  brother,  N<  ;il
lenrv,  clcrgvman,  b.  in  Brownsville,  Pa.,  in  1888;
d.  in  St.  Mary's.  Jay  co.,  Ind..  12  Nov.,  1874  lb-
was  among  the  first  students  who  entered  the  Uni-
versity of  Notre  Dame,  and  the  first  to  receive  there
his  degree.  In  1851  he  entered  the  novitiate  of  the
congregation  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and  began  las
theological  studies.  After  finishing  his  novitiate,
he  taught  mathematics  in  the  university,  and  in
1854  went  to  Koine  to  complete  his  thvological
course.  He  was  ordained  pnest  on  24  June,  1856,
and  on  his  return  to  Notre  Dame  was  appointed
rice-president  and  director  of  studies.  In  1H59  he
was  made  president  of  the  College  of  St.  Mary  of
the  hake.  Chicago.  He  was  called  to  Paris  in  1863
on  business  connected  with  his  order,  but  returned
to  the  United  States  in  1866.  He  was  for  several
years  editor  of  the  "Ave  Maria,"  and  was  also  spir-
itual director  of  several  religious  and  literary  soci*
connected  with  the  University  of  Notre  Dame.
(ilLLKSPIK,  <■  curve,  clergyman,  b.  in  Glas-
gow. Scotland,  in  1683;  d.  2  Jan..  1760.  He  was
educated  at  the  university  in  his  native  city,
licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Glasgow
early  in  1712,  and  came  to  New  England  that
.  bringing  a  letter  of  recommendation  from
Principal  Sterling  to  Cotton  Mather.  Shortly
afterward  he  preached  for  the  church  at  Wood-
bridge,  N.  J.,  and  in  1713  was  ordained  minister
of  the  church  at  White  Clay  Creek.  Del.  His
charges  f,.r  several  rears,  liesides  White  Clay,  am*
1  Red  Clay,  Lower  Brandy  wine,  and  Klk
Kiver.  He  took  part  in  the  controversy  that  was
for  vears  wage*  1  in  the  synod,  and  resulted, in  1741.
in  th  division  of  that  bod  v. He  withdrew


. .HIMI ' ™ H l IIUIV II, .11111 .  » 1 I  "  .| t ,,ni n.

wl  bishop  of  western  Michigan  in  1874,

aerated  In  Grand  Rapids.  24  Feb..  1875.


with  the  excluded mtimbarl  but  remained  neutral

until  1744.  when  he  returned  to  the  old  BtTSOd. He

published  "Treatise  against  Deistaand  Free  Think-

"hiladelphis  l/ctters  t..  the  I'

I'M;  u Sermon  against  Divis-
ions in  < Ihrlst's  <  hutches  "  ( 174") :  and  "  Remarks
upon  Mr.  George  Whitfield  "  .  1 7 1 1

01LLE8PIE,  Gael  nuamllc.  P.  K.

bishop.  I.,  in  Qoehen,  N.  V.,  14  June,  1819,
tered  the  general  theological  seminary  of  the  Prot-
estant Kpisco|>al  church  in 1837.  and  was  gradu-
atad  in  IMOl Ha  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  I
church.  New  Vi>rk.  by  Biahop  B.  T.  Omlerdonk.  28
June.  1840.  and  priest  in  St.  Mark's  church.
N.  V.. by  Bishop  Be  Lancey,  80  Jane,  1*4:1. His  first
pariah  was  st.  Mark's.  Laroy,  esheuee  ha  removed

to  Ohio,  and  became  motor  of  St.  Paul's  church.
Cincinnati.  He  held  this  office  for  six  years,  when
he  accepted  a  call  to  Zion  church.  Palmyra.  N.  V..

and  remained  there  for  ten  yearn. He  next  became

rector  of  St.  Andrew's  church,  Ann  Arbor.  Mich.
He  was  elected

and  was  ooaaat

He  received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Holrnrt  college
in  1878.  Biahop  SUleepie  has  published,  btaidea
sermons  and  tracts.  "Manual  and  Annals  of  the
Diocese  of  Michigan*1  (1881

GILLESPIE,  William  Mitchell,  author,  b.
in  New  York  in  1816;  d.  there.  1  Jan..  1868.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1834,  and  afterward
s|Miit  marly  ten  years  in  Europe  in  study  and
travel.  On  his  return  to  New  York  in  1845  he  was
appointed  professor  of  civil  engineering  in  Union
college,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.  He  was
popular  as  a  professor,  a  brilliant  and  original
thinker,  and  had  few  equals  in  his  department
of  science.  His  published  works  are  "Rome,  as
s..ii  by  a  New  Yorker,  1843-'4 "  (New  York,
1845);  "  Roads  and  Railroads:  A  Manual  for
Road-making"  (1845;  7th  ed.,  1854);  "Philoso-
phy of  Mathematics."  from  the  French  of  Comte
(18ol);  "The  Principles  and  Practice  of  Land-Sur-
veying" (1855;  6th  ed..  1858);  and  a  "Treatise  on
Levelling,  Topography,  and  Higher  Surveying,"
edited  by  Cady  Stales  "<  1M71).

UILLET,  Ransom  H..  lawyer,  b.  in  New  I,eha-
non,  N.  Y..  27  Jan.,  1800.  lie  studied  law  with
Silas  Wright  at  Canton,  and  became  a  lawyer  in
Ogdensburg,  where  he  was  postmaster  in  1830-'3.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Baltimore  convention  that
re-nominated  Gen.  Jackson  for  president  in  18:12.
He  was  elected  to  the  National  house  of  representa-
tives as  a  Democrat,  and  served  in  1833-\,  was  an
Indian  commissioner  in  1837-'9,  register  of  the  U.S.
treasury  in  1845-'7.  solicitor  of  the  treasury  in
1847-'1>.  assistant  U.  S.  attorney-general  in  1855-'8,
and  solicitor  of  the  court  of  claims  from  1858  till
1861.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  llistorv  of  the  Demo-
emtio  Party"  (New  York.  1868);  "The  Federal
Government  "(1871):  and  a  "Life  of  Silas  Wright."

6ILLETT,  Ezra  Hall,  author,!),  in  Onlrhsof ,
Conn..  18  July,  1881;  d.  in  Harlem.  N.  Y..  2  Beat,
1875,  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1841.  and  at
Union  theological  seminary  in  1844.  and  in  the
latter  year  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Harlem.  N.  Y.  In  1868  he  was  apjoint-
ed  professor  of  potitioa]  economy,  ethics,  and  his-
tory in  the  University  of  New  York.  He  wrote
much  for  the  "American  Theological  Review,"
the  "Presbyterian  Quarterly."  the  "Historical
Magazine."  and  other  itcriodicals,  and  published
••  Life  and  Times  ,,f  John  IIuss"  (|  vols..  Boston,
18S8-'4);  "  llistorv  of  the  Presbvterian  Chun-h  in
the  United  States"  (2  vols..  Philadelphia.  U
•  del.. 1838  :  "(iod  in Human  Thought  "  (2


608


GILLETTE


OILLIS


v.,K.  New  York,  1874)1  and  "The  Moral  System"
besides  minor  works,  including  "  Ufa  Let-
•■  .V n<  i. •  1 1 1 Citii-s  and Empires,"  and  "  Eng-
land Two  Handled  Years  Ago."
GILLETTE.  Francis,  senator,  b.  in  Windsor,

iii,w Bl< tfield,  Hartford  oom  Conn.,  14 Dec.,

1807;  d.  in  Hartford,  Ooml,  BO  Bept,  1879.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1829  with  the  fsledio-
torv,  and  then  studied  law  with  Gov.  William  W.
Ellsworth.  Failing  health  compelled  him  to  re-
lin«|iiish  this  pursuit,  and  he  settled  in  Hloomfield
as  a  fanner.  In  1832  and  again  in  183<i  he  was
sent  to  the  legislature,  where  lie  gained  notice  in
lstfs  by  his  anti-slaverv  speech  advocating  the
striking  out  of  the  word  "  white  "  from  the  state
constitution.  In  1841  he  was  nominated  against
his  own  will  for  the  office  of  governor  by  the  Lib-
erty party,  and  during  the  twelve  following  years
frequently  received  a  similar  nomination  from  the
Liberty  and  Free-soil  parties.  He  was  elected  by
a  coalition  between  the  Whigs,  temperance  men,
and  Free-soilers,  in  1854,  to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the
U.  S.  senate  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Truman
Smith,  and  served  from  •,).">  May,  1854,  till  3  March,
1855.  Mr.  Gillette  was  active  in  the  formation  of
the  Republican  party,  and  was  for  several  years  a
silent  partner  in  the  "  Evening  Press,"  the  first
distinctive  organ  of  that  party.  He  was  active  in
the  cause  of  education  throughout  his  life,  was  a
coadjutor  of  Dr.  Henry  Barnard  from  1838  till
1842,  one  of  the  first  trustees  of  the  State  normal
school,  and  for  many  years  its  president.  Mr.  Gil-
lette took  interest  in  agricultural  matters,  was  an
advocate  of  total  abstinence,  and  delivered  lectures
and  addresses  on  both  subjects.  He  moved  to
Hart  ford  in  1852,  and  passed  the  latter  part  of  his
life  in  that  city.— His  son,  Edward  Hooker,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Bloomfield.  Conn.,  1  Oct.,  1840.  was
educated  at  the  Hartford  high-school,  and  the  New
York  state  agricultural  college  at  Ovid.  In  1863  he
removed  to  Iowa  and  settled  in  Dos  Moines,  where
he  has  since  been  occupied  in  farming,  in  manu-
facturing, and  in  editing  the  "  Iowa  Tribune."  He
has  held  the  office  of  chairman  of  the  National
committee  of  the  National  greenback  party  for
several  years,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  conventions
that  nominated  Peter  Cooper,  James  B.  Weaver,
and  Benjamin  F.  Butler  for  the  presidency.  In
1879  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  National
greenbacker  from  Iowa,  and  served  from  4  March,
1879,  till  3  March,  1881.— Another  son,  William
Hooker,  actor,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  24  July,
1853.  was  graduated  at  the  Hartford  high-school
in  1873,  and  studied  at  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York  during  1875-'6.  He  obtained  an  ap-
pointment in  one  of  the  New  York  theatres,  and
his  evenings  were  spent  on  the  stage.  .During
1876-'7  he  studied  at  the  Boston  university,  and
also  attended  the  lectures  of  Prof.  Lewis  B.  Mon-
roe, still  acting  during  the  evenings.  Subsequent-
ly he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  stage,  and
played  in  various  roles  in  the  principal  cities  of  the
United  States.  His  greatest  success  was  in  the
character  of  the  Private  Secretary,  in  the  play  of
that  name. He  has  also  acted  leading  parts  in

filays  written  by  him.  These  include  "  The  Pro-
essor,"  first  produced  at  the  Madison  square  the-
atrc.  New  York,  in  June,  1881 ;  with  Mrs.  Frances
II.  Burnett,  "Esmeralda,"  introduced  at  the  same
theatre  in  October,  1881,  and  "Held  by  the  Ene-
my," originally  played  at  the  Madison  square  in
February.  1886,  and  in  London  in  April,  1887.

GILLETTE.  Abram  Dunn,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1807;
d.  in  Lake  George,  N.  Y.,  24  Aug.,  1882. Ho  was


chiefly  self-educated,  but  was  for  a  time  a  student
in  (iranville  academy,  and  attended  occasional  lec-
tures in  Union  college.  After  teaching  for  a  time,
he  entered  the Baptist  ministry  in  ls:!-,>.  and  held

pastorate!  in  Beheneotady,  Philadelphia,  New  York,
and  Washington,  D.  0,  lie  was  a  manager  of  the
American  Baptist  publication  society  in  1886-'48j
In  18(59  illness  compelled  him  to  retire  from  the
ministry.  In  1887  a  memorial  window  was  placed
in  Calvary  Baptist  church,  New  York,  in  his  mem-
ory. He  published  a  "  History  of  the  Eleventh
Baptist  Church,  Philadelphia,''  "Memoir  of  the
Rev.  Daniel  II.  Gillette," and  "Pastor's  Last  (iift."
and  edited  "  Social  Hymns "  and  the  minutes  of
the  Philadelphia  Baptist  association  from  1707  till
1807.  Ho  also  contributed  largely  to  journals.
"  Reminiscences  of  the  Life  and  Labor  of  A.  D.
Gillette,  D.  D.,"  by  four  of  his  friends  and  associ-
ates, was  published  in  New  York,  18813.

1. 1  l.l.l.  Filippo  Sal  vat  ore,  clergyman,  b.  in
the  Papal  States;  d.  there  after  1764.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Jesuit  order,  and  went  as  mission-
ary to  South  America  about  1740.  He  travelled
seventeen  years  through  the  country  watered  by
the  Orinoco  and  lived  for  seven  vears  in  Santa  Fe
de  Bogota.  He  returned  to  Europe  when  his
order  was  suppressed.  He  wrote  in  Italian  "  Essay
on  the  History  of  America,  or  Natural,  Civil,  and
Sacred  History  of  the  Spanish  Kingdoms  and
Provincesof  Terra  Firma  in  South  America  "  (Rome,
4  vols.,  1780-'4).  The  work  of  Gilli  is  still  con-
sidered valuable  for  the  information  it  gives  on
the  vast  regions  watered  by  the  Orinoco.  It  was
for  a  long  time  the  only  one  to  be  consulted  on
the  subject,  and  many  writers  have  drawn  from  it
without  acknowledgment.  Gilli  refutes  the  inac-
curate views  that  then  prevailed  regarding  the
source  of  the  river,  and  tries  to  demonstrate  its
communication  with  the  Amazon.  Unfortunately,
his  ignorance  of  natural  history  and  his  credulity

Srevented  him  from  reaping  all  the  advantages
ue  to  his  zeal.  He  gives  vocabularies  of  most  of
the  languages  spoken  by  the  natives,  and  attempts
to  compare  them,  but  the  value  of  his  comparison
is  lessened  by  his  lack  of  the  critical  faculty.  A
part  of  Gilli's  work  was  translated  into  German  by
Sprengel  (Hamburg,  1785).  The  whole  of  the  3d
book  of  vol.  iii.,  which  comprises  his  observations
on  the  languages  of  the  tribes  of  the  Orinoco,  was
translated  into  German  with  notes  by  Father  Xa-
vier  Veigl,  an  ex-Jesuit,  who  had  travelled  in  the
same  regions.  This  part  of  the  work  is  contained
in  the  collection  of  the  travels  of  missionaries  of
the  Society  of  Jesus  in  America,  published  by  Von
Murr  (Nuremberg,  1785).

GILLIAMS,  Jacob,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1784;  d.  there,  4  Feb.,  1868.  After
his  graduation  in  medicine  he  entered  on  a  long
and  successful  practice  in  Philadelphia,  which  he
did  not  relinquish  until  within  a  few  years  of  his
death.  He  was  proficient  in  the  natural  sciences,
especially  in  ornithology,  and  was  brought  into
contact  with  Audubon,  Wilson,  and  Rushenberger.
In  connection  with  Charles  Lucien  Bonaparte  and
others  he  established  in  Philadelphia  in  1816  the
short-lived  Maclurian  lyceum,  and  afterward  as-
sisted in  founding  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences.
The  hall  that  it  occupied  was  built  at  his  expense.
til  l.l.l S,  John  Pritchet,  naval  officer,  b,  in
Wilmington.  Del.,  6  Sept.,  1803;  d.  there  25  Feb.,
is?:{.  lie  was  appointed  a  midshipman  from  Illi-
nois on  12  Dec.  1825,  his  mother  having  removed
to  that  state  after  the  death  of  his  father.  He  was
commissioned  M  lieutenant  on  9  Feb..  1887.  Dur-
ing  the  Mexican  war  he  had  charge  of  the  boats  of


(ill. I


GILLMOKE


808


the"  Decatur,"  in  Iht  PaptBTI  of  the  fort

•-f  I'li-paii,  uii.l  afterward  commanded  th.-  (lot illn
<m  tin-  Alvarado  river,  and  artel  as  fOVOfBOfaad
collector  of  Alvarado  ami  Tla<  otal|>ain  until  pfOO>
t rated  by  yellow fever, li.-  m let lieutenant  of

Ike  ••  i'i\ mouth  "  in  China  in  1861,  aiai  aeeended

the Mni river  to  confer  with  the  v roj  ->f  the

province  on  behalf  of  the  missionaries. In  Is

M participate.) in tin- Japan eXpeditloU under

Oom.  Party. He  was  laanuiilaaaVaiiaal  commander

on  11  S-pt..  1H.V),  ami  assigned tO  the  -leain  s|(M,p

oabontaa"  at  the  beginning  of  hostilities  in
.  ami.  arriving  at  Fort  Sumter  an  hour  before
the  Mirremler.  brought  away  the  garrison,  lie
afterward  commanded  the  steamer  "  Monticello,"
and  took  part  in  the  fight  at  Hat  (eras  Inlet,  cross-
ing the  har,  after  landing  triM>ps,  ami  engaging
•r\>  at  short  range,  lie  next  commanded  the
"Seminole,"  and  unstained  a  -even-  fire  from  tin-
forts  at  Shipping  Point  on  the  Potomae  river.  At
the  battle  of  Port  Royal  the  "  Seminole "  ran  in,
■ear  the  close  of  the  action,  In-t ween  Hilton  Head
and  Hay  Point,  and,  with  the  snppoH  of  two  gun-
boats, raked  Fort  Walker  and  drove  out  the  ene-
my. His vessel was subsequent lv employed in

blockading  service,  then  returned  to  Eampton

Roads,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  attack  on
Swell's  Point  in  May.  isii2.  He  was  commis-
sioned captain  on  111  July,  1K(!2,  was  assigned  to
the  -  <  >>Mpee,"  and  commanded  the  division  of  the
western  Gulf  blockading  squadron  off  Mobile,  and
then  the  division  off  the  coast  of  Texas,  making
many  captures,  until  he  returned  to  the  north  in
1864  on  account  of  illness.  He  was  made  a  com-
modore on  the  retired  list  on  28  Sept.,  I860.

GILLISS,  James  Melville,  astronomer, b.  fa
Georgetown,  l>.  <'..»>  Sept,  1811;  d.  in  Washing-
ton. D.  ('.,  !>  F.b.,  lH<).->.  He  entered  the  l\  S.
navv  as  a  midshipman  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and
made  his  first  cruise  on  the  "  Delaware."  Subse-
quently he  served  on  the  "Concord  "  and  on  the
"Java."  and  in  18211,  after  an  examination,  was
advanced  to  passed  midshipman.  To  obtain  a
scientific  education  he  spent  a  year  in  the  Fni-
versity of Virginia, and later pursued higher

studies  in  Paris. In
1830  he  became  as-
sistant in  the  depot
of  charts  ami  instru-
ments in Washing-
ton,  and soon aft-
erward was given
charge  of  the  small
wooden building,
which  was  then  the
only  observatory  in
Washington. Soon
after  the  sailing  of
the  U.  S.  exploring
expedition under
Capt.  Charles  Wilkes,
he  received apacaal
in»t  ructionsfrom  t  he
secretary  of  the  navy
concerning the  de-
termination of  differences  of  longitude  by  means
of  moon-culminations,  occultations,  and  eclipses,
with magnetic  and meteorological observations.
Hi- active astronomical career began with  this
work,  and  Hr. Benjamin  A.  Gould  savs  in  this
connection  :  ••  It  was  Qillisswho  first  in  all  the  land
conducted  a  working  observatory,  he  who  Aral
his  whole  time  to practical  astronomical
work,  he  who  first published  a  volume  of  oliscrva-
. first prepared a  catalogue  of stars,  and


£  .  Laa/  .  <&*JLA<j^j\


planned  and  aarrled  into  rffrtrl  the  oonatraetfen
of  a  working  observatory  as  oontrasted  with
intended  chiefly  for  purposes  of  instruction." Be

was  made  lieutenant in February,  1888,  and  until

the  return  of  the  eipetUlhw  was  active  in  making
observations  of  every  culmination  of  tin-  moon
and  every  occupation  visible  in  Washington  t I > » « t
occurred  U-tween  two  hours  lxfore  mneet  and
two  hours  after  sunrise.  His  rij^-rt  on  the  '
tronotnical Observations made  at the Naval  oh-

servatorv "  (Washington. 1848)  mm  the  first  to

be  published  in  the  Fnited  States.  In  August,
5,  a  bill  was  passed  by  congress,  authorizing
the  establishment  of  an  astronomical  obscrvat
and  the  dutv  of  preparing  the  plans  for  a  building
and  arranging  for  the  instruments  was  assigned
to  Lieut,  (iilliss.  After  consulting  American  as-
tronomers he  visited  Buropa,  where  he  studied  the
latest  forms  of  apparatus,  and  <>n  his  return  began
the  erection  of  the  building,  had  the  instruments
mounted  and  essentially  adjusted,  and  a  library
procured,  all  within  eighteen  months.  The  su|M.r.
inteiidctice  of  the  new  building  was  given  to
Lieut.  Matthew  F.  Maury,  while  Lieut,  (iilliss  was
assigned  to  duty  on  the  coast  survey  in  reducing
for  its  use  the  entire  series  of  moon-culminations
previously  observed  and  published  by  him.  Fif-
teen manuscript  folio  volumes  in  the  archives  of
the  survey  contain  this  valuable  work.  From
N'ovcuiIht,  1S4S,  till  October,  1852,  he  was  engaged
in  making  observations  for  the  determination  of
the  solar  parallax.  A  station  was  established  in
HecemlxT.  lX-1!).  on  the  hill  of  Santa  Lucia,  in  San-
tiago, Chili,  where  he  completed  a  series  of  obser-
vations of  great  value.  lie  likewise  accumulated
a  vast  amount  of  information  concerning  earth-
quakes and  other  subjects,  and  the  establishment
of  a  national  observatory  in  Chili  is  due  to  his  in-
fluence. On  his  return  he  published  "  The  U.  S.
Astronomical  Expedition  to  the  Southern  Hemi-
spheres in  1840-'52"  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1855
«  seq.).  He  visited  Peru  in  August,  1858,  for  the
purpose  of  observing  the  total  eclij>se  of  the  sun  of
that  year,  and,  notwithstanding  his  prostration
with  a  fever,  he  directed  the  mounting  of  the  in-
struments and  obtained  satisfactory  results  from
his  observations.  His  report  was  published  by
the  Smithsonian  institution  as  "An  Account  of
the  Total  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  on  September  7.  1858"
(Washington,  1859).  In  1860  he  observed  the  total
eclipse  of  the  sun  in  Washington  territory.  After
the  departure  of  Comd'r  Maury  from  Washington
in  April,  1801,  Lieut.  Gilliss  was  assigned  to  the
charge  of  the  observatory  in  Washington.  Under
him  it  became  one  of  the  few  first-class  observa-
tories in  the  world.  He  found  a  vast  amount  of
work  left  in  arrears  by  his  predecessor,  no  reduc-
tion of  the  observations  of  the  previous  six  years
having  been  made.  Lieut,  (iilliss  applied  himself
to  the  work  of  completing  them  and  of  adding  new
and  valuable  observations  with  such  assiduity  that
ho  gained  a  high  reputation  among  the  eminent
astronomers  of  the  world.  He  made  many  valu-
able improvements  in  the  instruments  used  in
astronomy,  and  was  the  author  of  various  govern-
ment reports.  Lieut.  (Jilliss  was  one  of  the  origi-
nal members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.
(.11  I  AHUM'..  Quincy  Adams,  soldier,  b  in
Black  River.  Lorain  co..  Ohio,  89  Feb..  1886;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  7  April.  1888  His  childhood  was
s]M-nt  on  his  father's  farm;  his  regular  studies  were
began  at  the  N'orwalk.  Ohio,  academy,  and  for  three
winters  preceding  his  twentieth  birthday  he  was  a
teacher  in  a  dist  riet-eohool,  and  meanwhile  attended
two  terms  at  the  high-school  at  Ely  ria.  Ohio.  A  poem


654


GILLMORE


OILMAN


<^/ft<^M^w«w_=>


that  ho  read  at  a  public  exhibition  attracted  the
attention  "f  a  member  of  oongram,  who  offend

him  the  nomination  as  a  owlet  at  the  V.  S.  mili-
tary ae  idemy.  He  was  graduated  in  1849,  at  the
head  <>f  his  class,  assigned  to  the  engineers,  and
after  Mil  llllH,  three  years  at  Hampton  Koa<ls  was
appointed  instructor  in  practical  military  engi-
neering at  West  Point,  and  subsequently  treas-
urer and  quartermaster  at  the  academy.  He  was
promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  the  engineer  corps  in
is.")(»,  and  was  on  duty  in  New  York  city  when
the  civil  war  opened. In  August,  1861,  he  was

appointed  captain
in  his  own  corps,
and  engineer  -  in-
chief  of  the  Port
Royal  expedition
under  Gen.Thomas
W.  Sherman.  The
reduction  of  Fort
Pulaski,  defend-
ing the  water  ap-
proach to  Savan-
nah, a  strong  forti-
fication, isolated  in
the  centre  of  a
marsh  island  that
was  entirely  sur-
rounded by  deep
water,  was  very  es-
sential to  the  suc-
cess of  this  expe-
dition, but  was  re-
garded by  the  ablest  engineers  of  both  armies  as
impracticable.  Capt.  Gillmore,  then  acting  briga-
dier-general, planned  the  establishment  of  eleven
batteries  of  mortars  and  rifled  guns  on  Tybee
island,  a  mile  distant,  which  occupied  two  months
of  incessant  day  and  night  labor.  The  bombard-
ment, which  opened  at  8  a.  m.,  10  April,  1802,
and  which  was  conducted  under  his  very  minute,
detailed  instructions  as  to  elevation,  charge,  direc-
tion, intervals  between  shots,  etc.,  for  each  piece,
resulted  by  2  p.  M.  of  the  following  day  in  the  surren-
der of  the  fort,  which  had  been  so  shattered  as  to
be  untenable.  This  exploit,  for  which  he  was  bre-
vetted  lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  army,  1  April,  1802,
placed  Capt.  Gillmore  in  the  front  rank  of  Ameri-
can engineers  and  artillerists.  He  was  assigned
to  important  commands  in  Kentucky  in  August,

1802,  defeated  Gen.  Peagram  at  Somerset  in  March,

1803,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  colonel,  and  in
June,  1803,  was  given  command  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  comprising  all  territory  occu-

f>ied  by  Union  troops  on  the  coasts  of  South  Caro-
ina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  In  July  he  was  placed
in  command  of  the  10th  army  corps,  and  in  the
autumn  of  the  same  year  he  won  new  laurels  by  his
operations  on  Morris  island,  for  which  he  was  bre-
vetted brigadier-general ;  the  reduction  of  Fort
Sumter,  and  the  taking  of  Fort  Wagner  and  Bat-
tery Gregg,  which  operations  were  characterized
by  great  professional  skill  and  boldness,  and  which
constituted  a  new  era  in  the  science  of  engineer-
ing and  gunnery.  For  these  services  he  was  made
major-general  of  volunteers.  In  1804  he  com-
manded the  10th  army  corps  at  James  river,  was
engaged  in  the  landing  at  Bermuda  Hundred  and
the  action  at  Swift's  creek,  commanded  the  col-
umn that  turned  and  captured  the  line  in  front  of
Dairy's  Bluff,  and  covered  Gen.  Butler's  retreat
into  intrenchments  at  Bermuda  Hundred.  In
July  of  the  same  year  he  commanded  two  divis-
ions of  the  19th  army  corps  in  the  defence  of
Washington,  and  in  1805  was  again  in  charge  of


the  Department  of  the  South.  Resigning  his  com-
mission as  major-general  of  volunteers,  in  Decem-
ber, 1805.  he  returned  to  ><rvice  in  the  engineer
bareM  at  Washington,  and  was  subsequently  ap-
pointed engineer-in-chief  of  all  the  fortiflcatioM
and  harbor  and  river  improvements  on  the  Atlan-
tic coast  south  of  New  York.  He  was  promoted
major  in  June,  1863,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1874,
and  colonel.  -'<>  l'.l...  1883.  He  was  president  of
the  Mississippi  river  commission,  which  was  cre-
ated by  congress  in  1879,  of  the  boards  of  en-
gineers for  the  improvement  of  ('ape  Fear  river,
N.  C,  and  the  Potomac  river  and  flats ;  as  well  as
of  several  boards  for  important  harbor  improve-
ments in  process  of  construction  according  to  his
Elans.  As  one  of  the  judges  at  the  Centennial  ex-
ibition  of  1870  he  made  special  and  voluminous
reports  on  "Portland,  Roman,  and  Other  <V-
ments  and  Artificial  Stones."  and  on  "  Brickmak-
ing  Machinery,  Brick-Kilns,  Perforated  ami  En-
amelled Bricks  and  Pavements."  Rutgers  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  Gen.  Gillmore's
works  upon  professional  subjects  are  esteemed
among  the  highest  authorities  in  their  class.  They
include  "Siege  and  Reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski
(New  York,  1802);  "Limes.  Hydraulic  Cements,
and  Mortars"  (1803);  "Engineering  and  Artillery
Operations  against  Charleston  in  1863 "  (1865 ;
supplement,  1868) ;  "  Beton,  Coignet,  and  Other
Artificial  Stones"  (1871);  "The  Strength  of  the
Building  Stone  of  the  United  States"  (1874);  and
"  Roads,  Streets,  and  Pavements  "  (1876).

<•  1 1. 1. ON",  Alexander,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Rot-
terdam, Holland,  in  1741 ;  d.  at  Gillon's  Retreat,
on  the  Congaree  river,  S.  C,  6  Oct.,  1794.  He  was
a  member  of  a  wealthy  commercial  family,  and  re-
sided in  London  for  some  time.  In  1700  he  came
to  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  became  a  prosperous  mer-
chant. In  May,  1777,  in  an  armed  ship,  he  cap-
tured three  British  cruisers,  boarding  them  one
after  the  other.  He  was  appointed  a  commodore
in  the  navy  of  South  Carolina  in  1778.  and  sent  to
France  to  procure  vessels.  He  finally  succeeded  in
hiring  a  frigate,  named  it  the  "South  Carolina,"
and  in  it  took  many  valuable  prizes.  With  a  large
fleet,  partly  Spanish,  he  commanded  the  expedition
which  in  May,  1782,  captured  the  Bahama  islands.
He  was  a  representative  of  congress,  1793^ '4,  was
often  in  the  state  legislature,  and  was  a  member  of
the  South  Carolina  constitutional  convention.  He
was  the  founder  and  first  president  of  the  Charles-
ton chamber  of  commerce.

(.11. .MAN.  Arthur,  architect,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass..  5  Nov.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,
11  July,  1882.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity  col-
lege, Hartford.  In  1844  he  published  a  paper  on
"  American  Architecture  "  in  the  "  North  American
Review,"  which  was  translated  into  several  foreign
languages.  He  was  then  invited  to  deliver  twelve
lectures  before  the  Lowell  institute,  Boston,  after
which  he  went  to  Europe  on  a  tour  of  professional
observat  ion.  On  his  return  to  Boston,  he  advocated
the  filling  in  and  improvement  of  the  "  Back  bay  "
district,  then  lying  waste.  He  urged  this  plan
upon  the  city  government  and  the  public  for  years,
before  the  legislature  and  elsewhere,  anil  finally  his
views  were  carried  out  by  the  state.  The  width
and  extent  of  Commonwealth  avenue,  now  one  of
the  finest  streets  in  the  world,  is  due  almost  en-
tirely to  his  persistent  efforts.  Mr.  Oilman  de-
signed and  built  the  Boston  city  hall,  which  is  re-
garded as  his  best  work.  In  1805  he  removed  to
New  York.  The  Equitable  insurance  company's
building,  in  New  York  city,  was  designed  by  him.
St.  John's  church  and  parsonage,  at  Clifton,  St  at  en


OILMAN


QILM  \N


:i.|.  and  inuth  of  Um  onpttol  at  Albany. an-  his
[man  was  u  member  of  tin-  American
Institute  of  art-hil

QILM  \N.  \rthnr.  author,  b.  in  Alton.  111..  23
.Fin  i,  Kdward  Oilman,  of  mi

•  nt Welsh family,  emigrated froin N<>rfi>lk.
and,  t"  Boston,  Mass.,  in ir^:s. Arthur  Oil-
man was  educated  in  St.  Louis  and  in  Now  York.
and  is  nn  honorary  M.  A.  <>f  Williams  college. In

;  he  began  active  business  as  a  banker  in  New

c,  but,  his  health  becoming  impaired,  he  re-
moved in  1868  t<>  tin-  neifrhbornood  <>f  Lenox,
Ma--**.,  when-  lit-  engaged  in  philanthropic  and  edu-
nnl  work.  In  in?<»  Mr.  Oilman  removed  to
Cambridge,  Mass., and  connected  himself  with  the
Riverside  pnsts.  In  1871  he  became  one  of  the
editors  of  the  American  tract  society  in  Boston,  and
in  1876,  together  with  his  wife,devieeda  plan  which
snbseqoenuy  took  form  as  "The  Society  for  the
collegiate  instruction  of  women."  familiarly  known
as  "The  Harvard  annex."  of  which  Mr.  Oilman  has

been  executive  officer  ever  since.  Mr.  Oilman's
studies  have  been  in  the  line  of  English  literature
and  of  history.  He  has  written  much  for  the  pe-
riodiral  press,  and  has  published  in  book-form
"The Oilman  Family  traced  in  the  Line  of  Hon.
John  Oilman,  of  Exeter,  N.  II."  (Albany,  N.  Y..
180U):  "Kir>t  Steps  in  English  Literature"  (Bos-
ton. 1^70);  "  Kings,  Queens,  and  liartutrians.  or
Talks  about  Seven  Historic  Ages"  (1870):  "First
Steps  in  General  History:  A  Suggestive  outline"
(1874);  " Shakespeare's  Morals,"  with  brief  collat-
eral readings  ana  Scriptural  reference!  (New  York,
1879);  "  History  of  the  American  People"  (Boston,
1888);  "Tales  of  the  Pathfinders"  (1884);  "The
Story  of  Rome"  (New  York  and  Ixmdon,  1885);
"Short  Stories  from  the  Dictionary"  (Boston,
18M<»);  sjmI  "Story  of  the  Saracens  '*  (New  York  and
London,  1886).  lie  has  also  edited  and  contributed
to  "  Boston,  Fast  and  Present. "  (Boston.  1878):
"Library  of  Religious  Poetry"  (New  York  and
Iyom Ion,  1880);  "The  Kingdom  of  Home ;  Homely
Pihiiis  for  Home  Lovers"  (Boston,  1881):  "Magna
t'harta  Stories  "  (Boston  and  London,  1883) ;  "  The
Story  of  the  Nations  Series,"  and  an  "  Index  to  the
Complete  Edition  of  the  Works  of  Samuel  Tavlor
Coleridge  "  (New  York,  1884).  He  also  edited  "The
Poetical  Works  of  Oeoffrey  Chaucer,"  to  which  are
appended  poems  attributed  to  Chaucer  (3  vols.,
Boston  and  London,  1879).  In  this  work  the  editor
printed  for  the  first  time,  for  the  general  reader,
the  famous  Elleemere  text  of  the  Canterbury  tales.
— His  wife.  Stella  Scott,  h.  in  Alabama,  is  the  au-
thor of  "Mothers  in  Council"  (New  York,  18H4).

(•I  I.MAN,  (handler  Bobbins,  physician.  I>.  in
Marietta.  Ohio.  6  Sept..  1803;  d.  in  Middle-town,
Conn..  86  Sept..  lNtio.  His  ancestors  were  among
the  earliest  sett  lersof  Ohio.  During  his  childhood
his  father  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  the  son
took  the  degree  of  M.  I),  in  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1N24,  and  soon  afterward  went  to  reside
in  New  York,  where  the  whole  of  his  active  pro-
fessional life  was  passed.  From  1S41  till  his  death
be  was  professor  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of
women  and  children  in  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  and  after  the  death  of  Dr.  Beck,  in
1851,  was  also  professor  of  medical  jurisprudence.
Early  in  life  he,  with  his  relative.  Charles  Fenno
Hodman,  had  charge  of  the  "American  Monthly."
Besides  numerous  contributions  to  medical  maga-
zines, he  published  the  following  in  book-form:
ds  of  a  I»g-Cabin  "  and  "Life  on  the
Lakes"  (1885);  a  translation,  with  Dr.  Theodore
Tellkampf.  of  Bischoffs monograph  "On the  Peri-
odical Discharge  of  the  Ovum  "  (New  York.


(Oh  Of tlM Ltfl  UK] Character  Of Dr.  .1.  ft

Beck  the  Medina!  to

the  Legal  Profesnion  "  d-  I  it  ion  of  B

lieal Jurisprudence" (Philadelphia, 18<i0);

"  Traits  i,n  Generation,11  and  ■  •■  Medico-LegaJ

animation  of  the  Case  of  Charles  I{.  Huntington."
OILMAN,  Daniel Colt,  educator,  b.  In  Nor-
wich. Conn..  <!  July.  \Kl\. He  was  graduated  at
Yale in 1858,  and  continued  his  studies in
Haven,  and  later  in Berlin,  where  he  loUoWod  the
lectures  of  Carl Bitter  and  Adolph  Trendelenburg.
He  travelled  extensively in Kurope,  and  gave  at-
tention to the social, |H)litical.  anil educational
condition  of  the  countries  that  he  visited,  and  also
to  their  physical  structure. On  his  return  in  Is.").*,
he  was  invited  to become  librarian  of  Yale,  and
subsequent  I  v  to  In-  professor  of  physical  and  politi-
cal geography  there,  and  secretary  of  the  govern-
ing l>oard  of  the  Sheffield  scientific  school. He  was
fora  short  time  sii|>erintcndent  of  the  public  schools
Of  New  Haven,  and  afterward  secretary  of  the  state
Uiard  of  education. From  his  post  in  Yale  he  was
invited,  in  1H?0,  to  become  the  first  president  of  the
University  of  California. This  invitation  was  n<>t
accepted,  but  two  years  later,  when  another call
was  given,  he  went  to  California,  and  remained  at
the  bend  of  the  state  university  till  1875. At  that
time  he  was  elect-
ed first president
of  the  Johns  Hop-
kins university  in
Baltimore,  and  to
the organization
and administra-
tion of  that  foun-
dation he has
since been de-
voted. He  was
one  of  the  origi-
nal trustees  of  the
John F. Slater
fund  for  the  edu-
cation of freed-
mcii,  and  the  sec-
ret a  rv of the
boara. He has
printed a large
number of ad-
dresses, reports  and  contributions  to  reviews,  among
which  may  be  mentioned  his  inaugural  discourses
in  California  and  in  Maryland ;  an  address  as  presi-
dent of  the  American  social  science  association;  a
discourse  at  the  <>|>cning  of  the  Sibley  college  in
Cornell  university,  and  another  at  the  opening  of
Adalbert  college  in  Cleveland,  Ohio;  an  sjVluaa  in
Bait  imore  on  the  benefits  which  society  derive!  from
universities;  and  an  address  before  the  Phi  Beta
Kappa  society  of  Harvard  on  a  kindred  topic. His
ideas  on  university  and  collegiate  education  have
sJeobeen  presented  in  articles  contributed  to  the
"  North  American  Review,"  to  the  "  Cvclopa-dia  of
Political  Science,"  and  to  other  publications. He
prepared  a  memoir of James Monroe for the
"American  Statesman"  series  (Boston,  lXfci).  and
has  edited  the  miscellaneous  writings  of Francis
Lienor  (1881)  and  of  Joseph  P.Thompson  (1884).
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  Harvard  in
1870  and  from  Columbia  in  1887,  and  he  is  a  mem-
Imt  of  manv  scientific  and  historical  societies.

01  I.MAS,  John  Taylor,  governor  of  New
Hampshire,  b.  in  Kxeter,  N.  H..  18  Dec..  1788;  d.
there.  1  S-pt..  18'28.  He  Itelonged  to  a  family  which
for  a  century  and  a  half,  according  to  a  well-in-
formed writer,  intluenced  "the  poillrioal.  orchoJOQ
tical,  social,  and  financial  history  of  New  Hamp-


866


OILMAN


OILMAN


shirr."  iiml  '•<li<l  more  to  keep  up  the  steady  course
of  the  oakmj,  tin-  province,  and  the  state,  certainly
till  1816.  than  any  two  or  three  other  families
together."  lie  was  the  son  of  Nicholas  Oilman,  a
leading  spirit  ill  politkal  affairs  during  the  Revo-
lution, and  fourth  in  descent  from  John  Gilman,
one  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  Exeter,  N.  II.,  who,
when  the  state  was  separated  from  Massachusetts
in  1680,  WM  appointed  one  of  the  royal  councillors.
On  tlie  morning  after  the  news  of  the  battles  of
Lexington  and  Concord  had  been  received,  John
Taylor  marched  with  100  other  minute-men  from
Exeter  to  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  served  in  the
provincial  army.  Soon  afterward  he  liecame  assist-
ant to  his  father,  who  had  been  made  treasurer  of
the  state.  In  Octolier,  1780,  he  sat  as  a  delegate
from  New  Hampshire  in  the  convention  at  Hart-
ford called  to  take  measures  for  the  defence  of  the
country.  After  serving  in  the  Continental  con-
gress in  1782-'3,  he  succeeded  his  father  as  treasurer
of  the  state.  This  office  he  held  until  appointed  one
of  three  commissioners  whose  duty  it  was  to  settle
the  accounts  of  the  states  with  the  old  confedera-
tion. He  resigned  in  1791,  and  was  again  chosen
state  treasurer.  In  1704  he  was  elected  governor,
re-elected  annually  until  1805,  and  again  in  1813-'14
and  1815,  but  subsequently  declined  to  be  a  candi-
date for  re-election.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1810— '11.  Although  a  zealous  Federalist,
so  great  was  his  popularity  that  he  was  frequently
chosen  governor  when  his  party  was  in  a  minority. —
His  brother,  Nicholas,  senator,  b.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,
3  Aug.,  1755  ;  d.  there,  2  May,  1814,  early  acquired
scholarly  tastes  and  methodical  habits,  which  were
still  more  stronglv  emphasized  under  the  careful
instruction  of  his  father.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one
Mr.  (iilman  entered  the  army,  as  adjutant  in  Col.
Scammell's  regiment,  and  served  with  distinction
until  the  close  of  the  war.  For  some  time  he  was  a
member  of  Washington's  military  family,  and  upon
him  was  devolved  the  duty  of  taking  account  of
the  prisoners  surrendered  by  Lord  Cornwallis  at
Yorktown.  In  1780  Gen.  Arnold  urged  Mr.  Gil  man
to  accept  an  appointment  on  his  staff.  Mr.  Gilman's
reply  was  characteristic.  Fearing  that  Arnold
would  not  be  engaged  in  active  movements,  he  said:
"  If  I  should  come  into  your  family  and  be  confined
in  the  dreary  wilderness  of  the  highlands,  while
our  operations  are  going  on  against  the  city,  which

Sossibly  may  be  the  case,  my  situation  would  be  as
istressing  as  that  of  Fabius  M.  when  he  had  re-
course to  the  flaming  cattle."  He  was  a  member
of  the  Continental  congress  from  1786  till  1788,  and
after  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  a  representa-
tive of  New  Hampshire  from  1789  till  1797.  In
1805  he  became  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  which
office  he  held  till  the  close  of  his  life.  He  was  one
of  the  presidential  electors  in  1793  and  1797,  and  he
was  also  one  of  the  state  councillors.  In  September,
1787,  Mr.  Gilman  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  met  at  Philadelphia  to  frame  a  constitution
for  the  United  States.  On  18  Sept.  the  secre-
tary of  the  convention  took  the  report  of  the  pro-
ceedings to  congress,  and  on  the  same  day  Mr.
Gilman  sent  a  copy  of  the  new  constitution  to  his
cousin,  Joseph  Gilman,  who  during  the  war  had
been  chairman  of  the  committee  of  safety,  with
the  following  significant  comment :  [The  plan]  '•  is
the  best  that  could  meet  the  unanimous  concur-
rence of  the  states  in  convention.  It  was  done  by
bargain  and  compromise,  yet — notwithstanding  its
imperfections — on  the  adoption  of  it  depends,  in
my  feeble  judgment,  whether  we  shall  become  a
respectable  nation  or  a  people  torn  to  pieces  by  in-
testine commotions and rendered  contemptible


for  ages."  Mr.  Gilman  was  a  man  of  deeds  rather
than  words,  and  was  personally  very  popnlar.  lb-
was  of  graceful  figure  and  elegant  carriage;  his
manners  were  courtly  and  his  charities  \\,
Stowed  with  Liberality  and  kindliness.  These  traits,
united  with  his  methodical  habits  and  fidelity  in  the
performance  of  duty,  kept  him  long  in  public  lit**.
till. MAN.  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Gloucester,
Mass.,  16  Feb.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  Mass.,  !i  IVl,.,
1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1811,  stud-
ied theology,  and  was  mathematical  tutor  at  Cam-
bridge from  1817  till  1819,  when  he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  Charleston.  S.  ('.,
which  relation  was  only  terminate.  1  by  his  death.
He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  temperance,  end
active  in  every  good  work  that  tended  to  promote
the  public  welfare.  Beyond  the  state  where  be
resided  he  was  chiefly  known  as  an  author.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  his  alma  mater
in  1837.  He  wrote  valuable  articles  for  the
"North  American  Review"  on  the  "Lectures  of
Dr.  Thomas  Brown,"  translated  several  of  the
satires  of  Boileau,  and  published  other  essays  in
the  Boston  "Christian  Examiner"  and  the  London
"Monthly  Repository,"  together  with  discourses,
biographies,  essays,  and  translations,  exhibiting  a
wide  range  of  knowledge.  Many  of  these  were  re-
printed in  "Contributions  to  Literature,  Deeorip-
tive.  Critical,  and  Humorous,  Biographical,  Philo-
sophical, and  Poetical"  (1856).  He  also  wrote
"Memoirs  of  a  New  England  Village  Choir"
(1829),  and  "  Pleasures  and  Pains  of  a  Student's
Life "(1852).  Of  his  poetical  writings,  the  ••  His-
tory of  a  Ray  of  Light "  and  a  poem  read  before
the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society,  of  Harvard,  are  best
known. — His  wife,  Caroline  Howard,  author,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1794,  wrote,  at  the  age  of
sixteen,  a  poem  entitled  "  Jephtha's  Rash  \  ow,"
which  was  followed  by  "  Jairus's  Daughter."  print-
ed in  the  "  North  American  Review."  She  was
married  in  1819,  went  to  Charleston,  S.  C,  with
her  husband,  and  resided  there  until  about  1870,
when  she  removed  to  Cambridge,  Mass.  In  1830
she  began  the  publication  of  "The  Rose- Bud,"  a
magazine  for  children,  which  ultimately  developed
(1833)  into  "  The  Rose."  From  this'  periodical,
which  was  discontinued  in  1839,  owing  to  the  fail-
ing health  of  its  editor,  her  writings  have  chiefly
been  collected.  They  include  "  Recollections  of  a
New  England  Housekeeper"  (New  York,  1835);
"  Recollections  of  a  Southern  Matron "  (1836) ;
"  Poetry  of  Travelling  in  the  United  States "
(1838) ;  "  Ladies'  Annual  Register "  (Boston,
1838-'9);  "Ruth  Raymond"  (New  York,  1840):
"  Oracles  from  the  Poets  "  (1845) ;  "  Sibyl,  or  New
Oracles  from  the  Poets  "  (1849) ;  "  Verses  of  a  Life-
time" (Boston,  1849);  "Oracles  for  Youth"  (New
York,  1852) ;  "  Mrs.  Gilman's  Gift-Book,"  compris-
ing in  one  several  volumes  for  the  young  previ-
ously published  (1859) ;  "Poems  and  Stories  by  a
Mother  and  Daughter,"  written  in  conjunction
with  Mrs.  Jervey  (Boston,  1872) ;  and  "  Letters  of
Eliza  Wilkinson  during  the  Invasion  of  Charles-
ton," being  personal  memorials  of  the  Revolution-
ary era.  Mrs.  Gilman  is  best  known  by  the  two
volumes  of  "  Recollections"  first  mentioned,  which
have  passed  through  many  editions.  She  is  now
(1887)  residing  with  a  daughter  in  Washington,
D.  C,  and,  at  the  age  of  ninety-two,  declares  that,
of  all  her  writings,  the  two  hymns  beginning;  "  Is
there  a  lone  and  dreary  hour,"  and  "  We  bless  Thee
for  this  sacred  day,"  have  lingered  longest  in  her
memory.  Her  most  popular  poem  is  the  l«>at-
song  "  Trancadillo." — Their  daughter,  Caroline
Howard,  author,  b.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('.,  1  Juno,


GILM


Q1LMORE


891


1823;  d.  then,  89  J  became  In  1840  Mrs.

•II  Glover,  and  m  \*<i-'>  M  r,  her

first  husband  having  died in  1846. She
ohiefly for the \'>ung, many talcs, p
novels,  which  appeared  in  southern  magazines  and

iu  the  v.iiiiinc  mentioned  above. Anions  bet  pub-
lish.-d  licti.iiis  arc  "Vernon  I  Fork,
I  ••  Helen  Courtenay'a  Promise"  (1861
i.il  Ml  i;.  George  Rockingham,  lawyer,  b.  In
rww  Oglethorpe)  county,  Go*  11  April,  1790;
(1.  in  Lexington,  «■•'.  M  Nov.,  1809, He  studied
law.  ami  began  practice  si  Lexington. In  ix i«t
he  became  a  lieutenant in  tin-  40d 17.  &  infantry,
which  Barred  against  the  Creeks,  mid  was  disband-
ed after  the  oonelnaion  of  peaos  aitfa  Givat  Britain
hi  1616. Heserred  in  the  legislature  in  l8i8-'20.
was  elected  to  < "tigress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served
from :i Dec*  1801,  to  3  Manh, 1800,  was  again
elected to the state house  of representatives in

•  I  served  in  oongresi  a  sscond  time  from  :i
B07,  to  :i  March,  1880. In  1806  "01  be  was
ejoeoroor  of  Georgia, Be  was  elected  again  bo
sjugreai  in  I860, and  served  from  i  Dec,  i

ti,  1885,  was  a  presidential  elector  on the
Hugh ''■  White  ticket in is3<;,  end  in  is:!7-'«»

barred  a  second  term  a.s  governor.  In  1*40  he  was
a  presidential  elector  on  the  Harrison  ticket.  By
his  will  he  left  valuable  lieipicsts  to  Georgia  uni-
versity, of  whicli  he  was  a  trustee  for  thirty  years.
He  published  a  historical  work  entitled  "Geor-
gians," containing  information  in  relation  to  the
early  settlement  of  the  state  (1855).

GILMER,  Jeremy  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Guil-
ford county.  N.  ('.,  '2$  Feb..  1818.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  l\  S.  military  academy  in  1839,  entered
the  engineer  corps,  and  was  engaged  in  building
forts  and  making  surveys,  and  in  river  and  harbor
improvements,  till  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
when  he  resigned  his  commission  as  captain  of  en-
gineers, and  entered  the  Confederate  army.  He
was  appointed  major  of  engineers  in  September,
1801,  and  was  chief  engineer  00  Sen.  Albert  S.
Johnston*!  stalf.  In  the  battle  of  Shiloh  he  was
severely  wounded.  After  his  recovery  he  was
apfMiiuted  chief  of  the  engineer  bureau  at  Rich-
mond. On  30  Aug.,  1803.  he  was  promoted  major-
?:eneral.  and  ordered  to  Charleston  to  direct  the  de-
ences  of  that  city,  but  in  June,  1804,  he  returned
to  Richmond  and  resumed  charge  of  the  bureau  of
engineering.  After  the  war  he  engaged  in  railroad
and  other  enterprise*,  in  Georgia.

(•I  I.MKK,  John  Alexander,  jurist,  b.  in  Guil-
ford countv,  X.  ('..  4  Nov..  1866  ;  d.  iu  Greensbor-
ough.  N.  (''..  14  May,  1864  He  received  ■  classi-
cal education,  taught  for  three  years,  studied  law,
and  was  licensed  to  practise  in  lSW.  He  was
Blasted  to  the  state  senate  in  184<>. and  successively
re-elected  till  1856.  He  was  the  Whig  candidate
for  governor  in  18.V>,  but  was  defeated  by  Braxton
Bragg.  The  same  year  he  was  elected  to  congress.
ami  iu  1858  was  re-elected,  serving  as  chairman  of
the  committee  on  elections.  He  was  mentioned
for  the  place  of  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  Mr.
Lincoln's  cabinet,  but,  withdrawing  from  con-
gress, embraced  toe  cause  (>f  ssotsslon,  and  was
elected  ii  member  of  the  Confederate  congress.

1. 1  I.MKK.  Thomas  Walker,  statesman,  l>.  in
Virginia;  d.  near  Washington,  1>.  C,  28  Feb..
lie  studied  law,  practised  in  Charlottesville,
Va.,  and  served  for  many  years  in  the  state  legis-
lature, f-.r  two  sessions  as  speaker. In  184<>-'l  he

was governor  of Virginia. In 1841 I ntend

ss,  aod.  although  he  had  been  elected  as  a
sustained  President  Tyler's  vetoes.  He  was
ted  as  a  Democrat  in  1842  by  a  close  vote.
vol.  ii. — 42


ompetitor,  Will  -gin, contested  there-

suit  without  siii  ess.  on  I ',  |'.  !.,  l  K44.  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Tyler  secretary  of  the  navy,
and  resigned  his  seat  in  congress  on  \x  Pee,  b
ter  on  the  duties  of  the  oflicc.  but  ten  da\s  later
was  killed  by  the  bursting  of  a  gun  00  l«>urd  the
United  States  steamer  "  Princeton."

<M  >IOK,  Harry,  soldier,  b.  in  Baltimore
county,  M.I.,  24  .bin., 1KJM ;  d.  iu Baltimore,  4

Manh,  1KKJ.  He  was  educated  under  a  private
tutor,  and  engaged  in  business  in  Baltimore  and  in
the  west  until  the  beginning  Of  the  Civil  war,  when
he  joined  the  Confederate  army,  under  Col.  Ashhy
Turner,  at  Charleston.  Va.  He  mh.ii  btOSJOOOOsV
spionoOS  for  his  during,  especially  as  a  scout,  and
was  appointed  sergeant-major  for  gallantry  af-
ter the  action  at  Harper*!  Ferry  in  I>cccml»er.
1801.  In  February.  1800,  ha  waeoevorsij  wound-
ed, ami  on  his  recovery  he  was  put  iu  command
of  a  company.  He  was  engaged  in  several  battles.
In  September,  1862.  he  was  captured  and  impris-
oned as  a  spy  for  five  months  at  Fort  McIIcnry.
but  in  February.  iHt'hi,  was  exchanged.  He  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Kelly's  Ford  in  March,
1803,  rejoined  the  10th  Virginia  regiment  in
April,  and  in  May  raised  a  battalion  of  horse,
and  was  commissioned  major.  In  June  he  com-
manded the  1st  Maryland  Confederate  regiment,
captured,  and  held  for  a  few  days,  Frederick,
Md.,  ami  the  towns  of  Chanil»cr>inirg,  Carlisle.
and  Gettysburg,  and  was  appointed  provost -mar-
shal of  the  last-named  place.  In  February,  1804,
he  raided  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and
was  court-martialed  for  destroying  a  train  and  jmt-
mitting  his  command  to  rob  the  passengers;  but
he  was  honorably  acquitted  of  this  charge  and  re-
stored to  his  command,  which  was  reorganized  as
the  2d  Maryland  cavalry.  In  July,  1804,  he  led
Gen.  Jubal  A.  Sally's  advance  into  Maryland.  STM
engaged  throughout  this  campaign,  and  iu  the
fight  at  Bunker  Hill  was  severely  wounded.  He
rejoined  his  command  at  Woodstock,  and  was  cap-
tured while  defending  his  guns.  He  spent  three
years  in  Europe,  and  in  1*74  was  elected  police
commissioner  of  Baltimore.  He  published  "  Four
Years  in  the  Saddle"  (Xew  York,  1  f- GO).

G1LM0RK,  James  Roberts,  author.!),  in  Bos-
ton, Mass  ,  lo  Sept,  1*2:5.  His  father  WSjSS  cousin
of  Gov.  Joseph  A.  Gilmore.  of  New  Hampshire,
The  son  was  prepared  for  college  in  I'tica,  X.  V.,
but  entered  a  counting-room  at  the  ageof  fourteen,
and  beOBHM  a  partner  in  the  business  before  he  was
of  age.  He  made  annual  business  t  rips  to  the  south,
and  at  the  age  of  twenty-live  became  the  head  of  a
new  cotton  and  shipping  firm  in  Xew  York  city,
from  which  he  retired  before  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  with  a  competency.  In  the  early  years  of
the  war  lie  published  several  novels,  containing  re-
alistic [(ortrayals  of  southern  life  and  feeling,  un-
der the  pen-naflM  "  Fdmund  Kirke."  He  also  wrote
numerous  war-songs  and  I  ml  lads.  His  writings
about  the  south,  by  their  graphic  and  uncxaggcr-
ated  pictures  of  slavery,  hcl[>cd  to  decide  the  north-
ern mind  in  favor  of  emancipation  and  the  continu-
ance of  the  war.  In  1*<>2  he  founded  the  "Conti-
nental Monthly  "  magazine,  to  advocate  emancipa-
tion as  a  |M>litical  necessity:  but  discontinued  nil
connection  with  it  soon  after  the  issuing  ol  Presi-
dent Lincoln's  proclamation.  In  July,  1804.  with
Col.  .Jaquess,  he  was  intrusted  with  an  unofficial
mission  lo  the  Confederate  government,  with  a
view  to  arranging  a  peace,  They  only  succeeded
in  eliciting  from  Jefferson  Davis  a  declaration
that  he  would  not  consent  to  |  ; on  the

basis of the iii(ie|M'iidence  of the Confederate


858


<;ILM«>KK


•  ill.MnCR


Stnt.-s.  ii  result  thiit  had  Hi.'  effect  of  dSftlUjlug
tin-  peace  party  of  the  north,  ami  ensured  the  re-
election  of  Abraham  Lincoln.  Baring  lost  his  for-
tuiH'  in  consequence  of  the  irar,  ho  engaged  in  boat*

ness  again  in  1*7:1.  In  1888  he  finally  retired,  and
applied  himself  anew  to  the  pursuit  of  literature.
Hi- earlier  publications  were  "  Anion j;  the  Pines"
(New  York.  [869):  "  My  Southern  Friends  "(ls»i2):
••  Down  in  Tennessee "(1868);  *  Among theGaoru-
|0Bn(1888);  "Adrift  in  Dixie"  (1888);  "On  the
Border"  I  Boston.  t864);  and"  Patriot  Bovs"(1864).
In  1880  be  prepared, in  eonneet Eon  with  t)r.  Lyman
Abbott,  an  arrangement  of  the  gospeia  forming  ■
life  of  Jesus,  entitled  the  "Gospel  History  "  (Sow
York):  and  the  same  year  wrote  in  the  space  of
thirty  days  a  "  Life  of  Garfield,"  of  which,  during
the  presidential  campaign  and  immediately  after-
ward. HO.IKN)  eotiies  were  sold.  He  published  subse-
quent ly  "The  Rear-Guard  of  the  Revolution,"  an
account  of  the  early  settlement  of  Tennessee  and
of  the  patriotic  services  of  John  Sevier  (New  York,
;iid  "John  Sevier  as  a  Commonwealth-Build-
er,"a  companion  to  the  "  Rear-Guard  "  (1887).  He
is  now  (IMS?)  writing  a  series  of  southwestern  his-
tories. His  wife,  who  has  aided  him  in  his  literary
labors,  is  a  daughter  of  Judge  John  W.  Edmonds.
GILMORE,  Joseph  Albree,  governor  of  New
Hampshire,  b.  in  Weston,  Vt.,  10  June.  1811 :  d.  in
Concord.  N.  EL.  17  April.  bS(>7.  He  enjoyed  scanty
educational  advantages,  and  while  a  boy  made  his
way  to  Boston  and  entered  a  store.  At  the  age  of
twenty-one  he  was  in  business  for  himself.  The
railroad  to  Concord,  N.  H..  was  completed  on  1  Sept.,
1*42.  and  about  the  same  time  he  removed  to  that
place,  and  opened  a  wholesale  grocery.  On  3  Aug.,
1848,  he  became  construction-agent,  and  afterward
superintendent, of  the  Concord  and  Claremont  rail-
road, and  24  Nov..  1856, superintendent  of  the  Con-
cord railroad,  which  came  to  include  the  Manches-
ter and  Lawrence  and  Concord  and  Portsmouth
railroads  and  their  branches,  making  a  system  of
about  175  miles,  of  which  he  continued  in  charge
until  11  Aug..  1866.  He  was  politically  a  Whig;
in  1858  was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  state
senate,  was  re-elected  in  1859,  and  made  president
of  the  senate  that  year.  In  March.  1863,  he  was
the  Republican  candidate  for  governor;  there  was
no  choice  by  the  people,  but  he  was  elected  in  June
by  the  legislature,  and  re-elected  by  the  people,  in
March.  lS(i4.  The  two  political  contests  were  the
severest  ever  known  in  New  Hampshire,  and  he
assumed  the  governorship  at  the  darkest  period
of  the  civil  war.  By  his  predecessors,  Govs.  Good-
win and  Berry,  16  regiments  of  infantry,  4  compa-
nies of  cavalry,  1  light  battery,  and  3  companies
of  sharp-shooters,  making  over  17,000  volunteers,
had  been  nut  into  the  field  ;  but.  in  1863  patriotic
fervor  hau  somewhat  abated,  voluntary  enlistments
were  few,  and  President  Lincoln  had  ordered  a
draft.  Gov.  Gilmore,  however,  raised  and  equipped
the  18th  infantry,  the  1st  cavalry,  and  the  1st  heavy
artillery,  which,  together  with  the  recruits  for-
warded to  existing  organizations,  made  the  num-
ber of  men  furnished  during  his  term  of  office
about  14,000,  and  the  entire  number  from  New
Hampshire  more  than  31.000,  from  a  population
of  fewer  than  330.000.  Gov.  Gilmore  retired  from
office  in  June,  1865,  in  feeble  health.  His  char-
acteristics were  restless  activity,  unbounded  en-
ergy, impatience  of  restraint,  liberality,  and  pub-
lic spirit. — His  son.  Joseph  Henry,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  29  April,  18134,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1858  and  studied  theology  at  Newton.  He  was
settled  as  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Fisher-
ville  (now  Penacook),  N.  IL,  in  1861,  and  was  also


instructor  in  Hebrew  at  Newton,  but  n-ii;ned  and
acted  as  private  secretary  to  his  father  during  Un-
closing rears  of  the  civil  war  also  editing  the
Concord  M  Daily  Monitor"  in  1864-'5.  In  1866  he
became  pastor  of  the  2d  Baptist  church  iii
ester,  N.  Y..  and  in  1867  professor  of  rhetoric  in
the  University  of  Rochester.  He  has  been  an  edi-
torial writer  on  religious  and  literary  themes,  and
has  published  several  text-books,  including  one  on
the"  Art  of  Expression  "  (Boston,  i*si ,.  n,.  j*  ti„.
author  of  the  popular  hymn  "  He  leadeth  me  ;  <  >h,
blessed  thought  !  "

GILMORE,  Patrick  Sarsfteld,  musician,  b.
near  Dublin,  Ireland,  28  Dec.  1829.  He  connected
himself  with  military  bands  at  the  age  of  fifteen.
and  after  having  been  in  Canada  with  an  English
band  he  went  to  Salem,  where  he  led  a  brass  band,
after  which  he  settled  in  Boston.  Mass.,  where  he
organized  "Gilmore's  Band,"  with  which  he  made
an  extensive  tour.  In  1861  he  accompanied  the
24th  Massachusetts  regiment  to  the  field,  and  in
1863  was  placed  in  charge  of  all  the  bands  in  the
department  of  Louisiana  by  Gen.  Banks.  He
originated  monster  concerts  in  this  country,  and
was  the  projector  of  the  great  "Peace  Jubilees"
held  in  Boston  in  1869  and  1872.  and  published  an
account  of  the  first  (Boston.  1871).  In  1878  he
made  a  European  tour  with  his  band.  He  is  now
band-master  of  the  22d  Regiment,  N.  G.  S.  N.  Y.
He  has  composed  manv  marches  and  songs.

GILMOUR,  Richard,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  28  Sept.,  1824 ;  d.  in  St.  Aupmstine,
Fla.,  13  April  1891.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1829.  and
afterward  settled  in  Pennsylvania  He  joined  the
Roman  Catholic  church  at  the  age  of  twenty,  and,
having  resolved  to  enter  the  priesthood,  became  a
student  in  Mount  St.  Mary's  seminary.  He  was
ordained  priest  by  Archbishop  Purcell  in  1852.  His
first  missionary  labors  were  in  southern  Ohio,
Portsmouth,  Ironton,  Gallipolis,  and  Wilkesville,
where  he  remained  five  years  and  built  churches
and  schools.  He  was
appointed  pastor  of
St.  Patrick's  church,
Cincinnati,  in  1857,
and  erected  a  school
there  which  he  af-
terward made  the
finest  building  of
the  kind  in  the  state.
He  was  next  made
professor  in  the  sem-
inary of  Mount  St.
Mary's  of  the  West,
and  was  then  sent
as  pastor  to  St.  Jo-
seph's church,  Day-
ton, Ohio,  where  he
erected  a  school.  He
was  nominated  for
the  see  of  Cleveland  by  the  bishops  of  the  province
of  Cincinnati,  15  Feb.,  1872,  and  consecrated  bishop
on  14  April,  by  Archbishop  Purcell,  in  the  cathe-
dral of  Cincinnati.  After  his  accession  to  the  epis-
copacy he  devoted  himself  especially  to  the  inter-
ests of  Roman  Catholic  education.  He  founded
the  "Catholic  Universe,"  and,  an  attempt  having
been  made  to  tax  Roman  Catholic  churehee  and
schools,  he  was  completely  successful  in  resisting
it  in  the  courts.  During  his  administration
diocese  of  Cleveland  the  number  of  Roman  (at  ho-
lies large! v  increased.  In  1884  it  amounted  to
174,000.  The  average  number  of  children  attend-
ing the  128  parochial  schools  is  2:!.(MK).  Th<
184  priests,  217  churches,  21  chapels.  71  Bta


(HLIMN


niRARI)


oso


itogionl  seminary  containing  44  studi
•l> Gilmour has  eompil  A Itecre-

ati<m«."  a  collection  of  hymns,  a  Bible  history,  and

a  wrn'>  <>f  ii -in lorn.
GILPIN,  Edward  Woodward.  Jurist,  b.  in
mington.  Del..  15  July,  l**:  d.  in  Dorer.DeL,
99  April.  lMTti.  In  his  youth  be  m  In  straitened
eJrcomstancee,  and  learned  the  trade  "f  a  currier.
Be  wn«i  afterward  olerk  in  a  store,  bni  anally
itndfri  law,  ami  was  admitted  t<>  the  iwir  in  1897,
II.  was  attornev-general  of  Delaware  in  1(140  '50,
ami  from  May,  l*">7.  till  his  death  was  chief  justice
e|  the  state.  Re  was  a  Whig  in  early  life,  hut  Ih--
came  a  Damooral  in  in"«;.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  an  anient  Unionist.
GILPIN.  Thomas,  manufactarer,  b,  in  Chester
iy.  Pa.,  18  March,  1728:  d.  in  Winchester,  \'a.,
\i.n!.  1778,  His  grandfather.  Joseph,  emi-
grated from  England  in  1096,  Thomas  engaged
in  (arming  and  manufacturing.  I>eeaine  intereste<l
in  science,  and  was  one  <>f  the  original  mcmliers  of
the  American  philosophical  society  in  1799.  lb-
aided  in  establishing  Wilmington  college,  Del.,  ami
labored  for  the  construction  of  a  canal  between  the
Chesapeake  and  the  Delaware.  In  1777.  with  other
eneiAberfl  of  the  Society  of  Friends  he  was  arrested
by  the  Pennsylvania  government  on  suspicion  of
being  a  loyalist,  and  taken  to  Virginia,  where  he
died.— His  son,  Joshua,  b. in  Philadelphia, 8  Nov..
1795;  <1.  there  in  1840,  early  showed  a  love  for  his-
torical investigation.  He  lived  in  England  in
(795-1801,  and  married  an  Englishwoman.  He
urged  forward  the  canal  that  his  father  had  pro-
posed, and  witnessed  its  completion  after  many
discouragements.  He  published  ** Verses  written
at  the  Fountain  of  Vaucluse"  (1790);  "  Memoir  on
inal  fnun  the  Chesapeake  to  the  Delaware"
li;  and  "Farm  of  V  irgil,  and  other  Poems"
(1839).— Another  son.  Thomas,  b.  in  Philadelphia.
10  Sept..  177o;  d.  there, 8  March,  1869,  bSBaflM  an
nsive  paper-manufacturer,  and  in  1817  eoa>
structcil  a  machine  for  making  paper  continuous-
ly. His  works  were  destroyed  by  an  in  \Xi'2.  He
published  a  collection  of  documents  connected
with  the  banishment  to  Virginia  of  his  father  and
other  (Juakers  (1850). — Joshua's  son.  Henry  IMI-
wood,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lancaster,  England,  14  April,
1801;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  •,»«»  Jan..  lsi;o.  at-
tended school  in  England  in lHll-'ltt. He  was

graduated  at  the
University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1N1<»,
Studied  law  with  Jo-
seph It.  Ingersoll,
and  began  practice  in
Philadelphia  in  1899,
lie  was  l*.  S.  attor-
ney for  his  state  in
ls:{-2,  solicitor  of  the

U.  s. treasury in

1^17.  and  attorney-
general  of  the  United
Stales  in  1840-'l.
In  1898 -':;•-'  lie  edited
the "  Atlantic BOU-

venir*'(7  sola,  19moX
the first American
Jultt.t  .  Jr* /^2. '-  literary  annual. Mr.

*f  oCrft&tn*  (Jilpin  was  president
of  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  the  fine  arts,  and  a  director  of  Girard
college.  He  bequeathed  the  sum  of  )f57.<HK)  to  the
1  •  historical  society,  and  his  extensive  and

valuable  library  to  the Historical  society  of  Penn-
sylvania, together  with  a  bequest  for  the  erection


H®i$\


of  a  building  in  which  tin-  library  should  U-  pre-
Bssidss  contributing  to  periodicals,  h«*
published  "  Keports  ofCasss  in  the  l

Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia.  1K37);  "Opinions  of  the

Attorney-Generals  of  the  United  States,  front  the

Beginning  of  the  Gorerninenl  to  1041,"  from  ofB
cial  documents  (I  sola*  Washington,  l Ml),  ami
many  nddresses,  and  edited  "  The  Papon  of  Jsjsjssj

Madison."  purehasad from Mrs. Madison by the

government  for  990,000  and  published  by  authority

frees  (8  rota,  1840). Bee  M  Memorial  of  Henry

D.  Gilpin"  (printed  privately,  Philadelphia,

GIOIX.  Olivier,  French' author  (known  by  his

IK'n-name  (Justine  Aymard).  b.  in  S'-vro  in  js]s.
lis  father  shipped  him.  at  the  age  of  twel\.
|»rentice  on  a  sailing-vessel,  |>ut  he  deserted  at  Vera
Cms,  shipped  on  board  a  fishing-vessel,  and  visited
the  entire  (Jidf  const.  He  joined  a  slaver  in  ]KUi,
and  made  several  voyages  from  Africa  to  Brazil.
In  1840  he  offered  his  ■arfiosa  M  the  Mexican  gov-
ernment, and  was  appointed  coinimfnder  of  an
armed  hrigantinc,  in  wliich  be  cruised  <>n  the  coast
of  Louisiana,  but  near  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi
was  attacked  by  a  V .  S.  frigate  and  after  a  stout  re-
sistance was  caotured  and  carried  to  Washington.
He  escaped  ami  went  west,  where  for  several  years
he  was  a  hunter  and  trapper.  He  was  captured  by
the  Apaches.  scaljM'd.  SJM  left  for  dead,  but  found
by  a  sqUUW,  through  whose  care  he  recovered,  lb-
set  out  for  Panama  in  1849,  and  penetrated  into
the  interior  of  Colombia  and  Brazil.  Ihring  with  the
Indians  like  one  of  them.  In  1N.*>1  he  went  on  a
hunting  expedition  to  Patagonia,  fell  into  the
hands  of  a  tribe  of  the  Pehuerjchea,  and  was  kept
a  prisoner  for  fourteen  months.  On  making  his
escape  he  went  to  Paris.  Ha  had  described  bis  wan-
derings and  adventures  in  his  novels,  which  in-
clude "Lai  trappeurs  de  1'Arkansas"  (Paris,
1858);  '•  Let  oherobenrs  de  pistes'"  (1808);  ••  Ls

grand chef  d«l  Aucas  "  (1888)  :  "LeS rodeurs  des

front ieres"  (1881);  "  Lai  at— turiers "  (1888);  "  Les

nuits Mexicaines  *'  (1899); "  L'Araman  "  (1804);

••  Fes  osmsseun  d'aJbeUles  '*  |  ihi»4>  :  ••  Les  his  <ic  la

Tortus'1  (1*04):  and  "  I'ne  vendetta  Mcxicaine  "
(1800).  He  has  also  published  "  Histoire  des  guer-
res  civiles  et  des  revolutions  dans  le  Mexioue,  dc-

puis  Iturbide  Jnaou'  ft  la  cession  de  la  California
aux  Etats-l'nis"  (9  vols.,  Paris.  1869).
Gilt  Alt  D,  Charles,  naturalist, b.  in  MUhansen,

France.il  March.  1899.  He  was  educated  in  Neu-
chtitel,  Switzcrlaml.  where  he  was  the  pupil  and

assistant  of  Agassiz.  Ha  followed  his  teacher  to
the  United  States  in  ls17.  remaining  with  him  un-
til 1850.  when  he  removed  to  Washington.  D.  ('..
ami  attached  himself  to  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion. In  1899  ha  Was  naturalized  as  an American

citizen. He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  sd 1

of  Georgetown,  D.  *'..  in  1N50,  remained  in  the
Smithsonian  institution  until  1859,  and  for  some
time  was  engaged  with  Prof,  lijiiril  in  the  investi-
gation of  reptiles.  His  publications  are  ••Mam-
malia." in  the  -  Icon. graphic  Kncvcloturdia  of
Science, Literature,  and Art  "  i  New  York, lsoli:

**  Monograph  of  theCottoida"  (wasiungton,  1891);
'•  Reptiles  "  tin  collalxu-ation  with  Prof.  Soencer
F.  Beard)  in  Btensbury'a  ••  Exploration  and  Bur*

vcy  of  the(ireat  Salt  Lake  of  Uudln(1858);  "  Bil>-
Uographia  Americana  historico  naturalis"
MCatalOguaof  North  American  Reptiles  in  the  Mu-
seum of  the  Smithsonian  Institution — Part  I..  S  r-
|nnts.*'  in  nnllahnfatinn  with  Prof.  Baird  (1858);
"  Rceeanhes  BpOSJ  Nemerte.ins  and  Planarians — I.,
Bmbryonk  Development  of  Planoeara  elliptica"
(Philadelphia, 1864);  "Life in its Physical As-


060


girard


GIRARD


'  (Washington.  18  ;  lil.s.  Fishes,  and

Crustacea."  in  (iilli>s's  "  U.  8.  Naval  Astronomical
Expedition  to  Chili "  (1886)  j  "HerpatologyoC  the
United  States  Exploring  Expedition  under  the
Command  of  Captain  Wilkes"  (1858);  "(ieiieral
Boport  upon  Fishes,"  (n  "  V.  S.  Fxplorations  and
Surveys  for  Railroad  Routes  from  the  Mississippi
River  to  the  Pacific  Ocean  "  (1859);  and  "Report
upon  Fishes,"  in  Emory's  "  Survey  of  the  United
State- and  Mexican  Boundary"  (1&50).

6 IRAKI).  Mure  Amable,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Varemie*.  Qnebeo,  86  April,  1822.  He  wasedu-
cated  at  St.  Hyacinthe  college,  and  admitted  to  the
btf  of  Manitoiia  in  1871.  After  the  suppression  of
Louis  RiePs  first  rebellion  bv  Gen.  Wolseley,  Mr.
Girard  became  a  member  of  the  executive  council
under  Lieut. -Gov.  Archibald,  and  m  treasurer  of
Manitoba  from  September.  1870.  till  March.  1872,
when  he  resigned.  He  was  premier  of  the  prov-
ince, with  the  office  of  secretary,  from  8  July  to  2
Dec,  1874,  when  he  and  his  government  retired.
When  the  Norquay  government  was  reconstructed
in  December,  1879,  he  took  the  office  of  provincial
secretary,  and  subsequently  became  minister  of  ag-
riculture and  president  of  the  council,  which  port-
folio he  held  till  his  retirement  in  January,  1883.
He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  coun-
cil for  the  northwest  territories  in  December,  1872,
and  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  legisla-
tive council  of  Canada  in  1858,  and  for  the  Canada
assembly  of  18(52.  He  was  elected  for  St.  Boniface,
in  Manitoba  assembly,  in  1870.  and  was  elected  by
acclamation  for  Baie  St.  Paul  in  1879.  He  was
called  to  the  Dominion  senate  on  the  entrance  of
Manitoba,  18  Dec,  1871. He  is  a  Conservative.

GIRARD,  Stephen,  philanthropist,  b.  near
Bordeaux,  France,  24  May,  1750;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  2(i  Dec,  1831.  He  was  the  son  of  a
sea-captain,  and  at  an  early  age,  with  limited  edu-
cation, sailed  as  a  cabin-boy  to  the  West  Indies,
and  thence  to  New  York.  Having  gained  his  em-
ployer's confidence,  he  became  mate,  and  then
captain,  of  a  small  vessel,  made  several  voyages
to  New  Orleans,  and  was  soon  part  owner  of  the
ship.  In  1709  he  had  established  himself  in  trade
in  Philadelphia,  and  was  alternately  shipmaster
and  merchant  till  the  Revolutionary  war  put  a
stop  to  his  enterprises.  He  then  opened  a  small
grocery-store  and  cider-bottling  establishment,  and
in  1 777-"!)  gained  some  money  by  selling  liquor  to
the  soldiers  of  the  continental  army.  He  returned
to  the  West  India  trade  in  1780.  and  in  1782  laid
the  foundation  of  his  fortune  by  taking  a  lease  of
a  range  of  stores,  which  he  underlet  at  a  large
profit.  Shortly  afterward,  during  the  servile  in-
surrection in  Hayti,  several  planters  deposited
their  treasures  on  two  of  his  vessels  for  safe  keep-
ing, and  were  subsequently  massacred  by  the  ne-
groes with  their  entire  families,  leaving  Mr.  Girard
in  possession  of  about  $50,000.  He  invested  large-
ly in  the  shares  of  the  old  Bank  of  the  United
Slates  in  1810,  and  in  1812  purchased  its  building
and  began  operations  in  his  own  name,  retaining
the  officers  of  the  old  institution,  and  succeeding
to  much  of  its  business.  During  the  war  with
Great  Britain,  Mr.  Girard  was  the  financial  main-
stay of  the  government.  He  continued  to  make  it
large  advances,  down  to  the  establishment,  in  1816,
of  the  second  U.  S.  bank,  of  which  he  became  a  di-
rector, and  whose  policy  he  influenced  greatly.  In
1814,  when  the  government  could  obtain  only
$20,000  instead  of  the  $5,000,000  that  it  wished,
he  promptly  furnished  the  entire  amount,  and  in
the  same  year,  when  the  interest  on  the  public
debt  could  not  be  paid,  he  wrote  to  the  secretary


of  the  treasury,  offering  to  wait  for  his  money.  (>r
to  receive  it  in  treasury  notes.  At  his  death  his
property  amounted  to  about  $9,000,0(K).  the  hulk
of  which  he  bequeathed  for  charitable  purposes.
The  character  of  Girard  has  been  regarded  as  an
enigma.  The  disfigurement  of  his  face  by  the  loss
of  an  eye  in  early  childhood,  shortly  before  he  was
thrown  on  the  world  for  his  support,  seems  to  have
soured  his  disposition,  and  throughout  his  life  he
was  crabl>ed  and  unapproachable  to  most  people,
though  he  had  several  warm  friends.  In  small
matters  he  was  a  miser,  ready  to  take  advantage
of  a  legal  technicality  to  avoid  paying  a  just  claim,
rigidly  frugal  in  his  personal  habits,  and  never
giving  aid  to  any  that  applied  for  it  at  his  door.
He  gave  those  in  his  employ  nothing  but  their
just  wages,  and  exacted  from  them  the  utmost
promptitude  and  fidelity.  His  life  was  one  of  con-
stant labor;  the  smallest  details  of  his  business  re-
ceived his  personal  attention,  and  even  his  leisure
was  spent  in  working  on  his  farm  near  Philadel-
phia, where  he  drove  daily  in  a  shabby  carriage
drawn  by  one  horse.  He  was  inhospitable,  and  his
appearance  was
forbidding.  He
spoke  English  in-
differently, was
partially  deaf  aft-
er 1812,  and  in
1830  lost  the  use
of  his  remaining
eye  by  an  acci-
dent. His  person-
al appearance  was
that  of  a  rough
old  sailor.  He
was  a  disbeliever
in  Christianity,
and  named  his
ships  after  noted
French  free-think-
ers. Yet  in  pub-
lic matters  no  one
could  be  more
open-handed.  His
timely  aid  to  the  government  has  already  been  men-
tioned. He  gave  thousands  to  the  city  of  Philadel-
phia for  public  improvements,  subscribed  freely  to
charities,  and  even  to  Christian  churches.  During
the  yellow- fever  epidemic  of  1793  he  nursed  many
of  the  sufferers,  was  one  of  a  committee  that  or-
ganized a  hospital  on  Bush  Hill,  and  when  no  one
could  be  hired  to  take  immediate  charge  of  it,  vol-
unteered, with  Peter  Helm,  for  the  work,  and  soon
established  cleanliness  and  order.  He  continued
in  active  labor  at  the  hospital  for  sixty  days,  and
also  contributed  liberally  to  the  families  of  the  vic-
tims of  the  fever.  His  will,  which  would  occupy
nearly  nine  pages  of  this  work,  contains  minute
directions  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  property.  To
the  Pennsylvania  hospital  he  bequeathed  $30,000;
to  the  Pennsylvania  institution  for  the  deaf  and
dumb.  $20,000:  to  the  Orphan  asvlum  of  Phila-
delphia, $10,000;  to  the  Philadelphia  public
schools,  $10,000;  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  for
the  distribution  of  fuel  to  the  poor  every  winter,
$10,000 ;  to  the  Society  for  the  relief  of  distressed
masters  of  ships,  $10,000;  to  the  masonic  loan,
$20,000;  to  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  a  large
amount  of  real  estate;  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
for  improvement  of  its  streets,  buildings,  etc,
$500,000;  for  the  improvement  of  canal  naviga-
tion in  Pennsylvania,  $300,000.  His  principal  l»e-
quest  was  $2,000,000,  besides  the  residue  of  a  cer-
tain portion  of  his  estate  out  of  which  some  lega-


|


GIB  \KMN


GIROI


fW.l


E


'i-iIkt  with  H  plot  <.f  grand

in Philadelphia  for  the  erection  ami  support  of  |

college  for  or|>liH!is. Aboul  om  third oc  U

i  up  with  preaoribing  the  details  of  ita  con-
struction and  management,  and  (iirard  evej
so  far  as  to  dictate  the  thickness  <.f  tin-  marble
slabs  on  the  roof,  the  exact  dimensions  of  the
building  and  Ita  rootna,  and  tha  atria  of  tli
leading  to  the  granda,  Hi-.  object  seems  to  have
been  to  make  it  certain  that  a  fire-proof,  substan-
tial edifice  should  bl  built,  in  his  own  words,
"  avoiding  needless  ornament,  and  attending  chief-
ly to  the  strength,  convenience,  mid  neatness  of
the  whole."  The  principal  building  of  the  col-
lege, which  was  begun  in  July.  INW.  and  opened

I  Jan..  1848,  is  a  niagnifbvnt  s|H-<imeii  of  (Jic  k
architecture,  in  the  form  of  a  temple,  surrounded
by  thirty-four  elaborate  Corinthian  columns,  and
costing,  with  the  aooOBSpanying  buildings,  \«r\
nearlv  *.2.000,000.  It  has  btn  doubted  whether
Mr.  (Jirard  intended  that  any  such  structure
should  !*•  erected.  It  is  in  many  reapaflfel  not  well
adapted  to  its  uses,  though  the  minute  directions
of  the  founder,  who  was  not  a  practical  architect,
are,  in  souu  q>onsible  for  tbeea  defects.
As  many  poor  white  male  orphans  pj  the  endow-
ment can  sup|M>rt  are  admitted  between  the  ages
of  six and ten years,  fed.  clothed,  and  educated,

and  between  the  egee  of  fourteen  and  eighteen  are

bound  out  to  mechanical,  agricultural,  or  commer-
cial occupations.  The  officers  consist  of  a  |>re>i-
dent.  secretary,  two  professors,  five  male  ana  five
female  teachers,  a  physician,  a  matron,  a  steward,
and  a  su|H'rintendeiit  of  manual  labor;  ami  there
are  about  BOO  U'licficiarics.  By  a  provision  of  the
will  of  the  founder  BO  ecclesiastic,  missionary,  or
minister  of  any  sect  whatever,  is  to  hold  any  con-
nection with  the  college,  or  lie  admitted  to  the
remises  even  as  a  visitor.  The  object  of  this,  in
irard's  words,  is  "to  keep  the  tender  minds  of
the  orphans  who  are  to  derive  advantage  from  this
boojaeel  fret  from  the  excitement  which  clashing
doctrines  and  sectarian  controversy  are  so  ant  to

firoduce,"  leaving  them  free  to  choose  on  their  en-
rance  into  active  life  -such  religious  tenets  as
their  matured  reason  may  enable  them  to  prefer."
S>e  ••  Life  of  Stephen  (Jirard,"  by  Stephen  Simpson
(Philadelphia,  1KW),  and  "Qirard  College  and  its
rounder, by  Henry  W.  Arey  (I860).

QIBABDIN,  IiOllls  Hue,  e<lucator.  He  was
ap|M>inted  professor  of  modern  languages  in  Will-
iam and  Mary  in  lso:{.  and  conducted  a  select
school  for  girls  in  Richmond.  \*a.,  for  several  years.
He  completed  vol.  It.  of  Burk's  "History  01  Vir-
ginia," and  in  1805  issued  the  prospectus  of  a
monthly  magazine  entitled  "  Amoenitates  Gmphi-
cn»,  an  Inst  nut  ive  and  Amusing  Collection  of
Vines,  Animals.  Plants,  Flowers.  Mineral-.  \w-
tiquities.  Customs,  and  Other  Interesting  objects.
Selected  and  engrared  from  Drawing!  after  Na-
ture, with  DeeerTptive  and  Explanatory  Sketches
in  English  and  French.  The  Text  by  L.  H.  (Jirar-
din.  Professor  of  Modern  Languagea,  History,  and

I I  iliv  in  William  and  Man-  College.  The  En-
gravings by  Frederick  Boaler." The  first  uuraber

(the  only  one  issued)  contained  six  fine  plat.
ored  by  hand. In 1H(KI  he  published  a  long  Latin
I  entitled  "  Maiomachia,  sire  Duello,"  in  "The

Visitor.','  a  Richmond  periodical.

8IB0N,  Franelaco  Hernandez  diee-ron),
Spanish  soldier,  I),  iii  <'aci-ies,  Spain,  about  1500;
d.  in  Lima.  Peru,  7  Deo,  1554  Ha  joined  an  ex-
pedition for  Veragua  in  1585,  ami  later  went  to
SjeJtO,  where  he  served  under  Aldana  and  afterward
ham rich,  but used  his  high  reputation  among


the  Spanish  conquer  m  to  revolt,  an

he  was  dissatisfied  w  ith  his  share  of  the  BjMBi  after

the  deaai  of  Qonaalo  Pineiro,  w  April,  1MB,  Hav-
ing Inch  cominisdotied  to  reduce  the  province  of
Cbaroaa  to  subjeotioa  in  USB,  ba  levied  troop*  at

Cu/co.  and  then  raised  the  standard  of  rebellion,
drawing  to  hi-  side  all  the  Spaniards  who  had  1n-
longed to  the factions  of  Alnmgro  and Pizarro.

After  arresting  the  governor  of  Onaeo  ba  took  poa-

■eseioti  of  the  government,  ami  in  a  Iwttle  near
Chuquinga,  20  May,  gained  a  complete  victory,
from  which,  however,  he  did  not  nap  anv  advan-
tage. He  was  attacked  in  turn  by  the  royalists,  and
defeated  at  Pucara.  H(  let.,  1554.  Having  been  aban-
doned by  his  troops,  he  fled  to  the  mountains,  but
waa  captured,  and  executed  at  Lima.  Tin-  rels-llion
lie  hea  led  was  the  last  that  was  instigated  by  the
eOOquerOTI  of  Peru  against  the  Spanish  crown.
I.IKOI  ARD, Desire. Canadian  author,  b. in

St.  Tbnothd,  noanhernofa  on . Qaohan.  7  July,  1836.

He  was  edneated  at  Montreal  college,  and  was
graduated  in  law  in  McGill  university,  from  which
he  received  the  0*0001  ,,f  B.C.  L.  and  I >.  C.  L.  He
was  admitted  to  the  Lower  Canada  Imr  in  October,
1800,  and  from  that  time  until  1872  devoted  him-
self to  his  profession,  in  which  he  attained  success
as  a  commercial  lawyer.  In  the  latter  year  he  was
elected  to  the  Canadian  parliament  for  Jac<|iies
Cart ier.  but  was  defeated  tor  Beauhnrnois  in  1H74.
He  was  re-elected  for  Jacques  Cartier  in  1874,  and
again  in  1NH2.  During  the  session  of  1882  he  pro-
moted and  carried  through  the  bill  authorizing
marriage  with  a  deceased  wife's  sister.  He  is  a
Conservative,  and  a  strong  supporter  of  the  policy
of  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,  and  of  the  late  Sir
George  E.  Cartiers,  He  founded,  with  W.  H.  Kerr
and  others,  the  "Barm  critiijue."  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "Treatise  on  Bills  of  Exchange,"  the  "  In-
solvent Act,"  and  "  Laws  of  Marriage."  He  is
well  known  by  his  contributions  on  constitutional
law  and  international  questions,  both  on  this  con-
tinent and  in  Europe.

GIROl'ARD.  John  Joseph.  Canadian  patriot,
I),  in  Quebec,  Canada,  11  Nov..  1  ?!*."> ;  d.  in  Canada,
IN  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  an  early
age,  and  entirely  destitute,  but  was  edneated  by
the  Abbe*  Oatien.  He  followed  his  benefactor  to
St.  Kustache.  and  after  the  hitter's  death  began  to
study  law  at  St.  Genevieve  in  1812.  He  was  ad-
mitt.'d  to  practice  at  the  former  place  in  1810,  and
established  himself  at  St.  Benoit.  where  he  mar-
ried. He  took  an  energetic  part  in  tbedieenaaJoasi

between  the  Camulian  governor  and  the  chamber
of  assembly,  and  in  1830  was  elected  to  repraoi  nt
the  countv  of  Deux-Montagnes.  He  devoted  him-
self principally  to  municipal  and  educational  ques-
tions, but  voted  with  the  jwtriots  in  favor  of  the
ninety-two  resolutions,  the  refusal  of  subsidies,  and
all  the  lnws  that  aimed  at  enforcing  the  rights  of
the  ohansher.  When  the  English  government  au-
thorized Lord  (Josford  to  take  what  money  he
needed  from  the  public  treasury,  (iirouard  ad-
dreosed  meetings  in  several  counties  of  the  prov-
ince of  yueliec  ill  OppOaftion  10  this  violation  of
the  prerogatives  of  the  legislature,  but  still  depre-
cated a  resort  to  physical  force.  When  the  insur-
rection iH'gan  he  took  command  of  the  insurgents
who  were  sMMBBed  at  St.  Benoit,  but,  seeing
that resistance  was  bWDOaajble  after  the fight at

st.  Baetaahe,  M  Nov..  is;};,  he  advised  his  oosn-

panions  to  dssparea  He  then  set  ,.ut  for  the  Cnited
Statics,  but  afterward  surrendered  himself,  and  was
taken  to  Montreal,  where  he  remained  in  prison  for
DM  iths.  In  \x\*  Lord  Durham,  the  new  gov-
ernor-general, offered  to  allow  the  leaders  of  the


90S


GIRTY


GIST


insurrection  to  go  into  exile  hu<1  to  pardon  the  rvst
,.n  .  ..rxl'tioii  that  the  former  would  sign  h  paper
acknowledging  their  participation  in  the  lvvolt.
(iiroiianl  refused  to  sign  the  paper  and  made
strenuous  effort!  to  dJssoade  Ids  eoin|ianions.  The
re>ult  proved  his  wisdom.  M  the  other  leaders  were
exiled  to  the  Kertnudas,  while  he  was  released  alter
the  proclamation  of  amnesty  without  conditions.
He  then  returned  to  St.  Benoit.  where  he  devoted
himself  successfully  to  his  profession.  He  was
offered  a  |*>rtfolio  in  the  Baldwin-Lafontaine  min-
istry of  1H42.  l)tit  declined  this  and  other  public
ollices.'  The  rest  of  his  life  was  spent  in  the  du-
ties of  his  profession  and  in  succoring  families  that
suffered  in  the  troubles  of  1887.  He  also  founded
the  hospital  of  Vouville  in  St.  Benoit.

GIRTY,  Simon,  leader  of  Indians,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania about  1750;  d.  in  Canada  about  1815.
His  father  hail  died,  and  his  mother  had  married
again,  when  in  1755  the  family  were  taken  cap-
tive by  Indians,  and  the  step-father  was  burned.
Simon  remained  a  prisoner  till  1758,  when  he  was
released.  In  1774  he  was  a  soldier  and  spy  un-
der Lord  Dunmore  at  Port  Pitt,  and  a  friend  and
companion  of  Simon  Kenton.  Being  an  active
loyalist,  he  left  Pennsylvania  at  the  beginning
of*  the  Revolution,  l>ccame  a  leader  of  the  savages,
and  was  concerned  in  many  atrocities.  It  is  not
known  whether  he  was  given  a  British  commission.
He  had  been  held  a  prisoner  by  the  Whigs  at
Pittsburg,  but  escaped,  collected  about  400  In-
dian warriors  in  the  summer  of  1777,  and  in  Sep-
tember attacked  Fort  Henry  (now  Wheeling,  W.
Va.),  which  was  garrisoned  by  about  forty  men.
After  defeating  with  great  slaughter  a  reconnoi-
tring party,  and  reducing  the  garrison  to  twelve
men,  he  made  a  demand  for  its  surrender,  but  was
refused.  The  Indians  now  laid  siege  to  the  fort,
but.  as  they  had  no  artillery,  the  garrison  held  its
own  until  it  was  relieved  next  day  by  forty  mounted
men.  In  1778,  with  two  other  Tories,  Girty  went
through  the  Indian  country  to  Detroit,  urging  the
savages  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Americans.
He  was  present  at  the  torture  and  death  of  Col.
William  Crawford  (q.  v.)  in  1782,  and  is  charged
with  showing  delight  at  his  sufferings;  but  Girty
averred  that  he  did  what  he  could  to  save  Craw-
ford's life.  Subsequently,  when  his  old  associate,
Simon  Kenton,  was  captured  by  the  Indians,  Girty
exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  save  him  from
the  torture,  and  succeeded  in  effecting  his  release.
In  August.  1782,  Girty  invaded  Kentucky  and  with
600  savages  made  an  attack  on  Bryant's  station,
near  Lexington,  which  was  garrisoned  by  about
fiftv  men.  After  an  unsuccessful  ambuscade  Girty
laid  siege  to  the  fort  till  the  approach  of  re-enforce-
ments  under  Daniel  Boone  caused  him  to  retreat.
He  was  rapidly  pursued,  and  the  battle  of  the  Blue
Licks  followed,  in  which  many  of  the  Kentucky
leaders  lost  their  lives.  This  was  the  last  great
Indian  battle  on  Kentucky  soil.  In  the  same  year
Girty  was  active  in  the  expulsion  of  the  Moravian
missionaries  who  had  been  laboring  quietly  among
the  Wyandottes.  He  lived  for  some  time  on  San-
dusky river,  where  he  had  established  a  trading-
station,  and  planned  and  led  many  marauding  ex-
cursions. He  was  present  at  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair's
defeat  in  1791,  and  directed  a  savage  to  kill  and
scalp  Gen,  Richard  Butler,  who  lay  wounded  on
the  field.  Girty  acted  as  interpreter  to  the  com-
mi-sionets  that  were  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment to  meet  the  Indians  in  179:5,  and  treated
them  with  insolence,  finally  securing  the  failure  of
the  negotiations.  He  also  aided  the  British  in  the
war  of  1812,  and  is  said  by  some  authorities  to


have  been  killed  in  the  battle  of  the  Thames  in
1818,  but  his  descendants  say  that  he  died  a  natu-
ral death  two  years  afterward.

GISBORNE,  Frederic  Newton.  Canadian  in-
ventor, b.  in  Broughton,  Lancashire.  England,  8
March,  1824.  He  made  a  tour  around  the  world  in
1842-'5.  came  to  Canada  in  July  of  the  latt.
and,  after  spending  two  years  in  farming, became
one  of  the  operators  of  the  Montreal  teli
company,  ana  opened  it*  first  station  at  Quebec.
He  was  then  connected  with  various  telegraphic
enterprises,  and  successfully  completed  the  line
across  Newfoundland  in  October,  1856.  In  1882  he
was  acting  commissioner  for  Newfoundland  at  the
London  exhibition,  represented  it  at  the  Paris  ex-
hibition of  1865,  and  was  appointed  London  agent
for  mines  and  minerals  by  the  government  of  Nova
Scotia,  In  1879  he  was  made  superintendent  of
the  Dominion  government  telegraph  and  signal
service,  which  office  he  now  holds  (1887).  lie  has
invented  electric,  pneumatic,  and  mechanical  ship-
signals,  anti-corrosive  and  anti-fouling  com  posit  ions
for  the  bottoms  of  iron  ships,  an  electric  recording
target,  and  improvements  in  gas-illumination.  His
semaphore  was  awarded  a  gold  medal  at  the  late
fishery  exhibition  in  London.  He  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  Royal  society  of  Canada.

GIST,  Christopher,  scout.  He  was  summoned
from  his  home  on  the  Yadkin  in  North  Carolina
by  the  Ohio  company,  an  association  of  English
merchants  and  \irginia  planters,  to  whom  had
been  given  a  royal  grant  to  examine  the  wotern
country  "as  far  as  the  falls  of  the  Ohio,"  to  mark
the  passes  in  the  mountains,  trace  the  course  of
rivers,  and  observe  the  strength  and  numbers  of
the  Indian  nations.  On  31  Oct.,  1750,  he  left  the
shores  of  the  Potomac.  He  crossed  the  Allegha-
nies  and  journeyed  in  February,  1751,  to  the
Miami  river,  holding  conferences  with  the  vari-
ous Indian  tribes,  but  principally  with  the  chief
of  the  Miami-.  During  the  latter  meeting  four
ambassadors  from  the  French  were  announced,  but,
after  a  deliberation,  an  alliance  was  formed  with
Gist,  as  the  representative  of  the  English.  On
1  March,  Gist  continued  his  tour,  descending  the
Miami  to  the  Ohio ;  thence  ascending  the  valley  of
the  Kentuckv,  he  found  a  pass  to  the  BlueetonSj
and  returned  by  way  of  the  Roanoke.  In  1753
the  Ohio  company  opened  a  road  into  the  western
valley,  and  Gist  established  a  plantation  near  the
Youghiogheny.  In  November  of  that  year  hostili-
ties were  threatened  between  the  French  and  Eng-
lish ;  and  George  Washington,  then  just  twenty-
one,  but  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  wilderness,
was  selected  as  an  envoy  from  Gov.  Dinwiddie.  of
Virginia,  to  make  a  winter  journey  to  the  streams
of  Lake  Erie.  With  Christopher  Gist  as  his  guide
he  set  out.  In  nine  days  they  had  reached  the
junction  of  the  Alleghany  and  Monongahela  riv-
ers, and  on  23  Nov.,  1753,  swam  their  horses  across
the  Alleghany,  and  wrapped  themselves  in  their
blankets  for  the  night.  Their  journey  ended  at
Waterford,  near  the  shores  of  Lake  Erie,  where
they  wert'  not  courteously  received.  They  ha
their  return,  and  the  day  after  Christmas  were  fired
upon  by  an  Indian  in  ambush.  "I  would  have
killed  him,"  wrote  Cist.  "  hut  Washington  forbade."
They  took  him  prisoner  instead.  Dismissing  their
captive  at  dusk,  they  travelled  all  night  and  next
day,  resting  at  dark  under  a  huge  tree.  The  de-
spatches were  delivered,  and  a  fort,  was  established
at  the  junction  of  the  rivers  which  Washington
and  Gist  had  crossed,  where  Pittsburg  now  stands.
It  was  afterward.  17  April,  seized  by  the  French.
and  named  Fort  Duquesne. Washington  has


MSI


01,  ASH


an


hisucout.  and  (.11  87  April
ill the  r'remh  tti'p'  within

II  TftTf All  cIlgHgcUHIlt


forward.  Cist net  in

til.'  latter alllKitltlCi

tl\f  miles  >•{  the  An

followed. and  tin-  French  with  Wat  en. Cioissub-
nt history  i-  unknown.
HIST,  Mordi  . ,ii. Idicr.  It.  in  Baltimoi

.  .1.  m  Charleston,  8.  C,  in  1788.  Hiean-
early  English  emigrant-  t.>  Maryland.
HewaHcWmiit.il  for eommerciaJ  pursuits  At  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution  1 1»«-  young  men  ot  Hal-
inn. m-  associated  under  the  title  "f  the  •*  Baltimore
Independent  company."  and  eleettd  OW  captain.
the  first  oompany  rui«sl  in  Maryland  f,,r
the  defence  «.f  popular  lil>erty. In  17?ii<ii-t wa-

appointed  ma-
ji»r  <>f  it  hattal-
lon  of  Maryland
regulars,  and
wa-  wilh  them
inthcltattlcnear
Brooklyn.  In
January,  1?7!»,
congress  aj>-
pointed liini  a

hrigadicr-gctier-
al  in  tin-  con-
tinental army,
and  lie  took  the

command  of  the

/5^«pr(y>  8d  Maryland bri-

/?*  s/mm  W  pl<1''-  ",,f"MKht

■tubbornly at

the  liattle  of
Camden,  S.  ('..
in  17W0,  and  at
one  time  after  a
bayonet  charge

his  force  secured
fifty  prisoners,
but  the  British  under  Oornwallis  rallied  and  the
Marylandcrs  gave  way.  Cist  escaped,  and  a  year
later  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  I'ornwallis.
He  joined  the  southern  army  iiniler  Qroono.  and
again  when  the  army  was  remodelled  in  1781  he  was
given  the  command  of  the  light  corps.  On  86  Aug.,
1TH-J,  he  rall'cd  the  broken  forces  of  the  Americans
under  Laurens  at  lh>-  liattle  of  the  Coinbahee,  and
gained  ■  decisive  victory  over  the  British.  After
the  war  he  resided  on  his  plantation  near  Charles-
ton. S.  ('. (Jen.  Cist  possessed  a  tall  and  graceful

figure,  symmetrical  proportions,  great  strength,  and

expressive  features.  lie  ha<l  l.ut  two  children,
sons  one  of  whom  he  named  "  Indejiendent  "  and
the  ..ther  '"  Slate*."

GLADDEN,  Adley  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Booth
Carolina:  d.  in  April.  1868.  He  was  a  major  in
Col.  Butler's  Palmetto  regiment  of  South  Caro-
lina \olitnteers  in  the  Mexican  war,  In-came  lieu-
tcnant-cloncl.  and  commanded  the  regiment  at  the

battle  of  Chnrabaeeo,  at  which  Ik »t h  of  his  ■upsrior
officers  were  killed.  He  was  severely  wounded  at
the  liei.n  Qate,  In  1861  ha was appointed  a  briga-
dier-general in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  as-
signed a  brigade  in  Wither*!  division  «.f  Rragg's
Corp-.  He  w.i-  wounded  on  the  first  day  of  the
liattle  of  Shiloh,  and  died  soon  afterward.

GLADDEN,  Washington,  clergyman,  l>.  in
Pittsgmve.  Pa.,  11  Feb.,  !*:!<;.  He  was  graduated
at  William-  in  1  s.~><».  After  a  course  of  theology  he
became  paetor  of  the  State  street  Congregational
church  in  Brooklyn  in  I860, then  in  Morii-aniu  and
in  North  Adam-.  Ma—.,  in  lWlT-'Tl,  when  he  re-
moved to  N.w  York  and  was  on  the  editorial  staff
of  the  N.w  York  "  Independent  '  until  187.V  I'd-ih
I]  1883  he  was  pastor  of  the  North  Congre-


gational church  in  Springfield* Mnnvnnl  for --me

dlted " Bundaj  Afternoon. He  then  vent

to  Columbus,  <  »hi<>.  to  be  pastor  <>f  the  first  charefa

in  thai  cits.  He  has  In-.ii  a  fre<picnt  contributor
t..  pepeM and periodical*,  a since— fill  public  lee-

tnrar,  and  ha-  published  H  Plain  Thongnt*  on  the

Art  of  Living'  (Bowton,  1808):  -  From  the  Huh
to  the  Hud  "  Worlcingtncn  and  their

Bmployi  f6)j  "  Being  a  Christian  "

••The Christian Boy" .N.w York. IH77): "  The
Lord-  Prayer"  (Bo*  ton. 1880); -The  Christian
League of Connecticut  " (New York.
••Things  N.w  end  Old  "(Columbus.  ikkj,;  -The

Young Men and the Church.-"  (Boston,

and  •■  Applied  Christianity"  (Boston,  1hm7).

(iLADWIN. Henry, Hritish soldier, d. near
ObeetersekL  Derby,  England. SB  June,  178L Be

iMcaine  a  lieutenant  in  the  48th  tool.  88  Aug.,
1758,  was  wounded  in  the  expedition  of  Braddock
in  IT."),  promoted  to  a  captaincy  in  the  With  on
.  1787,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major.  20
June,  17~i!».  He  was  in  eonuaand  of  the  fort  at
Detroit  when  it  was  liesieged  by  Pontine  in  17l*i-'4,
and  for  his  gallant  defence  was  promoted  to  a  lieu-
tenant-colonelcy. 17  Sept..  1 768, and  to  a  colonelcy,
88  Aug..  1777.  In  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was
a  deputy  adjutant-general,  ami  served  with  dis-
tinction, becoming  »  major-general,  88  S-pt..  1  288,
<«LASS,  Francis,  classical  scholar.  1>.  in  Lon-
donderry. Ireland,  in  1790;  d.  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  in
1885,  He  wa-  educated  in  Philadelphia,  and  s|>ent
the  earlier  part  of  his  life  in  that  city  and  il-  vi-
cinity, engaged  in  literary  pursuits.  In  1817  or
1M1K  in-  left  Pennsylvania  for  the  neat,  and  tattled
in  the  Miami  country,  when  be  taught  fo?  -«-\-
eral  years  in  various  pieces.  In  the  summer  of
IN'.':*,  .lame-  M.  Reynolds,  then  a  member  of  the
Ohio  university,  having  invasion  for  the  service-  of
a  tutor,  sought  out  Mr.  Class,  whom  he  found  at
the  head  <>f  a  country  school  in  Warren  county.
In  a  little  log  school-house,  furnished  with  desks
and  benches  of  rough  plank  over  which  the  plane
had  never  pas-ed.  this  accomplished  scholar  was
imparting  the  rudiments  of  an  English  education
to  a  few  children  of  the  neighboring  fanners,  and
giving  a  higher  training  to  half  a  dozen  youths
who  had  joined  his  school  for  the  benefit  of  hi*  in-
struction in  the  Creek  and  Latin  language-.  Mr.
Reynolds  s|>eaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  his  learn-
ing and  his  love  of  the  classics.  "The  mind."  he
say.-.  :•  was  with  him  measured  by  the  amount  of
classical  acquirements.  He  eras,  not  deficient  in
mat  hematics  and  other  branches  of  useful  science,
but  they  were  only  matters  of  mere  utility  and  not
of  affection."  M  He  was  delicately  formed  in  mind
and  body,  and  shrunk  from  all  coarseness  ss  a
positive  plant  from  the  rude  touch.  A  cold  or
unfeeling  word  seemed  to  palsy  every  current  of
hi- -..ill  and  every  power  of  hi-  mind:  hut  when
addressed  in  gentle,  confiding  tones,  he  was  easy,
communicative,  and  full  of  light  ami  life.  At  such
hours  he poured  out  a  stream  of  classical knowl-

edge  a-  clear,  sparkling,  and  oopiom  asever  Bowed

from  the  fountain  of  inspiration  in  the  early  days
of  the  Muses,"  Mr.  Reynolds  had  Ueu  with  Class
lorafaoni  three  month- when  the  latter  communi-
cated to  him  his  long-cherished  plan  of  writing  the

life  of  Washington  in  Latin  f«>r  the  nee  of  schools.

There  seemed  little  pros|N><'t.  however,  of  his  ac-
complishing it.  In  feeble  health,  in  extreme  par?
crty.  and  botne  down  l.y  the  daily  drudgery  Of  his

school,  ii.'  (eared  that  he  might  die  before  he  had
began  the  work. Arrangements  were  made  by  Mr.

Reynold-  for  his  relief,  ami  he  removed  to  Oavton,
where,  in the winter  of 1884,  he  U-gan his  book


6(J4


(J  LASS


GLEiG


ami  finished  it  in  I  voir.  He  did  not  live,  however,
to  Irani  that  his  work  had  heen  approved  by  some
of  the  ri|K-st  scholars  of  the  country.  He  died
shortly  afterward,  intrust iiiLT  his  manuscript  to
Mr.  Reynold*,  by  whom  it  was  published  in  1885.
It  was'  highly  commended  by  such  competent
fadgM  as  Professors  Anthon,  Maclean,  and  Alex-
ander, and  Presidents  Wylie,  Duer,  and  Fisk.  It
was  used  as  a  text-l>ook  for  some  time  in  the  gram-
mar-school of  Columbia  college,  and  might  have
won  its  way  into  general  acceptation  but  for  the
fact  that  the  stereotyped  plates  were  destroyed  in
a  fire,  and  the  book  was  never  reprinted.  The  fa-
tality which  pursued  poor  Glass  through  life  seemed
to  follow  him  after  (loath.  "  Washingtonii  Vita"
has  now  become  a  literary  curiosity. On  the  title-

Eage  appeared  a  selection  in  Latin  purporting  to
e  from  the  fragments  of  Cicero,  prophesying  the
future  appearance  and  deeds  of  Washington.  It  is
said  that  scholars  investigated  the  fragments  of
Cicero  without  success;  and  their  bewilderment
was  only  relieved  when  Prof.  Anthon  acknowledged
that  he  had  written  the  passage  himself.

GLASS.  James  W.,  artist,  b.  in  1825  ;  d.  in  1857.
He  became  a  pupil  of  Huntington  in  New  York
city  in  1845,  and  went  to  London  two  years  later,
where  he  applied  himself  to  art  for  several  years,
returning  to  the  United  States  in  1856.  His  "  Last
Return  from  Duty,"  an  equestrian  portrait  of  the
Duke  of  Wellington,  brought  him  first  into  promi-
nence in  England.  It  was  purchased  by  Lord
Ellesmere,  and  a  duplicate  was  ordered  by  the
queen.  The  subject  has  been  engraved  by  James
Paed.  He  was  particularly  successful  in  his  draw-
ing of  horses.  His  works  include  "  The  Battle
of  Nasebv,"  "The  Roval  Standard,"  "Puritan  and
Cavalier.*'  and  "The  Free  Companion."

GLASSON,  John  J.,  naval  officer,  b.  inNew  York
city;  (1.  there,  12  March,  1882.  He  was  appointed
midshipman,  1  Feb.,  1823,  and  in  that  year  served
under  Com.  Porter  in  the  suppression  of  piracy  in
the  West  Indies.  In  183?  he  received  the  commission
of  lieutenant,  and  commanded  the  schooner  "Fal-
con," of  the  Home  squadron,  in  the  attack  on  Vera
Cruz  in  1848.  He  was  also  engaged  in  the  rescue
of  120  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Valladolid,  Yuca-
tan, which  was  burned  and  sacked  by  the  Indians
in  an  insurrection.  While  in  these  waters  he  aided
the  French  bark  "  L'Asie  de  Dunkirk  "  in  a  peril-
ous position  off  the  harbor  of  Aguador.  He  com-
manded the  store-ship  "  Lexington,"  in  Perry's
Japan  expedition,  in  1853-'4,  was  appointed  com-
mander in  1855,  and  stationed  at  New  Bedford,
Mass.,  from  18(51  till  1803.  He  was  retired  in  Oc-
tober, 1864,  but  was  in  the  navy-yard  at  Norfolk,
Va.,  in  charge  of  stores  for  the  supply  of  the  Coast
squadron  in  the  Atlantic,  and  the  flotilla  force  in
the  Chesapeake  from  1864  till  1866.  He  was  made
commodore  on  the  retired  list,  4  April,  1867.

GLAZIER,  Willard,  author,  b.  in  Fowler.  St.
Lawrence  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Aug.,  1841.  He  spent  his
boyhood  on  a  farm,  and  was  educated  principally
at  the  state  normal-school  at  Albany.  He  taught
in  Schodack,  N.  Y.,  in  1859-'60,  and  in  1861  en-
listed in  the  2d  New  York,  or  Harris  cavalry
regiment.  He  had  reached  the  rank  of  lieutenant,
when  he  was  taken  prisoner  in  a  cavalry  skirmish
near  Buckland  Mills,  Va.,  on  18  Oct.,  1863,  and  sent
to  Libby  prison.  He  was  afterward  transferred  to
Georgia,  to  Charleston,  and  then  to  Columbia.  S.  C,
whence  he  made  his  escape,  but  was  recaptured
near  Springfield,  Ga.  He  escaped  again  from  Sy  I  -
vania,  Ga.,  19  Dec.,  18(54,  and  returned  home.  Ins
term  of  service  having  expired,  but  on  25  Feb.,
1865,  entered  the  army  again  as  1st  lieutenant  in


the  26th  New  York  cavalry,  and  served  till  the  end
of  the  war.  He  has  since  devoted  himself  to  litera-
ture, and  frequently  delivered  lectures.  In  1876
he  went  from  Boston  to  San  Francisco  on  horse-
back, and  was  captured  by  hostile  Indians  near
Skull  Kocks,  Wyoming  territory,  but  made  his
escape.  In  1881  he  made  a  canoe  voyage  of  ::.<hki
miles,  from  the  head-waters  to  the  mouth  of  the
Mississippi,  and  claimed  to  be  the  discoverer  of  a
small  lake  south  of  Lake  Itasca,  which  he  main-
tains should  be  regarded  as  the  true  source  of  the
Mississippi.  It  has  since  been  found  that  this  lake
is  laid  down  on  the  maps  of  the  government  sur-
veys. Capt.  Glazier's  works  include  "Capture.
Prison-Pen,  and  Escape,"  over  400,000  copies  of
which  were  sold  (Albany,  1865);  "Three  Years  in
the  Federal  Cavalry  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  Battles
for  the  Union"  (Hartford,  1874);  "Heroes  of
Three  Wars"  (Philadelphia.  1878);  "Peculiarities
of  American  Cities "  (1883) ;  and  "  Down  the  Great
River"  (1887).  See  his  life  by  John  A.  Owens,  en-
titled "Sword  and  Pen"  (Philadelphia,  1884).

GLEASON,  Frederic  Grant,  musician,  b.  in
Middletown,  Conn.,  17  Dec.  1848.  After  studying
under  Dudley  Buck,  he,  in  1869,  went  to  Leipsie,
Germany,  where  he  pursued  his  musical  educa-
tion under  Moscheles  and  Richter.  Later,  in  Ber-
lin, Weitzmann,  and,  in  London,  Oscar  Beringer
were  among  his  teachers.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  in
1876  he  went  to  Chicago,  where  he  is  now  (1889)
musical  critic  of  the  "  Tribune."  His  chief  com-
positions are  two  operas  of  the  grand  romantic
type,  "  Otho  Visconti "  and  "Montezuma."  The
vorspiel  and  many  parts  of  "Otho  Visconti  "  have
been  published  (New  York).  The  vorspiel  has  been
played  under  Theodore  Thomas,  and  the  introduc-
tion to  the  second  act  and  the  vorspiel  under  Mr.
Gleason.  Under  Theodore  Thomas  several  selec-
tions from  "  Montezuma"  have  been  rendered,  and
the  introduction  to  the  second  act  was  given  at  the
National  music  teachers'  convention  at  the  Academy
of  Music,  New  York.  2  July,  1885.

GLEIG,  George  Robert,  author,  b.  in  Stirling.
Scotland.  20  April,  1796;  d.  in  Winchfield,  near
Stratfieldsaye,  Berkshire,  England,  11  July,  1888.
He  was  educated  at  Glasgow  and  Baliol  college,
Oxford,  joined  a  regiment  in  Cork'  in  1812,  and
was  transferred  to  the  85th  light  infantry,  which
was  sent  to  Spain  in  1813.  He  served  under  Wel-
lington in  the  Peninsular  war.  was  sent  with  his
regiment  to  this  country,  and  took  part  in  the
battles  of  Bladenshurg — where  he  was  wounded —
Baltimore,  and  New  Orleans.  He  returned  to  Eng-
land in  1815,  was  retired  from  the  army,  took  or-
ders, and  in  1819  was  appointed  to  a  curacy  in  Kent
In  1821  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  presented
him  to  the  perpetual  curacy  of  Ash,  to  which  was
added  the  charge  of  Ivy  church,  Kent.  He  was
appointed  chaplain  of  Chelsea  hospital  in  1834,
and  during  the  last  four  years  of  his  service  was  by
Wellington  made  chaplain-general  to  the  forces,
which  office  he  held  until  he  retired  at  the  age  of
eighty.  His  exertions  to  establish  a  system  of  edu-
cation for  the  soldiers  gained  for  him  the  pool  "f
inspector-general  of  military  schools.  In  1848  bt
was  prebendary  of  St.  Paul's  cathedral.  Mr.  Gleig
was  for  half  a  century  a  contributor  to  "  Black-
wood's Magazine."  and  occasionally  published  pa-
|>ers  in  the  "London  Quarterly "  and  the  ••Edin-
burgh Review,"  also  contributing  to  "  Frasert
Magazine,"  of  which  he  was  for  two  years  the  edi-
tor. He  was  probably  the  oldest  of  living  writers,
he  having  as  lately  as  1886  contributed  to  the
"Fortnightly  Review"  an  article  on  the  a


ULEIM


QLI8AM


088


Daks  of  Wellington.  He  wee  the  author  of  many
Important  liooks.  among  which  arc  "  < 'anipaigns  <>f

tdngton  mill New  Orleans"  (London,  18
and  ••  I'hc  Bubaltern  "  (published  in  "  Blaekwood  "
in 1894  Many  editions  of

these  popular  work-'  ha\c  -nut-  ap|>carcd.

(.1  I  l>l.  John  ^odfricd.  clergyman.  I>.  in
(icrmany  :  (1.  in  (icrmantown.  Pa.,  in  1?.*>?.  In
1754  he  rami*  to  thin  country  with  (asjier  Fahm-
stink.  Mttled  in  (icnnantiiwii,  ami  preached  there
until  his  death.  In  conjunction  with  Weiscr  and
tiias  he  published  "  The  Inspired." — His  son.
rgf.  (  lii  1st  Ian,  soldier,  I».  in  WM\;  d.  in  I>an-
castcr  count  v.  Pa..  21  July.  1817,  took  juirt  in  the
War  of  the  ({evolution  and  was  severely  wounded
near  Philadelphia,  lie  removed  to  Lancaster
county  in  IT?!),  where  he  resided  until  his  death. —
Qeorge'i  son, Christian,  journalist,  b»  in  Lancaster
county.  I'a..  10  Jan..  17*0;  d.  in  Pittsburc.  IV. 'J  1
S'pt..  1861,  Went to  Philadelphia,  where  he  entered

the  printing-office  of  Kara  Bailer.  He  settled  in
Harrishurg  in  is  12.  and  was  appointed  to  print  the
■mat*  journal  in  English,  Afterward  he  estab-
lished ami  edited  "  The  Pennsylvania!!."  He  served
Deign  of  volunteers  in  the  war  of  1812-'15.
From  [881  till  1884  he  was  sheriff  of  Dauphin
county.  He  removed  to  Pittsburg  in  18i{0,  and
resided  there  until  his  death.

8LENDT,  John, clergyman,  i>.  in  Londonderry.

Ireland.  24  June.  1755;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,4
lSv'i'J.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  where,  after  studying  theology,  he  was
ordained.  He  accepted  a  call  from  the  church  in
Londonderry,  and  remained  there  until  he  was
exiled  during  the  Irish  insurrection  of  1798,  in
which  he  protested  against  the  aggressive  measures
of  the  government,  ami  rendered  himself  obnoxious
to  the  nobility.  He  arrived  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  in
1799.  and  afterward  supplied  t he  congregations  of
Staunton  and  Bethel,  Augusta  co.,  Va.,  for  nearly
two  years.  He  was  invited  by  President  Jefferson
to  !»•  his  Sliest  in  Washington,  and  during  his  visit
delivered  a  discourse  in  thecapitol.  In  1803-'30  he
was  pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  in  Balti-
more. Md.  In  1806  he  served  as  chaplain  of  the
0. S.  house  of  representatives,  and  in  1815  and  1810
of  the  senate.  In  1881  the  I'niversity  of  Maryland
gave  him  the  elegies,  of  I>.  D.  He  published  an
'•Oration  in  Commemoration  of  Washington."  de-
livered in  Staunton  in  1800  (re-published.  1K15).

GLENDT,  William  Marshall,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Virginia  in  lsni  ;  d.  in  Baltimore.  Md..  HI  July,

1H?:{. lie  was  appointed  midshipman  in  1NI8 m-

missioncd  lieutenant  in  1H27.  and  served  succes-
sively with  the  Brazil  and  Pacific  squadrons.  In
1847  he  was  made  commander,  and  svrved  in  the
Mediterranean  foreighteen  months.  Subsequently
he  commanded  in  the  Hast  Indus.  In  is."i."»  he  was
made  captain,  and  in  1801-'2  served  as  senior  officer
on  the  coast  of  Africa.  Up  was  promote*!  to  the
rank  of  commodore  in  1888, and  in  the  following
year  was  made  print  commissioner  in  Washington,
1>.  ('.  He  served  >ix  months  as  Ughthooee  fa>
.  and  in  1H<>T>  retinal  from  active  service.

6LENN,  James,  governor  of  Booth  Carolina

from  1744  till  1755,  Toward  the  end  of  his  admin-
istration he  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  Cherokees
in  their  own  country.  By  this  action  a  large  extent
of  territory  was  Ceded  to  the  king,  which  009*
bibnted  largely  to  the  interest  and  safety  of  the
colonv.  He  published  "A  Description  of  South
Carolina "'  ( London.  I7»ii».

BLENTWORTH, George, physician, b. in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  22  July.  17:5.*):  d.  there,  I
1793. lie  was graduated at the I'niversity of


Edinburgh  in  1MB  During  the  last  French  war
in  America  he  was  a  surgeon  in  the  British  army.
In  1777  he  served  as  mrgeOB  Of  it  regiment,  ami
afterward  was  appointed  senior  surgeon  in  the  con-
tinental army,  and  became  director-general  of  hos-
pitals tor  the  middle  division.

GLIDDKN.  Oeerge  Dana  Hoard  man,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Ellsworth.  Me..  IB  April.  IM4td.il
<  ambridge,  Mass.,  25  Jan.,  1KN5.  He  was  graduated
at  the  l.S.  naval  academy  in  1888,  and  in  the  same
year  was  made  ensign.  His  first  year  of  nt
whs  | Missed  on  the  •'.Seminole,"  of  the  Western  (Julf
blockading  squadron.  He  took  |wirt  in  the  l.altle
Of  Mobile  Bay.  5  Aug.,  1804.  where  he  received  the
highest  commendations  from  his  commanding
officer.  From  lH«;r,  till  18t>7  he  serfed  on  the
•'Wyoming,"  of  the  Fast  India  squadron.  He
WW  appointed  master  in  1888,  lieutenant  in  If
lieutenant-commander  in  1H(»H.  und  commander  in
1KM:{.  He  was  engaged  with  the  Asiatic  squadron
from  18(»7till  1888,  when  he  was  stationed  at  the
Naval  academy. In  1870 and  1N71  he  commanded

the  "  Teniicss,.,.  " J),.  s,.rVed  with  tl Wachu-

iett,"  of  the  Bnropean  Beet,  from  in72  till  ih~4,

and  with  the  "Omaha,"  of  the  Pacific  fleet,  from
1875  till  1H77.  Hfl  was  on  duty  at  the  Boston
navy-yard  in  1*78.  His  last  service  was  in  Asiatic
waters,  where  he  commanded  the  "  Palos,"  from
which  he  was  detached  in  18M4.

GLIDDON,  George  Kohins.  arohawlogiet,  b.
in  Devonshire,  England,  in  1809;  d.  in  Panama,
16  Nov.,  1857.  At  an  early  age  he  went  to  Alex-
andria, where  his  father  was  a  merchant,  and
also  F.  S.  consul.  For  nearly  twenty-three  years
he  resided  in  Egypt,  and  during  a  great  part  of
that  time  served  as  l'.  S.  vice-consul.  He  \isjted
the  Tinted  States,  and  lectured  in  Boston,  New
York,  and  Philadelphia  on  Egyptian  antiquities.
He  was  agent  for  the  Honduras  Into  roccanic  rail-
way at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  wrote  ••  A  Me-
moir on  the  Cotton  of  Egypt  "(Ixwdon,  1841);  "  An
Appeal  to  the  Antiquaries  of  Europe  OO  the  De-
struction of  the  Monuments  of  Fgypt"  (1841);
••  Discourses  on  Egyptian  Archa-ology "  (1K41);
"Ancient  Fgypt"  0850;  new  ed..  1808);  "Typei
of  Mankind."  written  in  conjunction  with  Dr.
Josiah  ('.  Nott.  which  contained  contributions
from  Agassiz  and  Dr.  Samuel  Q.  Morton  (Phila-
delphia, 1854);  and  "Indigenous  Ibices  of  the
Earth."  with  Dr.  Nott  and  others  (1857).

GLISAN.  Rodney,  physician,  b.  in  Linganore,
Frederick  co..  Mil..  29  Jan..  1*27.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  the  medical  department  of  the  I'niversity
of  Maryland  in  ls4i».  After  practising  for  a  year
in  Baltimore,  he  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon
in  the  U.  8,  army,  and  engaged  as  medical  offi-
cer from  1S.")()  till  188L  He  served  five  years  on
the  plains,  and  six  years  in  Oregon  during  the
Indian  wars,  from  1*.V>  till  1881,  when  he  resigned
his  commission.  After  practising  a  year  in  San
Francisco,  he  settled  in  Portland.  Oregon.  He
was  president  of  the  Multnomah  county  medical
society  in  1872  ami  1878,  and  of  the  Oregon  state
medical  society  in  ls7">  '»'.,  and  has  |>een  for  several
years  a  member  Of  the  American  medical  associ-
ation. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  7th  International
medical  IMHISIBSS,  held  in  London  in  1SH1.  and  a
member  Of  the  8th  International  medical  congress,
held  in  Washington,  D.  ('.,  in  18H7.  Be  is  now
(1HM7)  emeritus  professor  of  obstetrics  and  diseases
of  women  and  children  in  the  medical  department
of  Willamette  university.  Amoiii;  his  notable
onees  were  the  first  amputations  of  the  shoulder
and  thigh,  and  theSBOOnd  Operation  for  strangu-
lated inguinal  hernia  ever  jH-rfonned  on  the  Pacific


GLLSSON


GLOVER


coast  north  of  San  Francisco.  He  has  travelled
throughout  the  United  States,  British  and  Central
America,  ami  s|>ent  two  years  in  Europe.  He  lias
written  numerous  articles  upon  medical  subjects,
published  in  the  "  0.8. Army  Statistics "(1*50 and
n  I  he  "  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sci-
'il805-'78  and  18H0),  and  in  Krichsen's  "Col-
lection of  Medical  Rhymes  "  (( 'hieago.  1H84).  He
has  also  published  a  "Journal  of  Army  Life"
(San  Francisco.  1874);  a  "Text-Book  of  Modern
Midwifery"  (Philadelphia.  1881);  and  "Two
Years  in  Europe  "  (New  York.  1887).

GLISSON,  Oliver  S.,  naval  ..nicer.  b.  in  Ohio.
18  Jan..  1809 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Ph..  20  Nov.,  1890.
He  was  made  midshipman,  became  lieutenant  in
1837,  and  commanded^  the  sloop  "Reefer"  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  served  in  the  navy-yard  si
Norfolk,  Ya.,  from  1848  till  1850,  when  he  was  on
special  duty.  He  was  attached  to  the  steam  frig-
ale  •Powhatan,"  of  the  East  India  squadron,  in
1852.  and  from  1*."):;  till  1N.V>  was  on  the  Japan  ex-
pedition, being  in  Japan  when  the  first  treaty  was
made  by  Com.  Perry.  He  was  appointed  com-
mander, and  assigned  to  the  steamer  "Mount
Vernon  "  in  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron in  1801,  became  captain  in  1802,  and  while  in
the  "  Mount  Vernon  "  saved  the  transport  "  Mis-
sissippi," which  was  bound  to  New  Orleans  with
1,500  men  of  Gen.  Butler's  expedition.  It  was
supposed  that  she  was  intentionally  run  upon  the
Frying-pan  shoal.  He  also  burned  a  light-boat
under  the  guns  of  Fort  Caswell,  while  on  the  block-
ade of  Wilmington,  N.  C.  He  commanded  the
steam  sloops  "Iroquois"  and  "Mohican"  in  1802,
and  the  steamer  "Santiago  de  Cuba"  in  1804-'5.
He  was  present  in  the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,
December,  1804,  and  January,  1805,  and  being
recommended  for  promotion  by  Admiral  Porter
for  covering  the  landing  of  the  troops  and  carry-
ing the  division  into  action.  He  became  commodore
in  1800.  and  commanded  the  station  at  League
Island.  Pa.,  from  1807  till  1870,  when  he  was  ap-

g tinted  rear-admiral  and  ordered  to  command  the
uropean  fleet. He  was  retired  18  Jan.,  1871.

GLOSSBRENNER,  John  Jacob,  Moravian
bishop,  b.  in  Hagerstown,  Md.,  24  Julv,  1813;  d.
in  Churchville,  Augusta  co.,  Va.,  7  Jan.,  1887.
After  receiving  a  common -school  education,  he
was  apprenticed  to  a  silversmith.  In  1830  he  was
converted  and  began  to  read  theological  books.
He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Virginia  annual
conference  in  1833,  and  labored  as  itinerant  mis-
sionary, circuit  preacher,  and  presiding  elder  till
May.  1849,  when  he  was  first  elected  bishop  of  the
United  Brethren  in  Christ.  He  was  re-elected  for
the  quadrennial  terms,  and,  when  no  longer  able  to
render  active  service,  was  appointed  bishop  emeri-
tus, May,  1885.  He  visited  conferences  on  the
Pacific  coast  in  the  time  of  pioneer  settlement,  and
was  active  in  promoting  the  interests  of  his
church.  Previous  to  his  death  he  was  senior  bish-
op, without  any  assigned  district  of  labor.  Sev-
eral of  his  occasional  sermons  have  been  published
in  the  denominational  journal,  "  The  Telescope,"
Dayton,  Ohio.  The  degree  of  1).  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Lebanon  Valley  college  in  1884.

GLOVER,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  5
Nov.,  1732;  d.  in  Marblehead.  Mass..  30  Jan..  1797.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  raised  1,000
men  and  joined  the  army  at  Cambridge,  where  he
was  of  great  Berries  in  organising  and  disciplining
troops.  He  commanded  the  21st  regiment,  aft cr-
wanl  the  14th.  which  was  one  of  the  first,  as  well
as  the  best,  in  the  continental  army.  Being  com-
posed almost  entirely  of  fishermen,  it  was  called


Js&yt^ti


f-t^n,


the  "amphibiou-.  regiment."  On  the  retreat  from
Long  Islam!  it .manned  the  boats  and  CTOSDtid  thfl
entire  army  in  safety.  These  troops  also  manned
the  boats  and  led  the  advance  over  the  I  »•
on  the  night  In-fore  the  victory  at  Trenton.  Col.
Clover  partici-

Keted m the
atlle  of Still-
water, and  was

with  Washing-
ton at  Val  ley-
Forge. Be  was

appointed  brig-
adier -  general
on  21  Feb.,
1777,  and  in
July  of  that
year  joined
Gen.  Schuyler.
He  served  in
the  campaign
against  Bur-
goyne.and  con-
ducted the  pris-
oners to  Cam-
bridge. In
1778  he  joined
Greene's  divis-
ion in  New  Jer-
sey, signed  the  protest  against  D'Estaing,  and  was
detached  to  Rhode  Island  under  Sullivan.  He  was
ordered  to  Massachusetts  in  1780  to  superintend
the  drafts  from  that  state.  He  was  a  member  of
the  court  of  inquiry  concerning  Major  Andre,  which
assembled  on  29  Sept.,  1780.  Glover  was  diminu-
tive in  person,  active  and  energetic,  and  poi
considerable  military  ability.  See  a  memoir  of
him  bv  William  P.  Upham  (Salem,  Mass.,  1803).

GLOVER,  Sir  John  Haw  ley,  governor  of  New-
foundland, b.  in  1829;  d.  in  England,  30  Sept.,
1885.  He  entered  the  navy  at  an  early  age,  and
was  made  a  lieutenant  in  1851.  He  served  in  the
Baltic  in  1854,  was  given  command  of  the  "  Otter."
a  steam  vessel,  in  1855,  and  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  commander  in  November,  1862.  After  a
few  years'  cruising  on  the  African  coast,  he  became
governor  of  Lagos,  an  island  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,
which  office  he  administered  until  he  resigned  in
1872.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  a  special  commis-
sioner to  the  friendly  native  chiefs  in  the  British
settlements  on  the  Gold  Coast,  and  performed  his
mission  so  successfully  that,  on  his  return  to  Eng-
land, he  received  the  thanks  of  parliament  and  the
honor  of  knighthood.  He  was  appointed  governor
of  Newfoundland  in  1870,  and  administered  this
office  till  June,  1881,  when  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  the  Leeward  islands.  He  was  again  gov-
ern o'r  of  Newfoundland  from  1883  until  ins  death.

GLOVER,  Joseph,  physician,  b.  about  1780;  d.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  about  1840.  He  was  graduated
in  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  18(H),  and  in  that  year  became  a
member  of  the  medical  society  of  South  Carolina.
He  was  active  in  establishing  a  free  dispensary  in
1801,  and  gave  his  services  gratuitously  to  the  poor,
receiving  a  vote  of  thanks  from  the  trust
1805.  Among  his  suggestions  which  the  medical
society  made  to  the  city  council  was  that  of  plant-
ing; trees,  the  sanitary  advantages  of  which  he
showed  in  his  report  in  1808.  Dr.  Glover  was  noted
for  fearlessness  and  skill  as  a  surgeon.  He  sue*
eessfully  performed  lithotomy,  removed  a  portion
of  the  spleen  and  the  omentum,  and  was  one  of
the  first  in  this  country  to  revive  the  operation  of
tapping  the  head  for  hydrocephalus. A  di


0U)\  KB


UODDAKD


091


of  the  caw  was  published  in  pamphlet-form

and  whs  widely  quoted.

(.1  01  I  i:.  n  llllaa rernor  of  NortJ

him,  1 1.  about  h»7<». Iii  1703  Thomas  Cary  obtained

un mission  us  deputy-governor  "f  North  OaTO-

I  inn. While  collector  of  the  rriii-||i.  Iiu«!  neglected

ti>  settle  his  accounts,  and the lords proprietors.

disapproving  of  his  election  t>>  this  office,  directed
their  deputies  to  appoinl  one  of  t  h«-ir  number  in  his
place.  Their  choice  Ml  upon  William  Glover.  Fur
a  time  Cart  yielded  to  this  change,  boi  iflwtml
l  tin-  reoorda  of  the  province,  tad  proclaimed
Idmeelf  gorernor. This  |,-<1 to  anarchy, us  the  «■> .1<>-

ny was s4M.n divided Into fait  ions, the church,

ruvalisis,  ami  adherent*  <>f  the  proprietaries  being
in  (ilovi-r's  division,  ami  tin-  party  swayed  by  demo-
cratic instincts  belonging  to  thai  of  Gary.  From
KiMi  [ill  1710 eaeb party  hail its  own  government,

ami  eleeted  Ha  own  council. Irritated  by  the  per*

•ions  nf  Carv.  the  partisans  of  Glovef  at  last
sought  refuge  In  Virginia.

t.l  I  CK.  James  I  raser,  lawyer,  b.  in  Niagara
Falls,  N.  v..  98  April,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at
OomeU  in  ih?4.  ami  then  studied  law,  whieh  kc
m»w  (1MH?)  practises  in  Buffalo,  acting  as  attorney
for  the  Kea  York  Central  ami  Hudson  River  rail-
roail  company  ami  other  corporations.  Mr.  (iliuk
has  ban  prominent  in  politics,  ami  holds  the  office
of  president  of  the  Central  Republican  club  of  Krie
county,  liis  work  in  perfecting  the  organization
of  his  party  in  Buffalo  has  attracted  attention
throughout  the  United  States.  He  is  curator  of
the  Buffalo  library,  and  has  presented  that  library
with  one  of  the  most  valuable  collections  of  auto-
graphs, manuscripts,  and  letters  in  the  I'nited
States.  It  includes  complete  booh  manuscripts  of
ItHJ  eminent  American  and  English  authors;  let-
ters, addresses,  essays,  and  other  autograph  frag-
ments (in  many  cases  a  large  nutnlx-r  of  an  author's
manuscripts)  of  about  100  eminent  American  men
and  women  of  letters;  of  eighty-eight  eminent  Eng-
lish men  and  women;  a  small  collection  of  manu-
scripts of  French,  German,  and  other  continental
authors;  Latin  missals  of  the  loth  century.  Persian
scripts,  and  many  American  and  English  historical
documents,  seals,  and  other  relics.  Mr.  (ili'ick  is  also
a  trustee  of  Cornell,  a  trustee  of  the  Buffalo  acad-
emy of  s, ■ii-nees.  ami  vice-president  of  the  State  liar
association.  Among  his  publie  addresses  are  the
following:  "The  Position  of  the  Scholar  in  Poli-
tics,'' delivered  before  the  Cornell  alumni  in  1877;
"The  Power  and  Influence  of  Music,"at  the  laying
of  the  corner-stone  of  the  new  Music  hall  in  Uuf-
falo;  and  "The  BeeponsibUithw and  Bights  of  the
Medical  Profession,'  at  the  commencement  of  the
University  of  Buffalo,

(iLVNN.  James,  nival  officer,  b.  alsmt  1800;  d.
18  May.  1871.  lie  entered  the  U.S.  navy,  4  March,
1815,  was  made  lieutenant.  18  Jan.,  1885, command-
er, h  Sept.,  1*41,  and  served  on  the  California
coast  during  the  Mexican  war.  In  command  of  the
: -of- war  "Preble,"  14  guns,  he  was  sent  to
China.  From  the  Dutch  consul  at  Canton,  Com.
nger  learned  of  the  imprisonment  at  Naga-
saki "t  eighteen  American  Bailors,  wreaked  in  Yeeo,
r>  June,  i*4<;.  Despite  imperfect  charts  ami  un-
known seas,  end  the  tad  that  Coin.  Biddle,  wit  h  t  he
\  ship  of  the  line  " Columbus "  and  the  sloop
*  Vii.ceniies."  had  been  repelled  but  a  few  months
before  in  the  Bay  of  Vedo.  Glynn  faced  the  mutheast
monsoon, and  arrived  in  Nagasaki  harbor,  17  April.
:ing  through  the  cordon  of  boats,  he  anchored
under  the  batteries  within  a  mile  of  the  city,  and,
when  boarded  by  interpreters,  demanded  the  re-
lease within two  days  ,,f the American  seamen.


and,  in  the  face  of  military  menace  and  prepara-
tions.  M I his  claim. After parley -

ciiscs,  the  wimie  |»rty  of  aigheeao  was  dell

on  the  deck  of  the  -  Preble  "  ,„i  the  86th. The  llrst

result of  this  voyage was  a  detailed  and formal

proposition  made  bj  Glynn  to  the  c.  s.  sjovermmeatl

,  to  attempt  the  peaceful  owning <>f  Japan  by  diplo-
macy, lacked  bj  a  show  of  force.  Tin-  expedition,
as  finally  organized,  grew  to  the  proiMirtions  of  a
fleet,  the  command  of  which  was  claimed  l»y  offi.
f  highest  rank— first  by  Aulick,  and  then  by
Perry.  Other  mesttaof  tins  episode  were  prepa-
ration of  the  .lapainse  mind  for  Perry,  the  training
of  the  interpreter Moriyama YeOOSuke, who did

giHMl  seislos  in iNoi,  and  of  the  hjnrogiiphar.

Lieut.  Silas  Bent,  the  only  officer  in  Perry's  il.-.-t
conversant  with  Japanese  waters,  who,  in  a  pa|>er
read  lie  fore  the  American  geographical  socielv  in
1858,  first  clearly  defined  and  described  the  Kuro
Shiwo,  "Dark  Stream."  or  Oulf  Stream  of  the
Pacific  ntwin Glynn  was  nuule  a  captain  in  If

(..MKINKR,  John,  clergyman,  h.  in  Baernau,
Bavaria.  5  Dec.,  1847.  Be  came  with  his  parents,
in  lsp».  to  Milwaukee.  Wis.,  entered  the  theologi-
cal seminary  there  in  1800,  and  was  ordained  pi
H»  June.  INTO.  Mr  was  pastor  of  various  congrega-
tions up  to  lN?t>.  at  tlie  same  time  editing  the
••Catholic  Columbian."  and  Contributing  frequent-
ly to  German  and  English  Soman  Catholic  jour-
nals. He  was  apiMiinted  professor  of  ecclesiastical
history  and  homiletiis  in  the  seminary  of  St.  Fran-
cis of  Sales.  Milwaukee,  in  1870,  which  chair  he  still
holds  (1867}  He  has  published  "  Die  katholische
Kirche  in  den  Ycreinigten  Staaten  "  (Milwaukee,
1v7-"m:  "Sind  wir  dem  Weltcnde  nahe  f"  (Detroit.
1877);  "Modem  Scientific  VieWI  and  Christian
Doctrines  compared"  (Milwaukee,  1884);  "The
Spirit!  of  Darkness  and  their  Manifestations  on
Earth.  <>r  Ancient  and  Modern  Spiritualism  "(1886):
and  "The  Church  and  the  Various  Nationalities  of
the  United  States"  (1887).

U0DDAR1),  Calvin,  jurist,  b.  in  Shrewsbury,
Mass.,  17  July.  17»>s:  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn..  2  May,
1848.  lie  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  I*
studied  law  with  Oliver  Ellsworth,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  17!KI.  and  settled  in  Plainfield,  Conn.
In  1791  he  was  seal  to  the  state  legislature,  and,
with  re-elections,  continued  to  serve  until  1801,
being  speaker  during  the  last  three  years.  He  was
then  elected  to  congress  from  Connecticut,  and
held  his  seat  for  two  terms— from  7  Dec..  1801,  till
:{  March.  1805,  He  removed  to  Norwich  m  II
and  was  a  member  of  the  state  executive  council
from  1808  till  lNlo.  lb-  was  a  presidential  elector
in  1818,  and  a  delegate  to  the  Hartford  convention
in  1814,  From  1815  till  1N18  he  was  judge  of  the
BiBpeiioi  court  of  Connecticut.  Subsequently,  for
five  yean,  he  held  the  office  of  district  attorney

for  the  county  of  New  London,  and  for  seventeen
wars  was  mavor  of  Norwich.

i.olMi  \l!l>.  Calvin Luther, inventor, b.  in
Oovington,  N.  V.,  88  Jan..  1880, Be  was  nadn-

ated at  Vale in 1845,  after which he  taught the

classics  in  New  York  for  a  year.  From  1848  till
1854  he  was  engaged  as  a  clerk,  and  then  Ugan
business  on  his  own  account.  His  attention  BSSflSj
to  have  been  called  at  once  to  the  necessity  of
thoroughly  cleansing  wool  in  the  earliest  stages  of
its  manufacture,  in  order  t,.  secure  perfection  in
the  finished  product,  and  to  this  end  he  arranged
a  burring  picker.  Suliscipictitly  he  patented  solid
packing  barring  machines,  and  feed-rolls  as  an
attachment  for  the  earding-machine,  and  has
since  darised  several  valuable  improvements  for
this  machine. The  steel ring feed-rolls,  with ad-


068


(inDDAKD


•  ioDFKKY


instable  stands  and  spring  boxes,  were  also  pat-
eutcd  by  him.  For  his  inventions  he  has  been
Imnoivd'with  many  medals,  including  gold  medal!
from  the  world's  fair  held  in  London  in  1862  and
that  in  Paris  in  1M67.  Bishop,  in  his  "  American
Manufactures."  savs  of  Mr.  Goddard:  "Probably
no  man  in  the  United  States  has  labored  more
zealouslv  and  effectively  to  place  American  wool-
len L,'""<is  <>n  an  equality  with  those  of  Europe."

GO  1>I>AKD.  Josiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wendell,
MMfc,  J7  Oct..  1818;  d.  in  Ningpo,  China,  4  Sept.,
is.")  J.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1835.  and  at
the  Newton  theological  institution  in  1838,  was  ap-
pointed a  missionary  to  the  Chinese  in  Siam,  and
arrived  in  Singapore  in  June,  1839.  His  labors
were  begun  in  Bangkok,  Siam,  in  1840.  In  1848
he  removed  to  Ningpo,  where  he  remained  until
his  death,  preaching  and  working  with  energy,
although  in  failing  health.  He  prepared  several
tracts,  an  English  and  Chinese  vocabulary,  and  a
translation  of  the  New  Testament  into  Chinese.

GODDARD,  Paul  Beck,  physician,  b.  in  Balti-
more, 26  Jan.,  1811;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8
Jul  v.  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington  col-
lege in  1828,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1832,  and  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  followed  his  profession.
Dr.  Goduard  acquired  reputation  through  his  work
as  an  editor  of  medical  books.  These  include  a  se-
ries of  twelve  plates  "On  the  Arteries,"  and  a  simi-
lar series  "On  the  Nerves"  (Philadelphia);  with
Joseph  E.  Parker,  "  The  Anatomy,  Physiology,  and
Pathology  of  the  Human  Teeth,  with  the  most
Approved  Methods  of  Treatment"  (Philadelphia,
1844) ;  Bloreau's  "  Practical  Treatise  on  Midwifery  "
(1844) ;  the  iconographic  portion  of  Bayer's  "  Theo-
retical and  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of
the  Skin"  (1845);  Ash  well's  "  Practical  Treatise  on
the  Diseases  peculiar  to  Women"  (1848);  Philip
Rieord's  "Illustrations  of  Syphilitic  Diseases
(1851);  Wilson's  "System  of  Human  Anatomy,
General  and  Special"  (1851);  and  Wilson's  "  Dis-
sector, or  Practical  and  Surgical  Anatomv"  (1851).

GODDARD,  William,  printer,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  in  1740;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  23
Dec,  1817.  He  established  the  first  printing-press
at  Providence  on  20  Oct.,  1762,  where  he  also  be-
gan printing  the  "  Gazette." He  soon  afterward

became  one  of  the

Sublishers  of  the
few  York  "  Gazette
and  Postboy,"  and
in  1766  removed  to
Philadelphia,  where,
with  Galloway  and
Wharton,  he  pub-
lished the  "Penn-
sylvania Chronicle."
In  1773  he  went  to
Baltimore  and  estab-
lished the  "  Mary-
land Journal."  He
was  active  in  organ-
izing the  post-office,
and  was  appointed
surveyor  of  roads
and  comptroller  in
1775.  He  sold  his
press  in  1792,  and
retired  to  a  farm  in  Johnston,  R.  I.,  but  afterward
removed  to  Providence.  He  was  a  Whig  in  the
Revolution.  His  friend,  Gen.  Charles  Lee  (who
was  the  writer  of  the  "Queries"  in  the  "Journal."
which  caused  Goddard  trouble  with  the  Whig  club
in  1779).  bequeathed  him  a  portion  of  his  exten-


J^j+jS*


sive  landed  estate  in  Virginia.  He  published  &
"History  of  the  IVnusvlvania  Chronicle"
— His  son,  William  Giles,  educator,  b.  in  John-
ston, R.  I.,  2  Jan.,  1794  ;  d.  in  Providence,  16  Feb.,
1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1812,  WM
professor  of  moral  philosophy  and  metaphysics
there  in  1825-'34.  and  of  rhetoric  and  belles-lc'ttres
in  1834-'42.  He  was  editor  and  proprietor  of  the
"  Rhode  Island  American,"  Providence,  in  1814-'25.
He  had  been  a  member  of  the  Rhode  Island  legis-
lature. His  writings  were  edited  by  his  son,  1  •'.  W.
Goddard  (2  vols.,  8vo,  Providence,  1870).

GODDU,  J.  H.,  Canadian  patriot,  b.  in  St.
Denis,  Canada,  in  1796;  d.  there  in  1882.  At  tin-
age  of  sixteen  he  served  in  the  Canadian  volt  incurs
during  the  war  of  1812,  rose  to  the  rank  of  major
and  distinguished  himself  at  the  battles  of  Laoolk
and  Chateaugay.  He  was  afterward  present  at  the
naval  engagement  of  Plattsburg,  where  he  com-
manded a  gun-boat.  He  then  settled  on  a  farm.
which  was  granted  him  by  the  government  as  a  re-
ward for  his  services,  in  the  township  of  Weedon,
but  subsequently  removed  to  St.  Cesaire.  In  1837
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Canadian  agitation.
He  was  present.  23  Oct.,  1837,  at  the  assembly  of
the  six  confederate  counties,  and  was  one  of  the
first  to  take  up  arms ;  named  commander  of  the
insurgents  of  St.  Cesaire,  and  reported  at  the  head
of  over  a  hundred  men  at  St.  Mathias.  The  de-
feat of  the  Canadians  at  St.  Charles  convinced  him
that  the  struggle  was  hopeless,  and  he  led  his  men
back  to  St.  Cesaire,  and  was  subsequently  arrested.
He  was  conducted  to  Montreal  and  imprisoned
till  2  July,  1838,  when,  with  six  others,  he  entered
into  an  agreement  with  Lord  Durham  to  plead
guilty  of  high  treason.  He  was  exiled  to  the  Ber-
mudas during  the  pleasure  of  the  queen  of  Eng-
land ;  but  the  proclamation  of  the  governor-general
exiling  British  subjects  without  trial  was  annulled.
Goddu  came  to  the  United  States,  and  after  some
time  was  allowed  to  return  to  Canada.

GODEY,  Louis  Antoine,  publisher,  b.  in  New
York  citv,  6  June,  1804 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  29  Nov.,
1878.  lie  was  educated  in  New  York,  where  for
many  years  he  kept  a  book-store  and  circulating
library.  Removing  to  Philadelphia,  he  in  1830
founded  "  Godey's  Lady's  Book,"  the  first  periodi-
cal of  the  kind  published,  which  was  continued  by
him  with  great  success  until  1877,  when  it  was
sold  to  a  stock  company.  On  retiring  from  the
editorship  and  proprietorship  of  the  magazine,
Mr.  Godey  remarked  that  not  an  immoral  thought
or  profane  word  could  be  found  in  its  pages  during
the  entire  period  of  his  connection  with  it.  He
also  published  the  "  Daily  Chronicle  "  newspaper,
"  Jarvis's  Musical  Library,"  and  "  Young  People's
Book."  Mr.  Godey  left  a  fortune  of  over  f  1,000,000,
acquired  entirely  from  his  publications.

GODFREY,  "Thomas,  mathematician,  b.  in
Bristol,  Pa.,  in  1704;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  Decem-
ber, 1749.  He  followed  the  trade  of  a  glazier  in  the
metropolis,  and,  having  a  fondness  for  mathemati-
cal studies,  mastered  such  books  as  he  met  with,
subsequently  acquiring  Latin,  that  he  might  be-
come familiar  with  the  mathematical  works  in
that  language.  Having  obtained  a  copy  of  New-
ton's "  Principia,"  he  described  an  improvement
he  had  made  in  Davis's  quadrant  to  James  1
who  was  so  impressed  that  he  at  once  addressed  a
letter  to  Edmund  Halley  in  England,  giving  a  full
description  of  the  construction  and  uses  of  God-
frey's instrument.  Halley  appeal's  to  have  ignored
this  communication,  and,  after  a  year  and  a  half
had  elapsed,  Logan  transmitted  a  copy  of  the  in-
vention to  Peter  Collinson,  with  a  request  that  it


GODIN


(JOD1N


860


be  communicated t<>  tin- IC>\«I ■  Mean-

while. John Hadley, then  »  t of the

iv.  had  present**!  n  paper  in  May.  I  TBI,  which
hail  bsSB  inserted  in  the  "  Philosophical  Trnn-ju-
<>f  i hut  year.  describing  a  reflecting  qoad-
rant  of  the  name  character,  whieh  he  claiine.l  M  his
own.  It  waif  decided  that  both  were  entitled  to
the  honor  of  the  inveniion.  although  statements
wore  Blade  showing  how  the  invention  of  Godfrey
might  have  Income  known  to  I  ladles.  The  society
sent  to  Godfrey,  as  his  reward,  honanhoM  furni-
ture to  the  value  of  fiSOO,  instead  of  money,  on  ac-
count of  his  habit*  of  intemperance.  Benjamin
Franklin  resided  in  the  BMM  BOOH  with  Godfrey,
and  savs  that,  like  most  great  mathematicians
whom  he  had  met.  he  was  not  a  pleasant  nun-
panion.  since he  expected universal precision in

fining  said,  and  was  perpetually  denying  or
distinguishing  on  trifles,  to  the  diatnifaaoceof  all
conversation.— His  son. Thomas,  |H>et.  b.  in  Phila
delpbia,  Pa»,  4  1  >.*<•..  !?:$(»;  d.  near  Wilmington,

N.  C,  :i  Aug..  IHM,  received  a  fair  education  in  his
mother-tongue,  and  was  apprenticed  to  a  watch-
maker. In  1786  he  obtained  ■  lieutenant's  com-
mission in  the  provincial  forces  raised  for  an  ex-
pedition  againsl  Fort  Poqneene.  Ob  the  diebaaeV
ing  of  the  troops,  he  went  t<>  N'oilh  Carolina  and
pted  an  appointment  of  purchasing  agent,  re-
maining so  oeonpied  for  three  years.  His  em-
ployer dying,  he  returned  to  Philadelphia,  and
then  sailed  to  New  Providence  as  a  ■npereatgO.
Be  set  out  to  retuni  by  way  of  North  Carolina,  but
contracted  a  fever,  from  the  effects  of  which  he
died. While in North Carolina he wrote the

tragedy  of  -The  Prince  of  Parthia,"  which  was
offenii  to  a  company  | nr forming  in  Philadelphia
in  17.7.I.  This  is  regarded  as  the  first  dramatic
work  written  in  this  country.  Mis  early  contribu-
tions to  the  "  American  Magazine,"  published  in
Philadelphia,  showed  poatio  talent,  and  he  subse-
quently published  "The  Court  of  Fancy,  a  Poem"
(Philadelphia,  l ?<»:{).  modelled  somewhat  upon
Chaucer's  "House  of  Fame."  A  volume  of  his
poems,  with  an  "  Account  of  T.  Godfrey,''  was  pub-
lished by  his  friend,  Nathaniel  Fvans.  in  1 707.

(ill DIN.  Louis  (go-deen),  French  astronomer.
b.  in  Paris,  96  Feb.,  l?<>4:  d.  in  Cadiz.  Spain,  ll
Spt.,  1T(K».  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
Louis  le  Grand,  and  studied  astronomy  under
Delisle.  His  astronomical  tables  (1 724)  pave  him
reputation,  and  the  academy  elected  him  a  immi-
sionary  member.  He  was  commissioned  to  write  a
continuation  of  the  history  of  the  academy,  left  un-
completed by  Fontanelle,  and  was  also  authorized
t<>  submit  to  the  minister.  Cardinal  Fleurv.  the  heal
means  of  discovering  the  truth  in  regard  to  the  fig-
ure of  the  earth,  and  proposed  tending  expedition!
to  the  equator  and  the  jx>lar  sea.  The  minister  ap-
proved the  plan  and  appropriated  the  necessary
means,  the  academy  designating  La  Condamine.
Bouguer,  and  (lodin  to  go  to  Peru  in  17:14.  The
lition  sailed  from  Roehelle,  1<>  May,  I7:>r>.
touched  at  Cadiz  to  take  two  naval  lieutenants,
whopi  Philip  V.  had  ordered  to  accompany  it.  and
eeded  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  they  remained
months  to  take  observations.  They  arrived  in
Quito  in  February,  I7:!<i.  immediately  crossed  the
Andes  to  establish  their  stations  in  the  interior,
and  remained  two  years.  When  they  had  finished
their  task  in  17:?*.  at  the  invitation  of  the  viceroy
of  Peru,  Godin  accepted  the  chair  of  mathematics
in  Limn,  where  be  al stabliahed  a  oonrse  of  as-
tronomical lectures.  When  in  1746  an  earthquake
i  the  greater  part  of  Lima,  he  took  valua-
ble seismological  observations,  assisted  the  suffer-


ind  BUhia  olans  by  the  us.- of  which  the  new
buildings  would  In-  levs  exposed  to  dancer  from  re.
netted  sh.Kks. In  17.11  he  returned  but

found  that  he  had  beta  nearly  forgotten,  ami  sn.
perseded  as  pensioner  of  the  academy;  and,  ■
fortune  had  been  lost  in  unfortunate  speculations,
he  accepted  the  presidency  of  the  college  for  mid-
shipmen in  Cadiz  in  178S.  During  the  earth<|iiake
of  Ushon.  1958,  which  was  distinctly  fell  at  Cadi/,
he  took  ol»scrvntions  and  did  much  to  allay  the  ap-

praheflsjona  of  the  public,  for  which  he  was  enno-
bled by  the  kfag  Of Spain. In  177!>  he  was  called

to  Paris  and  reinstated  as  pansioBary  BMSsbsr  of

the  academy;  but  be  died  OB  his  retuni  to  Cadiz.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Appendix  BOX  tables  astro-
nomiipies  de  Lahire  "  (Paris,  1784);  "  Ilistojre  as
(academic  des  sciences.  WHO  a  '<.»!»"  (11  vols..  i;
"  Im  coimnissarice  <les  temps"  (17W>-'H) ;  "  Kl  tem-
blor tie  tierra  de  Lima.  *us  BBBSBB,  efectos  y  B0B>
sccuencias  "  (Lima.  174H);  "  Curso  de  matematicas
para  el  BBOde  BdsdiseipBlOS''  1 1790);  "<  M.s.Tvations
astronomicpies  au  Perou "  V-i  vols..  Paris.  i;
•■  Des  tremhleinents  de  terre  en  general,  de  OMX
de  Lima  et  Lislxume  en  (utrticulicr "  (175:t):  and
■•  Les  iM>ss(>ssions  Kspaguoies  dam  I'AnsfiojBS  «lu
Sud;  le  Perou,  son  histoire,  ses  richesses.  et  maiirs
ile  ses  habitants "(1 7.")).—  His  cousin.  Jean  Godin
des  Oiionais,  French  naturalist,  b.  in  St.  Amand,
Cher.  France,  in  1712:  d.  there  in  1792,  end «rked
in  1765 With  the  expedition  for  measuring  a  dsgTM
on  the  equator.  To  be  distinguished  from  his  rela-
tive (Jodin.  he  added  to  his  surname  that  of  his
mother.  OdoneJa  When  the  coinmission  returned
to  France,  Qodin  des  Odotiais  Ixiaine  professor  of
astronomy  and  natural  science  at  the  College  of
Quito,  1 7:i9.  At  the  same  time  he  studied  the  In-
dian languages  and  the  floraof  Kcuador, and  when,
in  174;i.  a  marriage  with  an  heiress  gave  him  the
means,  he  rCBJgBOd  bis  chair  and  gave  his  whole
time  to  natural  science  and  the  Indian  language.
He  explored  Kcuiidor  and  the  northern  provinces
of  Peru,  and  collected  an  herbarium  containing
more  than  4.000  species  of  plants.  He  also  made
drawings  of  over  800species  of  animals.  Having  lost
the  greater  part  of  his  wife's  dowry  in  speculations,
he  resolved  to  try  his  fortune  in  Cayenne. where  he
arrived  in  May.  1750.  and  settled  on  the  banks  of
the  river  ()ya|»ok.  For  fifteen  years  he  explored
Cayenne  and  the  Brazilian  Guiana,  north  of  the
Amazon,  and  collected  nearly  7.<MMI  meoiea  of
plants.  From  17(m  till  177:J  he  explored  the  Ama-
zon. In  the  latter  year  he  finally  returned  to
France,  and  settled  on  his  estate  of  St.  Amand.
He  gave  his  l.otanical  collections  to  the  museum  of
natural  history,  where  they  are  still  preserved  In
1784  he  was  elected  a  member  Of  the  Academy  of
s,  ience,  and  he  labored  thenceforth  to  arrange  the
notes  taken  during  the  many  years  of  his  explora-
tions, and  published  "Flore  raisonnee  du  Perou.
comprenant  4.000  especes.  dont  plus  de  1.500  nou-
velles"  (<>  vols..  Paris.  177(i<  with  two  volumes  of
illustrations  containing  over  750  plates) ;  ••  I„es
plantes  de  la  Guyane  "  (1777) :  "  Panne  du  Perou  "
(4  vols.  177s.  with  two  volumes  of  illustrations);
"  Plan  de  navigation  libre  de  I'AflMtBOne,  dedic  au
Due  de  Choiseiil  "  (177»»:  "Flore  de  la  (iuyane,
explication  de  l'herbier  MBOBi  au  museum  d'his-
toire  naturelle"  (.">  vols..  177!»).  with  three  volumes
of  illustrations);  ••  Flore  de  L'ABMBOBe, explication.
etc."  (4  vols..  17S0.  with  one  volume  of  illustra-
tions); "(Jrammaire  dc  la  langue  Ouichua  on
[boss"  (1768);  u  Dicttennaira  do  la  langue  yui-
chua  "  1 1 7S'J  | :  "  V.xabulaire  des  dialectes  Indiens
de  la  Cuvaiie"  (17X1):  and  '•(Jrammaire  BOSB*
paroe des langues Indieiiues de l'Aincrique  du


1570


(inDKIN


liiiHON


Slid  "  (8  v..|-..  17*4).— His  wife,  Isabel,  b.  in  Ri<>-
bamlwi.  Peru,  in  1728;  d.  in  St.  Amand.  France,  mi

the  daughter  of  I >< •  1 1  Padro  Bmanoal  deGrandmai-

son,  wli<>  was  oortagidor of  OtabaJael  the  tim<'  <>f
bar  birth.  At  tin-  age  of  Bftaan  she  married  <»<mHh
deeOdonaia. When  her  husband  decided  in  1788

to  , atabUah  himself  OO  the  hanks  of  theOvajtok,  he
asked  for  passports  from  the  court  of  Portugal  to
enable  him  to  return  by  the  Napo  and  Amazon  for
his  family,  which  he  did  not  receive  for  some  years
afterward.  Kinallv  the  Portuguese  government
placed  a  vessel  at  his  dis|x>snl  in  17*>8,  but  as  he
wa>  about  to  embark  he  fell  sick,  and  employed  a
man  named  Orcasnval  to  act  in  his  liehalf.  In-
stead of  discharging  this  mission,  the  latter  re-
mained in  the  Portuguese  settlements  to  trade  on
his  own  account,  and  Madame  Godin,  guided  by
rumor,  finally  set  out  alone.  On  arriving  at  Canelos.
where  -he  was  to  embark,  she  found  it  deserted  on
account  of  the  small-pox.  The  thirty  Indians  com-
posing her  escort  had  successively  abandoned  her
on  the  route,  and  she  had  with  her  only  her  son,
her  two  brothers,  and  four  servants.  They  at-
tempted to  row  to  the  mission  of  Andoas,  about
450  miles,  from  which  she  could  easily  reach  the
Portuguese  transport,  but  lost  their  guide,  and
were  reduced  to  the  most  frightful  sufferings  in
the  desert.  At  the  end  of  three  days  they  all  died
except  Madame  (lodin.  who,  after  wandering  for
several  weeks  through  a  dense  wood,  was  taken  by
an  Indian  to  the  mission  at  Andoas.  All  attempts
to  find  Orcasaval  wore  unsuccessful,  and  so  she
never  profited  by  the  transport  which  the  Portu-
guese government  furnished  her.  She  had  still  to
travel  over  3,0(X)  miles  to  reach  her  husband,  and,
after  a  long  time  and  much  further  suffering,  she
arrived  at  Oyapok,  where  he  had  remained  several
years  waiting  for  his  wife.  Afterward  they  em-
barked for  France,  and  arrived  in  La  Rocheile,  26
May,  1773. The  rest  of  Madame  Godin's  life  was

Eassed  on  her  husband's  estate  at  St.  Amand  in
terry.  Prince  Charles  Bonaparte,  the  naturalist,
has  given  Ma<la me  Godin's  name  to  a  remarkable
species  of  South  American  birds,  the  "  Chanuepelia
Godinae,"  "  consecrated,"  he  says, "  to  the  memory,
which  can  never  be  too  much  honored,  of  Isabel
God  in  des  Odonais,  who,  alone  and  abandoned,
travelled  across  the  American  continent  in  its
greatest  width,  sustained  by  her  greatness  of  soul
and  her  martyrdom  to  duty."  See  her  life  by
Ferdinand  Denis,  based  on  family  documents,  in
the  **  Magasin  pittoresque  "  (1854),  and  "  Les  voy-
ages <lans  les  forets  de  la  Guyane,"  by  Malouet.

GODKIN,  Edwin  Lawrence,  journalist,  b.  in
Moyne,  County  Wicklow,  Ireland,  2  Oct.,  1831.
His  father,  James,  wrote  a  "Religious  History  of
Ireland  "  (1873).  The  son  was  educated  at  a  gram-
mar-school near  Wakefield,  England,  and  at
Queen's  college,  Belfast,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1851.  He  was  a  correspondent  of  the  London
"News"  in  Turkey  and  Russia  during  the  Cri-
mean war,  1854-'6.  In  the  autumn  of  1856  he
came  to  the  United  States,  and  in  the  ensuing  win-
ter made  a  journey  on  horseback  through  the
southern  states,  a  record  of  which  appeared  in  let-
ters to  the  "  News."  He  studied  law  under  David
Dudley  Field  in  New  York  city,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1859,  practised  for  a  few  years,  and
then  went  to  Europe,  owing  to  impaired  health.
He  returned  to  New  York  at  the  close  of  1862.  and
was  a  correspondent  of  the  "  News  "  and  an  edito-
rial writer  for  the  New  York  "Times"  until  July,
1865,  when  he  established  and  became  editor  of
"The  Nation,"  which  in  1866  passed  into  the
hands  of  Mr.  Godkin  and  two  other  gentlemen  as


proprietors.  In  1881  "The  Nation"  WM  made  the
weekly  issue  of  the  "  Evening  Poet,"  and  Mr.  find-
kin  became  one  of  the  editors  and  proprietors  of
the  joint  publication.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  His-
tory of  Hungary,  A.  I).  3<kmk5<>"  (London,  1856),
and  of  the  work  on  "  Government  "  in  the  ••  Ameri-
can Science  Series"  (New  York,  1871).

GOILXAN,  John  !>.,  physician,  b.  in  Annapolis,
Md..2<>  Dec.  I7!»4:d.  in Germantown,  I'a.,  17  April.
1880.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  an  early  age  with-
out means,  and  after  he  had  been  a  short  time  at
school  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  in  Baltimore.
In  the  autumn  of  1814  he  enlisted  as  a  sailor  in
the  flotilla  stationed  in  Chesapeake  Iwy,  and  was

C resent  at  the  defence  of  Fort  McIIenry.  In  1815
e  began  the  study  of  medicine  under  Dr.  Lackey
in  Klizabethtown,  whence  he  soon  afterward  re-
moved to  Baltimore,  studied  under  Dr.  Davidge,
filling  the  place  of  his  preceptor,  who  was  pro-
te-sor  of  anatomy  in  the  University  of  Maryland,
while  the  latter  was  disabled  by  sickness.  After
he  was  graduated  in  February,  1818,  he  practised
successively  in  New  Holland,  Pa.,  Anne  Arundel
county.  Md.,  Baltimore,  and  Philadelphia.  In
October,  1821,  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
became  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Medical  college
of  Ohio,  and  began  the  publication  of  the  "  \\  ext-
ern Quarterly  Reporter.'  a  medical  periodical  pro-
jected by  Dr.  Drake,  of  which  only  six  numbers
were  issued.  In  1822  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,
lectured  on  anatomy  to  a  private  class,  and  de-
voted himself  more  exclusively  than  before  to
scientific  pursuits.  He  became  in  1824  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "  Philadelphia  Journal  of  Medical
Sciences,"  and  was  appointed  professor  of  anatomy
and  physiology  in  Rutgers  medical  college,  New
Jersey,  in  1888.  In  1827  he  resigned  on  account  of
failing  health  and  went  to  the  West  Indies,  and  on
his  return  lived  in  Germantown  until  his  death.
As  a  lecturer  on  anatomy  and  as  a  naturali-t  he
had  but  few  equals  among  his  contemporaries  in
the  United  States,  and  he  was  also  well  versed  in
the  Latin,  French,  and  German  languages.  Dr.
Godman  had  adopted  the  materialistic  views  of
the  French  naturalists;  but,  having  witnessed,  in
1827,  the  death  of  a  medical  student  who  died  a
Christian,  he  changed  his  views  and  was  ever
afterward  devoutly  religious.  He  wrote  articles
on  natural  history  for  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Ameri-
cana "  to  the  end  of  the  letter  C,  and  contributed
to  the  "  American  Quarterly  Review  '"  and  to  other
periodicals.  He  published  "  American  Natural
History,"  "  Rambles  of  a  Naturalist,"  "  Account  of
Irregularities  of  Structure  and  Morbid  Anatomy,"
"  Contributions  to  Physiological  and  Pathological
Anatomy,"  "  Bell's  Anatomy,"  with  notes ;  a  t  rans-
lation  of  Levasseur's  "Account  of  Lafayette's
Progress  through  the  United  States,"  "  Anatomical
Investigations"  (1824).  His  biography  by  Dr.
Sewall.  has  been  published  bv  the  Tract  society.

G0D0N,  Sylvanus  William,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  18  June,  1809;  d.  in  Blois,  France,
10  May,  1879.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  in
1819,  and,  after  serving  at  sea  in  various  parts  of
the  world,  was  promoted  passed  midshipman  in
1827,  and  lieutenant  in  1836.  He  accompanied
Com.  Isaac  Hull  to  the  Mediterranean  on  the  flag-
ship "  Ohio  "  in  the  vears  1839, 1840.  and  1841.  was
actively  employed  during  the  Mexican  war.  and
was  present  in  the  bomb-vessel  "  Vesuvius"  at  the
reduction  of  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  made  commander
in  1855.  and  captain  in  1861,  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war.  In  command  of  the  "  Mohican  "
he  took  part  in  the  attack  on  Port  Royal  by  t  he
fleet  under  Admiral  Du  Pont. He  placed  his  ship


QODH  IN'

iti  position  t<>  secure  an  enfilading  tlr«-  <>n  the  f<>rt
<>n  Hilton  II'-  I'l.  iuhI  materially  assisted in sileno-

the  batteries  of  the  enemy. In  lwihe  was

[noted commodore,  atnl commanded I lit* 4th
iIim-ioii (if Admiral Porter's licet al l»oth bot>

bardmenta  of  Port Honor,  N.  «'..  in Daaasaber,

1864,  ami  January.  IMS.  In  Um  report  <>f  the
latter  action  In*  was  s|tecially  commended  for  the
support  rendered  tin*  commander-in-chief,  ami  for
the  good  discipline  and  OOOUtotO  Bring  of  Ids  ship,
tin-  "  Susquehanna,"  At  tin-  clooe  01  the  war  he
Was  made  rear-admiral,  and  commanded  the  South
Atlantic  or  Brazil  squadron,  in  I860  "..  Mis  last
active  employment  was  as  commandant  of  the
Brooklyn  navy-yard  in  1  H(l.M_"7n.  He  was  retired
on  account  of  Ul  in  1M?1.
GODWIN,  Parke,  editor,  b,  in  Pnteraon,  N.
i  l-VI'..  I  sit;.  Mis  father  was  an  ollicer  in  tin-
war  of  1818,  and  his  grandfather  a  soldier  of  the
Hevolution.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
I,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  l»ar  of
Kentucky,  but  did  not  practise.  He  married  the
eldest  daughter  of  William  Cullcti  Bryant,  and
from  ls.tT  till  1868,  ■  ■v-epting  one  year,  was  BOB*
Meted  with  the  New  fork *•  Evening  Post"  In
1841  he  bmed  the  "Pathfinder."  a  weekly,  which
was  suspendi-d  after  three  months.  He  contributed
many  articles  to  the  "  Democratic  Review,"  in
which  ho  advocated  reforms  that  were  subsequently

Introduced  into  the  constitution  and  coda  of  New

York.  He  was  also  editor  of  ■  Putnam's  Monthly."
to  which  he  contributed  many  literary  and  political
articles,  which  were  published  in  book-form,  under
the  title  '•  Political  Essays"  (New  York.  18581  In
1866  he  again  booame  connected  with  the"Kven-
Ing  Post."  During  the  administration  of  Presi-
dent Polk  he  was  deputy  collector  of  New  York.
Suliseipieiitly  he  joined  the  Republican  jiarty  and
sapported  it  by  his  speeches  and  writings.  He  is
the  author  of  ••  Popular  Yiew  of  the  Dootriaoiof
Charles  Fourier  "(New  York.  1844);  "Constructive
Democracy":  "  Yala.a  Mythological  Tale"(1851);
"  A  Handbook  of  I'niversal  Biography  "(1851  :  new
ed.,  entitled  "  Cvclop.edia  of  Bioi:raphv."  1N71);
"History  of  France  *  (lei  vol..  lsiii);  -Out  of  the
Past,"  a  volume  of  essays  (1870):  and  edited  a  new
edition  of  Hrvant's  prose  and  pftftrnal  writings,
with  a  life  (»>  vols.,  New  York.  lHKi-^).

GOKS.  Pedro  de  (go'-es),  Portugueee  pioneer,
b.  in  Lisbon  in  1608;  d.  in  Silo  Salvador  tie  Pallia,
in  1664,  He  was  a  brother  of  Damian  de  (Joes,  the
historian.  He  served  as  captain  in  the  fleet,  and
bv  his  geographical  knowledge  was  of  great  ser-
vice in  the  expedition  of  Martini  AfTonso  de  Suiza
to  Brazil  in  December,  1680.  In  recom|>en>e  of
his  scn'ices,  Goes  was  given,  in  1532,  the  district
north  of  Souza's  captaincy  <>f  Sao  Vicente,  extend-
ing 160  miles  on  the  coast  to  the  river  of  Itanimi-
rim,  with  nearly  sovereign  rights.  He  introduced
the  sugar-cane  from  the  Canary  islands,  and  soon
had  flourishing  plantations.  But  the  surrounding
Indians  were  very  troublesome,  and  (toes  sailed
for  Portugal,  in  1641,  in  quest  of  monetary  re-
aourecsand  re-enforcements.  When  be  returned  in
tin'  mxt  year  with  an  expedition,  he  found  his
establishments  and  cane-fields  burnt  down,  and
his  colonists  dispersal  or  killed  by  the  savages,
tried  to  restore  cultivation,  organized  an  expo-
dition  into  the  interior,  defeated  the  Indians  in
many  engagements,  in  one  of  which  he  lost  an  eye

iiml for  three  years enjoyed  tranquillity.
bit  toward  the  end  of  1646  the  Indians  a^ain  laid
his  plantations  waste, and in 1517 lie sailed for
"ii.  to  lay  his  grievances  baton  the  court. On
U  May.  1648,  he  said  to  King  John III. :  "  If  your


ill -


majesty  does not soon «m  cor the hardy  col..:

and  f  Bnizil,  before  they  lo*-  property

and  lives,  your  majesty  will  lose  the  coloiiv." Im-

preaseil  i»v  tham  words,  the  Mm  appointed  Thoaal
de  S  rnor-general  of  Brazil,  and  sent  him.

in  1646,  to  protect  the  pioneer*.  In  his  voyage  of
1641  Qoee  i-  believed  to  have  bronghl  the  tirst
tohaeeo-plants  t,,  Kuro|ie.  tin  his  return  to  Bra-
zil. Goes  was  appointed  "Capitfo  major"  and  with
an  armed  rasas!  cruised  on  the  coast,  making
end  captures  (,f  contraband  vassals. Be  as

Suiza  greatly  in  the  organization  of  the  adminis-
trillion  and  in  the  development  of  tin-  resources  of
the  new  colony,  and  sent  many  valuable  notes  to
his  brother  for  hi*  history  of  Portugal  and  its  colo-
nies. (Joes  had  a  disagreement  with  Suiza's  sue.
oeeaor.  Duarte  da  Costa,  in  1658,  and  was  preparing
to  sail  for  Europe  when  he  died.

UOKSKKIAND.  Louts  de,  B.C.  bamop,  b.  in
St.  I'rlmin,  France,  4  Aug..  lHKi.  lb-  studied  the
ejajsjai  at  Qoimpar  and  Pont  Croix,  Finistcrre,
and  theology  in  the  seminary  of  Quimpar,  and
that  Of  St.  Sulpiie.  Paris.  After  his  ordination  in
1840  he  resolved  to  devote  himself  to  the  Ameri-
can mission,  and  sailed  for  the  I'nited  States  the
same  year.  Between  1840  and  1*47  ha  WW  occu-
pied with  missionary  duties  in  the  diocese  of  Cin-
cinnati. He  was  next  appointed  vicar-general  of
the  diocese  of  Cleveland  and  rector  of  the  cathe-
dral. When  the  see  of  Burlington  was  created  in
Vermont,  he  was  nominated  its  first  bishop.  He
entered  upon  his  office  in  1  K">:{,  and  at  once  set
almut  building  up  the  diocese.  He  obtained  sev-
eral priests  from  Europe,  and  introduced  the  Sis-
ters of  Providence,  who  established  a  school,  and
took  charge  of  the  orphans.  He  also  established
convents  and  schools  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy.  Sis-
ters of  St.  .Joseph,  and  Sisters  of  the  Congregation
of  Our  Lady,  opened  schools  in  Winooski.  Burling-
ton, and  Rutland. and  built  a  fine  Gothic  cathedral.
During  his  administration  the  churches  in  the  dio-
cese have  Increased  from  6  to  71,  while  the  number

of  Catholic!  has  nearly  doubled.

(jIOESS.MANN.  Charles  Anthony,  chemist,  b.
in  Nauinbiirg.  Germany,  18  June,  1S27.  He  was
educated  at  the  gymnasium  in  Fritzlar.  and  then
studied  under  Frioarich  Wohler  in  the  university
of  GKKtingon,  where  be  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  I).  iii  \*y.l.  From  1869  till  ikt>7  be  was  assist-
ant in  the  chemical  laboratory,  and  privat-docent
in  the  university.  He  then  came  to  the  United
States,  and  at  first  was  engaged  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  salt  industry  in  New  York  and  Michi-
gan. In  18(52  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  in
the  Henssclaer  polytechnic  institute  in  Troy,  but
resigned  that  chair  after  two  years.  He  was  elect-
ed in  1866  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  Massa-
chusetts agricultural  college,  and  in  addition  to  his
professorship  has  lieen  chemist  to  the  Massachu-
setts state  board  of  agriculture  since  1N7:{.  director
of  the  state  agricultural  ex|»erimcnt  station  since
1882.  and  analyst  of  the  Massachusetts  state  hoard
of  health  since  1883.  His  contributions  to  chemi-
cal literature  have  Im-cii  numerous,  and  include,
prior  to  his  coming  to  the  I'nited  States.  pa-H-rs  on
organic  acids  contributed  to  the  "  Annalen  der
Chemk  and  Pharmacie."  Dr.  Gocssmann's  later
panafl  ineliiilearticles  on  sugar,  salt,  various  foods,
and  spasm]  fertilization  of  plants.  These  have  ap-
peared chiefly  in  the  rc|>orts  of  the  organizations
with  which  he  has  been  connected.

<.OKTS(  Mil  S.  Johannes  Henrlcus.  clergy-
man, b.  in  | dg aria.  Switzerland,  in  171N;  d.  in
Hachensaok,  N. .!..  about  inoo.  He  studied  at  the
I'niversity  of  Zurich, and  emigrated  to  the  I'nited


672


GOPF


GOLDSHUROH.ll


Slai.s,  prolmblv  in  1718.  Hfl  studied  divinity, and
in  17:57  applied  for  ordination  to  thi  presbytery  of
Philadelphia,  but  was  refused,  and  he  was  or-
dained bv  his  instructor.  At  the  end  of  ten  years'
work  in  the  ministry  the  question  of  his  ordina-
tion again  arose;  it  was  submitted  to  the  New
York  ami  Ijong  Islam!  conferences,  and  Mr.
Qwtachhu  was  reordained.  During  the  contest
churches  were  closed  against  him,  and  some  of  his
parishioners  had  their  children  rebaptized.  In
174!)  he  removed  to  Hackcnsack,  N.  J.,  disagreed
with  his  colleague  on  ecclesiastical  questions,  and
so  hot  was  the  discussion  as  to  his  ordination  that.
one  Sunday,  apprehending  ■  resistance  to  his
preaching,  he  buckled  on  a  sword  and  entered  the
pulpit  prepared  to  use  the  weapon  if  forcibly
ejected.  Mr.  Goctschitis  was  an  instructor  in  di-
vinity and  a  trustee  in  Queens  (now  Rutgers)  col-
lege, and,  although  of  violent  passions,  was  learned
and  devout.  His  publications  are"  The  Unknown
(ioil  "  and  "  Sermons  "  (Newton,  X.  J.,  1742).— His
brother,  John  Mauritius,  b.  in  Liguria,  Swit-
zerland, in  1720;  d.  in  New  Jersey  about.  18(H),  re-
moved to  this  country  in  1744, and  practised  medi-
cine, but  was  persuaded  by  his  brother,  Johan-
nes, to  study  for  the  ministry.  He  preached  to
both  Dutch  and  Germans  in  Schoharie,  N.  Y.,  and
also  practised  medicine.  He  was  one  of  the  origi-
nal trustees  of  King's  (now  Columbia)  college.

GOFF,  Nathan,  politician,  b.  in  Clarksburg.
W.  Va.,  9  Oct,  1843.  He  was  educated  at  the
Northwestern  Virginia  academy.  Georgetown  col-
lege, and  the  University  of  New  York.  In  18(51  he
enlisted  in  the  National  army  in  the  3d  regiment
of  Virginia  volunteer  infantry,  served  as  lieuten-
ant and  then  adjutant  of  this  regiment,  and  in
\HiVA  was  promoted  major  of  the  4th  Virginia  cav-
alry. In  18(5.1  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and
elected  to  the  West,  Virginia  legislature,  in  1808
was  appointed  district  attorney,  which  office  he  re-
signed in  1881  to  accept  the  secretaryship  of  the
navy,  to  fill  out  the  unexpired  term  of  Richard  \V.
Thompson,  who  had  vacated  it.  In  March,  1881,
he  was  reappointed  district  attorney  of  West  Vir-

finia,  which  office  he  again  resigned  in  July,  1882.
Ie  was elected to  congress as  a  Republican  in
1884.  and  was  re-elected  in  1880.

GOFFE,  William,  regicide,  b.  in  England  about
1005;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  107!*,  or,  as  is  held
by  some  historians,  at  New  Haven  in  1680.  The
weight  of  testimony  is  in  favor  of  Hartford.  He
was  the  fourth  son  of  Stephen  Goffe,  rector  of  Stan-
more,  Sussex.  The  elder  Goffe  was  "a  very  severe
Puritan,"  and  his  son  inherited  his  hatred  of  papist
and  churchman.  Prior  to  his  joining  the  army  in
1047  he  was  engaged  in  some  commercial  pursuit.
He  rose  rapidly  in  the  parliamentary  army,  becom-
ing a  major-general  in  1055,  with  command  in  Sus-
sex, Hampshire,  and  Berkshire.  He  commanded
the  soldiers  at  the  clearing  out  of  Barebones's  par-
liament, and  assisted  in  the  violent  proceeding
known  as  Pride's  purge,  in  which  obnoxious  Pres-
byterians were  summarily  excluded  from  parlia-
ment. He  was  returned  a  member  of  parliament
from  Yarmouth  in  1054,  and  from  Southampton  in
1050,  and  Cromwell  appointed  him  to  a  seat  in  his
house  of  lords  or  "  other  house."  He  varied  his
military  duties  by  exhorting  in  religious  gather-
ings. He  was  made  master  of  arts  at  Oxford  in
1<>49,  in  company  with  ten  other  parliamentary
officers.  He  was  held  in  great  esteem  by  Crom-
wi  11  and  by  the  court  in  general — so  much  so  that
he  was  spoken  of  with  favor  as  the  successor  to  the

firotectorship. On  the  news  of  Charles's  return,
loffe,  with  Whalley,  his  father-in-law,  made  prepa-


rations to  go  to  America.  They  arrived  in  Boston,
27  July,  1000,  and  took  up  their  residence  in  Cam-
bridge. When  the  news  arrived  in  Boston,  mi  the
Last  day  of  November,  that  the  act  of  indemnity
passed  by  parliament  in  August  excepted  them
from  its  provisions,  the  government  of  the  colon*
hngan  to  be  uneasy,  and  a  meeting  of  the  council
was  held,  22  Feb.,  1001,  to  consult  as  to  their  se-
curity. Four  days  later  Goffe  and  Whalley  depart-
ed for  New  Haven,  reaching  there  7  March.  [661.
Here,  or  in  the  neighborhood,  they  remained  till
1G04,  when  they  removed  to  Hadley.  During  their
stay  in  New  Haven  they  at  times  appeared  in  pnb*
lic,  but  often  were  compelled  to  conceal  themselves
when  pursued  by  crown  officers.  At  one  time  they
lived  in  a  cave  in  West  Rock  (Providence  Hill).
In  1075,  according  to  tradition,  Goffe  appears  as  a
savior  of  the  town  from  the  Indians.  The  truth  of
the  story  has  been  cast  in  doubt.  Prof.  Franklin
B.  Dexter,  in  a  paper  on  the  regicides,  in  the  New
England  colonial  historical  society  papers,  finds
evidence  in  its  favor,  while  a  late  writer  in  the
New  England  historical  genealogical  register  re-
examines the  testimony  and  decides  against  it.
The  story  has  been  woven  into  fiction  by  Wal-
ter Scott  in  "Peveril  of  the  Peak,"  and  by  I-'eni-
more  Cooper  in  "  Wept  of  Wish-ton-Wish."  Whal-
ley died,  it  is  thought,  at  Hadley,  between  August,
1074,  and  August,  1670.  Goffe  went  to  Hartford
in  1079,  and  probably  died  soon  afterward.  It  is
held  by  some  that  he  died  at  New  Haven,  and
three  rough  stones,  found  in  a  cemetery  there,  are
thought  to  mark  the  graves  of  Whalley,  Goffe,  and
Dixwell.  Goffe,  from  the  time  of  his  departure
from  Westminster,  kept  a  diary,  which  was  in  Gov.
Hutchinson's  possession,  and  was  destroyed  by  fire
in  the  attack  on  his  house  in  1705.  A  contempora-
neous transcript,  covering  only  from  4  May  to  6
Sept.,  1000,  found  among  the  Winthrop  papers,
was  printed  in  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety proceedings  in  December,  1803.  Goffc's  let-
ters from  1002  till  1079,  with  other  papers,  are
printed  in  the  collection  of  the  Massachusetts  his-
torical society  (4th  series,  vol.  iv.)  from  the  origi-
nals in  the  Mather  papers  belonging  to  the  Prince
librarv,  dejx>sited  in  the  Boston  public  library.

G01C0ECHEA,  Jose  Antonio  de  Lierido  y
(goi-co-cha'-ah),  South  American  naturalist,  b.  in
Cartagena,  Colombia,  in  1735  ;  d.  in  Guatemala  in
1814.  He  studied  in  his  native  city  and  Bogota,
entered  the  Franciscan  order,  and,  after  serving  as
teacher  in  several  of  the  convent-colleges  of  his
order  in  Europe,  was  called  as  professor  of  philoso-
phy and  theology  to  the  university  of  Guatemala.
He  was  an  eminent  preacher,  and  also  brought
into  his  adopted  country  many  useful  inventions.
He  was  an  indefatigable  student  of  natural  his-
tory, and  established  at  the  university  courses  of
instruction  in  botany  and  agricultural  chemistry.
In  1795  he  united  with  some  friends  to  establish
the  "  Economical  Society  of  Guatemala,"  under
the  presidency  of  Jacobo  de  Villaurrutja,  which
has.uone  much  for  the  progress  of  Central  America.
Goicoechea  wrote  treatises  on  botany,  agriculture,
mendicancy  and  the  means  of  suppressing  it.  all  of
which  were  read  in  the  Economical  society,  a  vol-
ume of  sermons,  and  an  eloquent  representation  in
favor  of  the  Indians  to  King  Charles  IV.

GOLDSKOROIGH,  Charles,  statesman,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1700;  d.  in  Shoals,  Md.,  13  De.
He  served  in  congress  as  a  Federalist  from  2  Dec.,
1M0.">.  to  ;!  March,  1817,  and  was  governorof  Mary-
land in  1818-'19.— His  cousin,  Charles  Washing-
ton, clerk  of  the  navy  department,  b.  in  Cambridge.
Md.,  18  April,  1779;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  14


DSBOROl  '■!!


tm


i^^MjrC^a^^jU.


S|il.,  1848,  VM  '!).•  t1r>t  clerk  <-f  the  btU— 0  <>f  pro-
visions and  clothing  of  1 1 1  ■  I  chief
t-l.rk  -if  tli.-  naval  department  from
under  S.vx.  Benjamin  Stoddart,  Rotterl  Siniih.
and  I'aul  Hamilton.  From  1841  until  separate
tu%\ ill  bureaus  were  established  lie  was  seetvtarv  of
the  naval  board.  He  is  the  author  «.f  ••  The  l\  S.
Naval  Chronicle " (Washington.  1834),  and  an  un-
pobUahei]  "Historj  "f  the  American  Navy,"  now
in  manuscript  ami  in  the  possession  <>f  tin-  senior
editor  «>f  tins  work. — Charles  Waahingttinli  son,
ItMlll  Male«dierlie».  nasal  officer,  I',  m  Washing-
ton. 1>.  c.  is  ivi,.,  1806:  d.  then,  M  \'<
entered  tin-  nary  aj  midshipman  at  seven  years

ufap'.  He  was  pro-
moted lieutenant
in  January,  1*25.
and,  after  serving
a  short  time  in
the Mediterranean

eaondron,  went  to

Paris  ami  passed
two  years  in  study.
In  1881  he  Joined

tin-  "  North  Caro-
lina" in  the  Med-
iterranean, and
while  cruising  in
the  schooner  "  \'<>r-
poise,"  in  the  Gre-
cian arelii|M>lago,
he  commanded  a
night  expedition  of
four  boats  and  thir-
ty-five men  for  the  recovery  of  the  English  brig
••(..met."  which  had  been  captured  by  Greek  pi-
rates. After  ■  fierce  light,  in  which  ninety  of
the  pirates  were  killed,  the  "Comet"  was  res-
cued, and  on  the  arrival  of  the  expedition  at
Malta  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  English  gov-
ernment. In  1888  he  married  the  daughter  of
William  Wirt,  and  went  to  Florida,  taking  with
him  a  colony  of  Germans  to  cultivate  lands  be-
longing to  his  father-in-law.  During  the  Semi-
nole war  he  commanded  a  company  of  volunteer
cavalry,  ami  also  an  armed  steamer.  In  Septem-
ber, 1841,  he  was  promoted  commander.  During
the  Mexican  war  he  was  executive  offcer  of  the
frigate  "Ohio."  which  bombarded  Vera  Cruz  in
March.  1H47.  He  was  senior  member  of  the  joint
army  and  naval  commission  to  explore  Oregon  and
California,  and  to  report  on  various  military  mat-
ters in  1K41>.  From  1853  till  1857  he  was  superin-
tendent of  the  C.  S.  naval  academy,  and  command-
ed t  he  sloop  "  Levant "  in  the  Mediterranean,  and
the  frigate  " Congress "  in  the  Hrazil  squadron  in
ls">s-"ti<>.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1855.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1861  he  was
appointed  flag-officer,  and  placed  in  command  of
the  u  Minnesota,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron.  In  September,  1861,  be  planned  ami
uted  a  joint  army  and  navy  expedition  to  the
sounds  of  North  Carolina,  and  captured  Roanoke
island.  •">  Feb.,  1h;,.>.  (See  Biknside,  Ambrose.)
He  received  the  thanks  of  congress  for  this  service,
was  made  rear-admiral  in  July.  1868,  and  as-
d  in  1H«U{  to  the  duty  of  preparing  a  code  of
dations  for  the  naval  service,  and  of  revis-
i  he  )>ook  of  naval  allowances.  In  1805  he
commanded  the  European  squadron,  and  after
1867  be  was  on  special  duty.  In  1H73  he  was
placed  on  the  retired  list,  and  made  his  bone
in  Washington.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  had
been  in  the  service  longer  than  any  other  naval
officer  then  living,  and  had  seen  more  active  duty.
vol.  it. — 43


— Another  son,  John  Rodger*,  naval  officer,  b,  in

liington.  I>.  c.  2  Jul)  Fane,

. . became  midshipman  in IH24,  lieutenant in

commander  In  1868,  captain  in  1862,  and

commodore in 1*»'>7. While midshipman  OS the

■  ••  Warren."  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  in
Is'.' I -'80,  he  was  engaged  against  the  (ireck  pirates,
and  in  a  launch  with  nineteen  men  captured  the
Mboooaf  "  Ili-leiie,"  of  four  nun-,  and  manned  by
fifty-eight  pirates.  In  1*44- '50  be  was  attached
to the coast survey,  and in l*51-'4  to  the  sloop

"Saratoga," During'  the  civil  WHr  be  commanded

tin'  steamer  "  l'ni<«ii  "  in  1861,  employed  in  1>I<«  k-
eding  Charleston,  Savannah,  ami  Caps  Hat  teres,
lie  captured  and  sunk  the  Confederate  BBhoOMf
'•  York,"  and  bonhnriled  the  fort  off  Point  Mat  Idas
on  the  Potomac  He  commanded  the  **  Florida,"
of  the  .South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in
1862,  and  the  "Colorado,"  of  the  West  (Julf  block-
ading squadron,  in  1888,  In  1866-'8  he  served  in
the  East  India  squadron,  on  the  sloop  "Shenan-
doah." In  1*7(1  he  was  retired.

COl  BSBOKOl  (.11.  Robert,  patriot.  I,,  in
Cambridge,  Md.,  in  173:!;  <1.  then, 81  Dec.,  1788.
He  was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  college  (now
the  Cniversity  of  Pennsylvania)  in  1760.  took  an
active  part  in  the  ante-Revolutionary  movements,
was  attorney-general  of  Maryland  in  176H,  and  a
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  of  17?4-'5,
and  that  of  Mav.  1776.

GOLDSHOROIGH.  Robert  Henry,  senator,  b.
in  New  Beaton,  Md..  in  17*0;  .1.  there.  B Oct.,  1836.
He  was  elected  C.  S.  senator  as  an  anti-Jackson
Democrat,  and  served  from  24  May.  1818,  till  3
March,  1819.  He  was  again  elected  as  a  Whig,
without  opposition,  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by
the  resignation  of  Ezekiel  F.Chambers,  and  served
from  23  Jan..  lK:r>.  till  his  death.

QOLDTHWAITS,  George,  senator,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, 10  Dec.,  1809;  d.  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  18
March,  1879.  He  received  a  primary  education  at
a  grammar-school  in  Boston,  and  at  thirteen  yean
of  age  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where
he  remained  two  years.  In  1826  he  removed  to
Montgomery,  Ala.,  studying  law  with  his  brother
Henrv,  and  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  his  eigh-
teenth year.  He  practised  his  profession  until  his
election  as  circuit  judge  in  1843.  was  appointed
justice  of  the  supreme  court  in  January,  1852,  and
in  1856  became  chief  justice,  but  held  the  office
onlv  thirteen  days,  when  he  resigned  from  the  bench
and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  adju-
tant-general of  the  state  of  Alabama.  He  was
elected  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  18(58.  but  lost
the  office  through  an  act  of  congress  which  dis-
qualified him.  In  1870  he  was  elected  I".  S.  sena-
tor, served  on  the  committees  of  claims  and  Revo-
lutionary claims,  and  in  1N77  retired  to  private  life.
— His  elder  brother,  Henry,  jurist.  l>.  in  Boston.
Mass..  in  1798  ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1*47.  was  HUt-
ally  educated  in  Boston,  studied  law,  and  removed
to  Montgomery.  Ala.,  where  he  became  the  partner
of  Gov.  Benjamin  Fitzgerald.  He  edited  a  news-
paper, served  in  the  state  legislature  several  terms,
and  afterward  removed  to  Mol>ile.  where  he  was  a
aneeajafnl  lawyer.  From  1880  until  his  death  he
was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Alabama.

COM  KZ.  Antonio,  Mexican  musician.  I),  in  the
city  of  Mexico  in  1805;  d.  in  Tulancingo  in  1*76.
At  the  age  of  eight  he  studied  with  Izipiicrdo  and
tiiiiesta.and  when  scarcely  ten  years  old  published
several  small  oompoaitioni  of  his  own.  which  were
favorably  received.  He  became  leader  of  the
orchestra  of  Garcias  Italian  opera  company  in


674


c.6mez


lii'MKZ  -FAIMAS


1827.  Gomez  founded  la  Mexico  a  conservatory
of  mii-ir.  inii  abandoned  it  for  want  of  peonniary

■Snlstsnon  and  the  musical  library  of  the  cathe-
dral, of  which  he  was  a|>poiuteil  director,  was  ar-
ranged by  him.  In  1H~>1  Gomez  became  onanist
of  the  new  cathedral  at  Tulaneingo,  hut  in  his
latter  years  sickness  prevented  him  from  continu-
ing his  labors.  Among  his  compositions  are:  "  La
Iudcpcndeiicia."  for  piano,  flute,  and  violoncello ;
'•  Mi>ercre."  for  eight  voices  and  grand  orchestra  ;
a  'IV  Dcum;  psalms;  vespers;  matins;  and  sev-
eral masses;  all  for  full  orchestra.

GOMEZ,  Antonio  Carlos  (go -met h),  Brazilian
musician,  h.  in  Campinas,  Sao  Paulo,  in  1889.  His
father  was  leader  of  a  military  hand  in  Campinas,
and  cultivated  his  son's  love  of  music  from  his
earliest  years.  At  the  age  of  eleven  he  left  school,
and  began  the  study  of  music.  He  excelled  as  a
performer  on  the  piano,  and  in  Sao  Paulo  gave  a
series  of  concerts  with  his  brother  Jose  Pedro,  a
violinist,  in  ls."i(;.  At  that  time  he  composed  several
romances  and  one  popular  song,  "lao  longe  de
mim  distante,"  which  was  soon  known  all  over  the
empire.  He  then  went  to  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he
was  admitted  to  the  conservatory  of  music,  and
soon  made  remarkable  progress.  In  1861,  when  the
national  opera  was  established,  Gomez  presented
his  first  opera,  "  Noites  e  del  castello,"  which  met
with  great  success.  The  imperial  government  gave
him  a  pension  for  four  years,  that  he  might  perfect
his  studies  in  Europe.  In  1870  he  returned  to  Bra-
zil. His  most  noteworthy  opera,  "  Guarany,"  was
represented  for  the  first  time  in  Rio  Janeiro  in
1872,  and  has  also  been  given  in  several  theatres
of  Italy  and  some  of  the  capitals  of  Europe.  His
other  operas  include  "Horea"  (1874),  "Salvator
Rosa,"  (1875),  and  "Cromwell"  (1876).

GOMEZ,  Esl ehiin.  Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Ca-
diz, Spain,  in  1478  (or,  according  to  Barbosa  Ma-
chado,  in  Oporto  in  1474) ;  d.  at  sea  in  1530  (or,
according  to  Barbosa,  in  Toledo  in  1534).  He  had
served  in  the  Portuguese  East  India  fleet,  acquired
reputation  as  a  mariner,  and  was  pilot  of  the  "  San
Antonio,"  commanded  by  Juan  de  Cartagena,  on
Magellan's  expedition  in  1519.  Irritated  by  his
failure  to  obtain  the  appointment  of  chief  pilot  of
the  expedition,  he  fomented  an  insurrection,  in
January,  1520,  which  was  promptly  suppressed  by
Magellan,  but  Gomez  escaped  execution  with  the
other  rebels,  because  his  services  as  pilot  were
needed.  He  afterward  incited  the  crew  of  the
"  San  Antonio  "  to  mutiny,  and  on  his  arrival
in  Portugal,  24  March,  1521,  was  imprisoned,  but
soon  set  at  liberty.  In  1524,  when  the  difficulties
between  Spain  and  Portugal  respecting  the  limits
of  their  colonial  discoveries  arose,  Gomez  was  one
of  the  council  of  pilots  appointed  to  decide  this
question,  and  proposed  to  the  emperor  to  avoid
these  difficulties  by  seeking  a  western  passage  to
the  East  Indies  by  the  north  of  the  new  continent.
His  proposal  was  accepted,  and,  in  command  of
a  caravel,  he  left  San  Lucar  in  November,  1524.
He  reached  the  coast  of  Florida  in  January,  1525,
and  continued  his  voyage  north,  exploring  every
inlet  in  quest  of  the  desired  passage,  including  one
in  about  37°  north  latitude,  probably  Chesapeake
bay.  On  arriving  at  latitude  42°  N.  without  dis-
covering any  western  pissage,  he  resolved  to  re-
turn, but  explored  the  \ountry  from  the  42d  to
the  40th  parallel,  and  fiNed  his  vessel  with  cap-
tured natives,  which  he  sold  as  slaves  on  his  return
to  San  Lucar  in  August,  1521.  On  presenting
himself  at  court,  he  was  unfavorably  received  by
the  emperor,  who,  according  to  Gomara,  reproached
him  with  the  capture  of  the  Indians,  as  tie  would


thereby  discredit  future  explorers.  He  now  tried
to  interest  some  merchants  in  a  new  expedition  of
discovery,  and  sailed  in  1680  wttfa  two  vessels  for
another  exploration,  but  was  never  heard  of  again.
Barbosa  Machado,  in  his  "Biblioteca  Lusitana."
says  that  Gomez  died  in  Toledo  in  1534  in  high  fa-
vor at  court.  Gomez  left  a  manuscript  diary  of  his
voyage,  published  in  1529  by  the  cosmograph'er
Diego  Ribera,  with  a  map.  in  which  the  posraoo
of  the  present  states  of  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island,
and  Massachusetts  is  marked  "  Land  of  Estebtn
Gomez, discovered  by  him  in  1525,  by  order  of  Hi-
Majesty;  abundance  of  trees,  game,  salmon,  tur-
bot,  and  soles,  but  no  gold  is  found."

GOMEZ,  Valentin,  Argentine  statesman,  b.  in
Buenos  Ayres  in  1774;  d.  there  in  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Cordoba  as  doctor
in  theology  in  1795,  and  at  the  University  of  Chu-
quisaca  in  civil  and  canonical  law  in  1796.  He  was
appointed  professor  of  philosophy  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Cordoba  in  1799,  took  holy  orders  in  1802,
and  soon  afterward  was  appointed  prebendary
canon  of  the  cathedral  of  that  city.  When  the  war
of  independence  began  in  1810,  he  espoused  the
cause  of  liberty,  protecting  the  patriots  from  the
persecutions  of  the  royalists,  and  collecting  sub-
scriptions for  the  revolutionary  cause.  At  the  bat-
tle of  Piedras  he  fought  so  valiantly  that  he  was
mentioned  honorably  in  the  general  order  of  the
day.  After  the  triumph  of  independence,  he  set-
tled in  Buenos  Ayres,  and  was  for  several  years  rec-
tor of  the  university  of  that  city.  He  was  elected
deputy  to  congress,  and  became  secretary  and  presi-
dent of  that  body.  He  was  appointed  minister
to  London  in  1821,  and  in  1823  to  Brazil.

GOMEZ-FARf  AS,  Valentin  (go -meth-fah-re -
as),  Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  Guadalajara,  14  Feb.,
1781 ;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  July,  1858.  He
studied  medicine  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1810
was  appointed  professor  of  the  university.  Later
he  practised  in  Aguas  Calientes,  and  joining  the
cause  of  independence  he  equipped  a  battalion  at
his  own  expense.  After  the  fall  of  Iturbide,  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  first  constituent
congress,  and  attracted  the  hatred  of  the  church
party  by  his  liberal  principles.  After  the  fall  of
Gen.  Bustamante  and  the  short  administration  of
Gomez  Pedraza,  he  was  elected  vice-president  with
Santa-Anna,  and,  as  the  latter  was  absent,  as-
sumed the  executive  on  1  April,  1833.  He  im-
mediately abolished  the  legal  expropriation  for
unpaid  church-tithes,  prohibited  the  admission  of
new  monks  to  the  existing  cloisters,  and  attacked
the  privileges  which  military  chiefs  had  arrogated*
In  consequence  there  were  several  revolts,  but
these  were  soon  quelled.  The  clergy  now  tried  to-
bribe  Gomez  by  the  offer  of  a  fortune ;  but  he  re-
fused indignantly,  and  on  4  Jan.,  1835,  a  so-called
constitutional  congress  assembled,  which  refused
to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  president.
Gomez,  tired  of  the  struggle,  left  the  country,  but
in  1838  returned  to  Mexico,  where  he  was  re
by  a  public  ovation.  The  jealousy  of  the  presi-
dent, Bustamante,  caused  him  to  be  sent  to  prison,
but  he  was  rescued  by  a  popular  rising.  In  1840
he  led  an  unsuccessful  attempt  at  revolution,  and
was  banished  a  second  time.  He  returned  to
Mexico  in  1845,  and  in  1846  was  again  elected  viee-

[tresident,  with  Santa-Anna  as  president.  As  the
atter  had  to  take  command  of  the  army  in  the
war  with  the  United  States,  Gomez  took  charge
of  the  executive;  but  in  February,  1847.  thei
a  revolt  against  him,  which  continued  till  21
March,  when  it  was  quelled  by  Santa-Anna.  The
vice-presidency  was  abolished  by  a  decree  of  the


G<  :»I(.\ZA

( iomu  wm  elected  a  Imb  to  that

Inm) \ In  I  s.V)  he  was  a  defeated  eniuli<lnt<*  f<»r  the

When  Santa -Anna  declared  liim-^-lf

itt.r  in  1858,  Gomes-Farias  took  part  against

him.  mill  was  "in-  of  the  committee  that  <  !•

presidenl  iii  October,  is*m.  lie  wai  ep-
pointed  |>ost  master-general,  ami  in  \*'u  took  |>art
in  the  formation  of  the  liberal  constitution,

i.imi  I  /  I'l  l»K  \Z  \.  Manuel,  Mexican  States-
man. I>.  in  Silo  la  Marina  (according  to  other*,  in
Queretaro)  in  lTHJt;  <1.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  14
May.  \*~>\.  Hi-  was  educated  in  Qaeretaro,  en-
tered the  militia,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
lution  of  into  remained  faithful  to  the  royal-
ists. When  Iturbide  proclaimed  the  ampin  in

1822.  Qomea sided with him, ami beUSJM  BOM*

inamliT  of  the  <it>  of  Mexico. He  sureadered

the  <Mtv  t»>  the  republican  authorities,  and  iii
appointed  by  President  Victoria  secre-
tary of  war.  He  became  president  in  1888,  de-
flating the  ultra  lilx-ral  party  under  Guerrero,
and  the  latter,  complaining  of  fraud  in  the  elec-
tions, appealed  to  arms.  Gomez  fled  to  Kurnpe
on  4  l>ec,  and  returned  in  1K:{0,  hut  tien.  Hiista-
mente  Ordered  him  to  leave  the  country  immedi-
ately, ami  he  win)  to  the  United  States,  fixing  his
lenoe  in  Pennsylvania.  He  was  afterward  re-
oalled,  and  was  president  again  in  18M-<8, In  1K41

he  was  iiiinister  of  state  under  the  second  admin-
istnition  of  Santa-Anna,  and  in  1H4'2.  1H44,  and
1845  was  deputy  to  congress,  where  he  acquired
fame  as  an  orator.  In  1N50  he  was  again  a  candi-
date for  the  presidency,  hut  was  defeated,  and  died
as  a  director  of  the  government  Imnk  of  loans.

GONANNHATKNHA,  Frances  Indian  con-
vert, h.  in  Onondaga,  X.  Y.;  d.  there  in  H>!i2.
She  had  been  converted  by  Father  Freinin  and  l>e-
caine  a  model  of  piety  and  charity  jn  the  Caugh-
nawaga  village  to  which  her  husband  belonged.
Hearing  one  day  that  a  hostile  party  was  going  in
the  direction  of  the  place  where  her  husband  was
hunting,  she  started  in  her  canoe  with  two  others
to  give  him  warning.  She  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  enemy,  who,  after  torturing  her,  brought  her  to
Onondaga  and  placed  her  in  the  custody  of  her
sister,  who  surrendered  her.  On  the  scaffold  the
made  a  profession  of  her  faith  and  of  her  happi-
ness in  dying  for  it.  A  relative  used  every  entreaty
to  persuade  her  to  renounce  Christianity,  and.  mad-
dened by  his  failure,  tore  her  crucifix  from  her
nook,  and  with  his  knife  slashed  a  cross  on  her
naked  breast.  "I  thank  you,  brother,"  she  said  :
"it  was  possible  to  lose  the  cross  you  have  taken
from  me,  but  you  have  given  me  one  I  only  can
lose  with  my  life."  She  then  addressed  those  pres-
ent with  great  force,  exhorting  them  to  embrace
the  faith.  She  was  then  tortured  for  three  suc-
cessive nights  and  barbarously  put  to  death.  The
narrative  of  her  martyrdom  is  taken  from  the  ac-
counts of  Frenchmen  who  were  prisoners  among
the  Onondagas  at  the  time.

GONZALEZ,  Francisco  Javier  (^on-thai  -eth).
South  American  soldier,  b.  in  Colombia  in  1780;
d.  in  Bogota  in  1882.  He  entered  the  Republican
army  in  1810, and  continued  in  active  service  until

In-coming  lieutenant  in  1HK),  captain  in  1818,
lieutenant-colonel,  11  Jan.,  1818,  and  colonel  on  4
He  (Miid  all  the  expenses  of  his  regiment  in
the  campaign  of  1813-'14,  and.  after  the  defeat  of
the  Republicans  in  the  latter  year,  returned  to  Bo-
gota, where  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Spaniards
in l*lii.  and  condemned  to  death. He  regained

H-rty  by  forfeiting  his  estates  and  paying  835.-
000  to  his  captors, ton.  Morillo,  taking  advent
of  his  extreme  poverty,  offered  him  every  induce*


078


merit  to  enter  tin-  Spanish  army  and  orgnnize  the
militia,  but  tionzale/.  refused.  When  the  news  of
the  defeat  of  tin- Spaniards  m  Boyaca  reached  l'>"-
gotA,  H  Aug..  l*!Ji.  the  authorities,'  fled,  having  the
capital  in  the  DOWer  of  a  inoti.  (ionzalez  a-
bled  the  |{epublicans.  restored  order,  and  guarded
the  public  treasure,  amounting  to  84000,000,  until
the  arrival  of  Itolivar.  who  appointed  him  gov-
ernor and  commander-in-chief  of  the  prmune  of
(  undinamarca.  He  devoted  himself  to  the  task  of
organizing  and  drilling  troopi  during  the  slotUSJ
years  that  he  was  commander  of  the  province.  In
the  civil  war  which  followed  the  war  of  bdepand-
erne,  Gonzalez  served  the  legitimate  government.

<iO.NZAI.KZ.  Jos£  Maria  it  Jesus,  .  !■  Io-
nian, b.  in  (iuadalajara,  Mexico,  81  Aug.,  lHM;  d.
in  Santa  Barbara.  California,  :{  Nov..  ls">.  Ib-
was  a  meinlMT  of  the  order  of  St.  Francis,  and  was
s<nt  to  the  Sin  .lose  mission,  Cal.,  in  Ih;^.  In
1839  he  was  appointed  vii  e-eiirnmissary  and  presi-
dent of  the  mission.  In  1848  he  was  made  vicar-
capitular  of  the  two  Californias,  and  in  1H47  was
nominated  bishop.  He  was  vicar-general  from
1801  till  1H5H,  and  also  guardian  of  the  apostolical
college  of  Zaeatccas  in  Is.").").  He  was  appointed
president  of  the  college  of  Santa  Barbara  in  1N58,
and  continued  in  that  office  till  his  death.

GONZALKZ,  Manuel,  Mexican  soldier,  b,  near
Matamoros  Tamaulipas,  Mexico,  in  1H20.  He  be-
gan to  figure  in  the  civil  wars  of  Mexico  about
1853,  fighting  with  the  reactionary  party  under
the  guerilla  chief  Marcelino  Ooboa,  (See  (onus.)
Up  to  1801  he  participated  in  all  the  engagements
between  the  reaction-
ary and  the  Liberal  par-
tisjins.  and  with  other
guerillas  was  the  terror
of  the  valley  of  Mexico.
He  has  been  many  times
wounded  in  battle,  and
his  right  arm  was  twice
shattered,  once  requir-
ing an  amputation.
when  the  allied  armies
of  France,  Kngland.and
Spain  invaded  Mexico
in  December,  18(51,  be
offend  his  sword  to  the
Lilieral  leader.  Juarez.
He  was  ordered  to  join
Gen.  Vidaurri  near  the
northern  frontier :  but
in  1888  the  latter  com-
plained to  the  secretary  of  war  that  (ionzalez  was
of  a  rebellious  disposition,  and  requested  that
he  might  be  recalled.  After  accompanying  the
president  in  his  flight  from  the  capital  as  far  as
Sin  Luis  PofeoaL  he  made  a  countermarch  to  the
mountains  of  Hidalgo,  where  he  maintained  him-
self till  the  year  1888.  Toward  the  end  of  the
year,  he  made  a  rapid  march  through  the  midst
Of  the  French  and  im|>erial  forces,  joined  (ien.
Escobedo.  and  accompanied  him  in  liis  aihance
toward  the  south.  He  was  promoted  colonel  in
1806,  brigadier-general  in  1st;;,  and  in  .lune  en-
tered tin- capital  with  F.scobcdo,  (  urmia,  and  Ilcr-
riozabal.  In  1088  he  was  appointed  governor  of
the  government  palace  by  Juarez,  and  he  occupied
this  position  till  1871,  when  he  was  arrested  on  a

charge  of  complicity  in  the  dhampeaianei  from

the  palace  of  the  gold  and  silver  plate  which had

belonged  to  the  enperoc  Maximilian. He  took

advantage  of  the  revolution  of  1*71  t<>  exa|H\
and  joined  the  forces  of  PorfWo  Ihaz.  He  after-
ward refused to Mihmit to the government of


870


gonzalkz  balcaecb


GONZALEZ  VIGIL


Lndo  tl««  Tejada,  and  in  .January,  1876.  joined
tin-  tliird  rebellion  of  Porflrio  Diaz,  and  organ-
ized in  the  eastern  frontier  states  I  todies  of  litfht
eavalrv  that  harassed  and  checked  the  govern-
ment forces.  <>n  it>  Nov.,  ikti;,  daring  Ehe  de-
cisive liiittle  of  Looum  de  Tecoac,  between  Ala-
torre  and  l>iaz,  flnniaku  arrived  at  the  head  of
:{,(MH)  eavalrv,  and  with  a  vigorous  attack  disor-
ganized and  entirely  routed  Alatorre.  This  ac-
tion decided  the  overthrow  of  Lerdo's  govern-
ment, and  in  1878  Diaz  appointed  Gonzalez  secre-
tary of  war,  in  which  office  he  did  much  for  the
Mexican  army.  In  1879  he  was  made  commander-
in-chief  of  the  northwestern  district,  where  he
soon  quelled  all  seditious  movements,  and,  return-
ing to  Mexico,  received  from  congress  the  rank  of
general  of  division,  and  the  title  of  "  Pacificator
of  the  Occident." In  June,  1880,  he  resigned  the

Krt folio  of  war,  as  his  candidacy  for  president  had
en  proclaimed  by  Diaz.  He  was  declared  elected
on  88  Sept.,  and  on  30  Nov.  assumed  the  executive,
and  appointed  Diaz  secretary  of  public  works.  His
administration  was  distinguished  by  financial  mis-
management. He  decreed  extraordinary  import
duties  on  foreign  manufactures,  doubled  the
stamp-duty,  and  debased  the  currency  by  the  issue
of  a  great  quantity  of  nickel  coins,  which  were
largely  disposed  of  to  speculators  at  a  discount.
The  opposition  to  these  culminated  in  a  riot  in
1884,  which  led  to  their  withdrawal  and  redemp-
tion by  the  government.  The  proposition  to  allow
the  government  the  use  of  about  £18,000,000  for
expenses  to  be  incurred  in  settling  the  English  debt
led  to  another  riot  in  November,  1884  (see  Diaz).
In  the  same  year  the  Monte  de  Piedad  bank  was
forced  to  suspend  by  the  efforts  of  a  rival  institu-
tion, and  through  reports  that  government  would
make  a  demand  on  the  bank  for  a  forced  loan,  which
proved  unfounded.  Gonzalez  also  published  a  de-
cree suppressing  the  liberty  of  the  press.  On  30
Nov.,  1884,  he  resigned  the  government  to  his  suc-
cessor, (Jen.  Diaz,  with  a  bankrupt  exchequer.  He
has  since  been  governor  of  the  state  of  Guanajuato.
On  SO  Oct.,  1885,  there  was  presented  in  congress
a  resolution  of  impeachment  against  the  ex-presi-
dent for  misappropriation  of  public  funds,  which
in  November  was  referred  to  the  section  for  the
grand  jury  of  the  congress  for  action.  This  accu-
Bation  lUWLnot  been  pressed.

GONZALEZ  BALCARCE,  Antonio,  South
American  soldier,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  Argentine
Republic,  in  1774;  d.  there,  5  Aug.,  1819.  He  en-
tered the  army  at  an  early  age,  was  taken  prisoner
by  the  English  in  Montevideo,  5  Nov.,  1807,  and
remained  in  England  until  the  declaration  of
peace.  He  then  went  to  Spain  and  fought  against
the  armies  of  Napoleon.  He  returned  to  South
America  in  1809,  and  took  part  in  the  Argentine
revolution  of  25  May,  1810.  Gonzalez  was  ap-
pointed major-general  of  the  expedition  to  assist
the  revolutionists  of  Peru,  and  gained  the  victo-
ries of  Suypacha  and  Cotagaita.  He  was  then
made  commander-in-chief  of  the  army,  and  soon
afterward  entered  the  city  of  La  Plata,  and  was
appointed  its  prefect.  He  filled  the  office  of  presi-
dent of  the  republic  in  1816,  crossed  to  Chili  to
join  the  army  of  San  Martin  in  the  following  year,
and  commanded  the  infantry  in  the  battle  of
Maypu,  5  April,  1818.  As  "commander  of  the
army  of  the  south  he  drove  the  Spaniards  from
Concepcion.  He  then  returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,
and  died  suddenly  while  engaged  in  preparing  a
plan  of  defence  for  the  city  against  the  Spaniards.

GONZALEZ  DE  SANTA  CRUZ,  Roque,  South
American  missionary,  b.  in  Asuncion, Paraguay,


in  1576;  d.  in  Uruguay  in  1628.  He  was  born
of  Bpanfth  parents,  entered  the  Society  of  Jeans  in
1600,  and  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  the  (Juay-
ciirus.  lie  effected  numerous  conversions,  among
them  that  of  the  cacique  and  his  wife,  and  in  Hill
determined  to  found  a  "reduction"  or  Indian  col-
ony on  the  river  Jujuv.  an  affluent  of  the  Bermejo,>at
24  south  latitude.  He  had  already  formed  several
Indians  into  a  community  when  he  was  summoned
in  1618  to  take  charge  of  the  reduction  of  St.  Igna-
tius, near  the  Parana.  He  subsequently  converted
a  large  body  of  Indians  at  Itapua,  and,  after  visit-
ing Asuncion  for  supplies,  founded  at  the  former
place  an  Indian  village  containing  nearly  800  fami-
lies. In  August,  1610,  he  founded  a  third  colony
on  the  St.  Anne  river.  On  8  Dec.,  1688,  he  laid
the  foundation  of  a  colony  which  he  called  Con-
ception, and  which  soon  had  a  population  of  nearly
4,000.  In  1626  he  founded  the  colony  of  St.  Nicho-
las, containing  400  families,  and  that  of  St.  Francis
X'avicr,  with  1,200,  as  well  as  several  others.  He
was  murdered  by  order  of  a  cacique,  who  feared
the  missionary  was  undermining  his  authority.

GONZALEZ  DEL  VALLE,  Manuel,  Cuban
lawyer,  b.  in  Havana  in  October,  1802;  d.  there
in  January,  1884.  He  studied  at  the  university
of  his  native  city,  received  the  diploma  of  doc-
tor of  philosophy,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  taught  law  and  philosophy  in  the  University
of  Havana,  and  filled  many  high  offices  in  that
city.  He  published  a  "  Diccionario  de  las  Musas  "
(New  York,  1827):  "  Programa  de  Materia-  filosofi-
cas  "  (Havana,  1839) ;  "  Articulos  sobre  Psicologia  "
(1840) ;  and  "  Estudios  de  la  Moral  "  (1843).— His
brother,  Jose  Z..  author,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in
1820;  d.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  in  October,  1851,  studied
law  in  his  native  city.  He  went  to  Madrid  to  finish
his  education,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.
He  was  for  many  years  professor  of  natural  phi-
losophy in  the  University  of  Havana,  but,  on  ac-
count of  his  health,  went  to  Spain  in  1850,  and
was  appointed  honorary  secretary  to  the  queen.
He  published  several  novels,  including  "Luisa,"
"Carmen  y  Adela,"  and  "Amar  y  Morir"  (1839);
"  Tropicales,"  a  volume  of  poems  (Havana,  1842);
"  Viajes  por  Europa  "  (1843) ;  "  Guirnalde  Fiine-
bre"  (1844);  "Rasgo  Historico  de  la  Filosofia"
(1848);  and  "Lecciones  de  Meteorologia  "  (1849). —
Another  brother,  Ambrosio,  physician,  b.  in  Ha-
vana in  1822,  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  his
native  city  in  September,  1846,  and  appointed  to
fill  the  chair  of  anatomy  at  the  university.  He  is
a  member  of  several  Spanish  scientific  societies,
and  has  done  much  to  improve  the  sanitary  con-
ditions of  Havana.  He  published  "  Manual  del
Flebotomiano  "  and  "  Manual  de  Obstetricia "
(1849);  "Muerte  Aparente"  (1863);  "Higiene  Pu-
blica"  (1870);  and  "Tablas  Obituarias "  (1870-'8).

GONZXLEZ-  VIGIL,  Francisco  de  Paula,
Peruvian  author,  b.  in  Tacna,  15  Sept.,  1792 ;  d.  in
Lima  in  1876.  He  entered  the  seminarv  of  Are-
quipa,  and  was  ordained  priest  in  1818,  but  after-
ward became  vice-rector  of  the  College  of  the
independence,  of  Arequipa.  In  1825  he  was
elected  deputy  to  congress,  and  came  to  Lima.  He
opposed  the  dictatorship  of  Bolivar,  and  voted
against  the  constitution  which  that  general  tried
to  impose  on  Peru.  In  1832  he  was  again  elected
deputy,  and  in  1834  was  editor  of  the  "  Genio  del
Rimac,"  the  organ  of  the  Liberal-reform  part\.  hut
subsequently  retired  to  his  native  city,  whence  he
was  called  in  1836  to  take  charge  of  the  National
library.  In  1837  he  was  again  elected  to  congress
and  in  1838  re-elected,  when  he  pro|x>-e.l  the  in-
dictment of the  government  of Gamarra, but


DALL


»;??


inl  devoted  himself  t<>  literature  until  h<-

•■M.k  charge  Of the National  librae

sometime lif  whs  .in.-  (.f  tli tUoTSOf  ••  Kl  <  "ii-

■tituciona]."  1 1  i-  greet  work  is  ••  Defense  do  la
Autoridad  da  los  Gobieraoi  oonl  ra  lac  prctetisiones
de  la  Curia Uoinaua  "  (6  v..|s., I.iu:

i |>art <>f  which appeared under  the  title

isa  de  la  Autoridaade  loeOWepoa"

ilao  published  "  Los  Jesuitas  "  (4  role.) ;
•  i  l\.  con  Documento*,"  "  Roma,  6  el
Primipado  Politico  del  Romano  Pontilic.-."  ••  Diii-
logoe  solirc  la  BrietattCsi  da  Mob,"  "  Dm
Bossuet  v  <!.•  Ki'iiclon,"  "Cataoismo  Pat  riot  ico."
and  numerous  political  ami  social  pamphlets,  iu-
oluding  "  I'az  perpetua  en  America.'

GOOCH,  Frunk  A iistin.  chemist,  b.  in  Water-
town,  Haai ..  '-•  Hay,  1888.  Ha  am  graduated  at
Harvanl  in  \H?2,  and  was  an  assistant  under  Prof.
Josiah  P.  Oooka  in  the  chemical  laboratory  until

Bobaaqoantly  he  was  associated  in  the  ana-
lytical work  parfonaad  in  Wawpottj  It.  L,  under

the  authority of  the V.  S.  geological survey,  rc-

aai i lug,  in  1877  the  degree  <>f  Ph.  D.  from  Harvard
for  his  original  researches.  In  1M7!»  he  was  ap-
pointed  ajmnial  agent  to  the  tenth  U.  BL  census,
and  was  detailed  as  an  exjiert  to  make  analyses
of  nmls  and  iron  ores.  His  re|M>rt  on  these  sub-
jects appears  in  one  of  the  volumes  of  the  census.
From  1HH1  till  1884  Dr.  (tooch  was  chief  chemist
of  the  northern  transcontinental  survey,  and  from
1884  till  1886  assistant  chemist  to  the  l\  S.  geo-
logical survey  in  Washington.  In  1880  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  chemistry  in  Vale,  and  has
undertaken  the  reorganization  of  that  department,
which,  owing  to  the  development  of  the  Sheffield
scientific  school,  had  for  some  time  been  neglected.
The  Kent  chemical  lalioratory  at  Yale,  the  con-
struction of  which  was  to  have  been  begun  in  1887.
was  planned  by  him.  Dr.  Qooch  is  a  lamber  <>f
scientific  societies,  and  his  contributions  to  chemi-
cal literature,  though  few  in  number,  have  been  of
great  value.  They  consist  principally  of  descrip-
tions <>f  improved  methods  of  analysis,  ami  of  new
forms  of  apparatus,  including  the  "  Gooch  filter,"
which  is  now  extensively  UBSO.

GOOCH,  Sir  Williaiu,  hart.,  governor  of  Vir-
ginia, li.  in  Yarmouth,  England,  21  Oct.,  1(181 ;  d.
in  London,  17  Dec.,  1751.  He  served  with  distinc-
tion under  Marll>orough  in  the  low  countries,  and
pandered  important  services  in  the  rebellion  of
171").  In  1 7*27  he  succeeded  Sir  Hugh  Drysdale  as
governor  of  Virginia,  in  which  office  he  continued
until  1747.  In  1740  Gov.  Gooch  joined  Admiral
Vernon  in  his  expedition  against  Cartagena,  New
Grenada  (See  Eslaba,  Skbastian),  was  severely
wounded,  and  contracted  the  fever  from  which
many  of  the  Kurdish  squadron  died.  He  returned
to  Virginia,  and  in  174(5  was  appointed  brigadier*
■Batal  in  the  army  raised  to  invade  Canada,  but
declined  to  serve.  The  same  year  he  was  created
a  baronet  and  appointed  major-general.  In  1749,
after  twenty  years*  service  as  governor  of  Virginia,
he  returned  to  England  "amid  the  blessings  and
tears  of  his  people,  among  whom  he  had  lived  as  a
wise  and  l>cucfici-ut  father."  In  April.  1745.  (J. .v.
Gooch  made  an  address  opposing  all  religious  or-
ganizatioiis  except  the  established  church,  and  pro-
posing punishments  for  other  bodies  that  should
ne  in  public  for  religious  pur|tosea.

QOODALE.  Elaine,  poet,  b.  in  Mount  Wash-
ington.  Berkshire  c...,  Mass.,  1*  Oct.,  1803.  Her
life  has  Invii  closely  associated  with  that  of  her
Doru  Read.  b.  in  Mount  Washington,  20
986.  The  sisters  were  brought  up  on  their  fa-
ther's farm. Elaine learned to read vcrv  early.


and  began  to  make  verse*  almost  as  soon  as  she
began  to  write.  Her  BktaY  also  composed  verses
at  the  age  of  mx.  In  a  short  time  lx it h  were  en-
thusiastic students,  and  were  educated  ohiaflj

their  mother. After  a time the  children est

Uehed  a  monthly  paper  f.»r  the  entertainment  of

the  family.  Blaine  bring  Hie  .sditor  ami  copying
into  it  their  various  composition*.  A  selection  <>f
tins,.  appeared  in  "St.  Nicholas"  for  Decern  tier,
1H77.  Elaine  Itccame  a  teacher  in  the  Hampton,
institute,  and  editor  of  the  Indian  department
of  the  •'Southern  Workman"  in  \ss:>,.  |„
she  made  a  six  weeks'  tour  of  ottscrvation  on  the
(ireat  Sioux  reservation,  and  reOOfded  her  imiires-
sions  in  a  scries  ,,f  papfltl  printed  in  New  York
and  Boston  journals.  On  1  Nov..  lxxO,  she  was
appointed  government  day-school  teacher  at  White
river  camp.  Lower  Brule  agency.  Dakota.  She  has
published  "Journal  of  a  Fanner's  Daughter"  (New
York.  1HN1),  and  the  joint  publications  of  the  two
sisters  consist  of  the  following  collections  of  their

SKietrv :  "Apple  Blossoms;  Venal  of  Two  Chil-
Iren.''  selected  from  the  work  of  the  preceding  six
years  (New  York,  1H78);  "In  Berkshire  with  tin-
Wild  Flowers"  (1871*);  and  "Verses  from  Sky
Farm,"  an  enlarged  edition  of  the  preceding  (181

GOOOAIiK,  Oeorgc  Lincoln,  botanist,  b.  in
Saco,  Me.,  I  Aug.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1888,  and  received  his  medical  degree
at  Harvard  and  Bowdoin  in  1803.  For  three  years
he  practised  in  Portland  and  was  instructor  of
anatomy  in  the  Portland  school  for  medical  in-
struction. In-coming  also  in  1804  state  assayer  of
Maine.  In  1S(>7  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
natural  science  and  applied  chemistry  in  Bow-
doin. and  in  1808  was  made  professor  of  materia
medica  in  the  medical  school  of  Maine,  and  also
a  memlier  of  the  board  of  agriculture.  He  re-
signed these  offices  in  1872,  and  Ijecamc  instructor
in  botany  and  university  lecturer  on  vegetable
physiology  in  Harvard.  In  187:$  he  was  made  as-
sistant professor  of  vegetable  physiology,  in  1878
professor  of  botany,  and  in  1 H 71*  director  of  the
botanic  garden.  Dr.  (ioodale  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  tlie  council  of  Harvard  college  library  in
1875,  and  in  1881  a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the
Museum  of  comparative  anatomy.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  ■oianOBl
and  of  other  scientific  societies.  Besides  various  me-
moirs on  iMitauical  subjects.  Dr.  (ioodale  has  pub-
lished "  Wild  Flowers  of  North  America"  (Boston,
1882);  "Vegetable  Physiology  "  (New  York,  1885);
and  "Vegetable  Histology  "  (1885).  The  last  two
with  other  matter  have  been  combined  under  the
title  of  -Physiological  Botany."  to  form  the  2d
volume  of  Gray's  "  Botanical  Text-Book  "  (li

GOODALK.  Nathan,  loyalist,  b.  in  Salem.
Mass..  in  1741  :  d.  in  Newton.  Mass..  in  1800.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  175!*.  and  was  one  of
the  loyalists  that  signed  the  address  approving
(iov.  Hutchinson's  course  in  1774.  but  recanted.
II |  also  signed  a  similar  address  to  Gen.  Gage.
Early  in  177")  he  retired  to  Nantucket,  and  after
the  organization  of  the  Ftsderal  government  he  was
clerk  of  the  F.  S.  courts  in  Massachusetts.

000DALL,  Albert  Gallatin,  bank  note  en-
graver, I  >.  in  Montgomery.  Ala.. 31  Dot,  1881 :  d.  in
New  York  city.  1!)  Feb.,  1887,  His  mother,  having
been  left  a  widow  in  straitened  circumstance-,
moved  with  her  family  to  the  (nek  reservation
in  Alabama  and  engaged  in  farming,  but  was
driven  out  with  tin-  other  settlers  in  Sl8  bv  the
Indians.  She  then  emigrated  to  Galveston,  Tex.,
and  died  the  year  following.  When  fifteen  years
of  age.  young  Ooodoil  entered  the  Texan  navy  as


878


GOODE


GOODELL


a  midshipman,  remaining  three  years,  and  seeing
active  M-rvicc  daring  the  m  between  Mexico  and
TftTTF  In  N"ViuiIht,  1H44,  he  went  t<>  Havana,
Cuba,  and  about  ■  year  afterward  began  to  learn
copper-plate  BDJgnving.  H«'  removed  to  Phila-
delphia in  1848,  beOMM  acquainted  with  Jacob
Perkins's  method  of  engraving  on  steel,  and.com-
ing  to  Sew  York,  connected  himself  with  the  firm
from  which  was  afterward  organized  the  American
bank-note  company,  of  which  he  was  during  the
last  twelve  years  of" his  life  the  president.  In  1858
he  went  toBttropa  on  a  business  mission,  visiting
Greece.  Turkey,  Russia.  Norway,  and  Sweden,  then
and  during  subsequent  visits  obtaining  all  the
foreign  orders  executed  by  the  company.  The
Greek  bank-notes  were  the  first  foreign  notes  en-
graved on  steel,  those  ordered  by  the  czar  coming
next  in  order.  Besides  his  European  contracts
Mr.  Goodall  secured  several  large  orders  from  the
South  American  states.  He  was  presented  in  1800
by  Alexander  II.  of  Russia  with  a  costly  seal
ring  set  in  diamonds,  and  in  1879  was  made
•'knight  commander"  of  the  "Order  of  the  Rose"
by  the  emperor  of  Brazil.  In  1800  he  went  to  St.
Petersburg  in  charge  of  five  American  engravers,
to  execute  an  order  obtained  by  him  the  year  pre-
vious, and  to  instruct  Russian  engravers  in  Ameri-
can methods.  Besides  being  skilful  with  the  burin,
Mr.  Goodall  was  a  proficient  linguist,  and  the  ma-
sonic fraternity,  of  which  he  was  an  active  mem-
ber, was  indebted  to  him  for  the  translation  of  the
proceedings  of  various  foreign  Lodges.

GOODE,  George  Brown,  ichthyologist,  b.  in
New  Albany.  Ind.,  18  Feb.,  1851.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesleyan  in  1870,  and  in  1871  took  charge
of  the  college-  museum.  In  1873  received  an  ap-
pointment on  the  staff  of  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion. From  1874  till  1887  he  held  the  office  of
chief  of  the  division  of  fisheries,  and  on  the  or-
ganization of  the  National  museum  became  its  as-
sistant director.  The  natural  history  division  of
the  U.  S.  government  at  the  Philadelphia  exhibi-
tion in  1^70  was  under  his  supervision.  He  was
l'.  S.  commissioner  to  the  international  fishery  ex-
hibitions held  in  Berlin  in  1880,  and  in  London  in
1883,  and  was  also  a  member  of  the  government
executive  board  for  the  New  Orleans,  Cincinnati,
and  Louisville  expositions  in  1884.  In  1877  he
was  employed  by  the  department  of  state  as  statis-
tical expert  in  connection  with  the  Halifax  fish-
eries commission,  and  in  1879-'80  was  in  charge  of
the  fisheries  division  of  the  tenth  census.  He  trav-
elled through  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  studying
the  administration  of  public  museums,  and  made
explorations  in  the  Bermudas  and  Florida.  On  30
Aug.,  1887,  he  succeeded  Spencer  F.  Baird  as  fish-
commissioner.  His  published  papers  include  about
100  titles  on  topics  in  ichthyology,  museum  ad-
ministration, and  fishery  economy.  Dr.  Goode  has
published  in  book-form  "  Catalogue  of  the  Fishes
of  the  Bermudas"  (Washington,  1876);  "Annual
Resources  of  the  United  States"  (1876);  with
Tarleton  H.  Bean,  "  A  Catalogue  of  the  Fishes
of  Essex  County  "  (Salem,  1879) ;  "  Game  Fishes  of
the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1879);  "  American
Fisheries :  A  History  of  the  Menhaden  "  (1880) ;
"  Materials  for  a  History  of  the  American  Mackerel
Fishery  "  (Washington,  1882) ;  "  Materials  for  a
History  of  the  Sword  Fishes"  (1882);  "  The  Natu-
ral History  of  the  Bermuda  Islands"  (1882, edited) ;
"A  Review  of  the  Fishing  Industries  of  the  United
States"  (London,  1883):  "The  Fisheries  of  the
United  States"  (Washington,  1884);  "Status  of
the  United  States  Fish  Commission  in  1884"  (1884);
"Beginnings  of Natural History in America"


(1886):  "  Britons.  Saxons,  and  Virginians"  (1887);
and  "  Virginia  Cousins"  (Richmond,  1SKM).

GOODK,  John,  solicitor-general,  b.  in  Bedford
county,  Va.,  27  May,  1880,  Be  was  graduated  at
Emory  and  Henry  college  in  1848.  studied  law  at
Lexington.  \"a..  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1851.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  a  member
of  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates,  and  in  1861  sat
in  the  State  convention  that  passed  the  ordinance
of  secession.  He  was  twice  sent  to  the  Confeder-
ate congress,  serving  from  22  Feb..  1862,  until  the
end  of  the  war,  and  during  the  recesses  of  t  hat  body
acted  as  volunteer  aide  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Jubal
A.  Early.  After  the  war  Mr.  Goode  removed  to
Norfolk,  Va.,  but  is  now  (1887)  engaged  in  the  prac-
tice of  the  law  in  Washington,  D.  C.  Shortly  after
his  removal  to  Norfolk  he  was  again  elected  to  the
Virginia  legislature,  and  was  then  chosen  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1875,  till
3  March,  1881.  Mr.  Goode  was  a  member  of  the
National  Democratic  conventions  of  1868  and  1N?2,
and  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1852,  185(1.  and
1884.  In  May,  1885,  he  was  appointed  solicitor-
general  of  the  United  States,  and  retained  the  of-
fice until  August,  1886.  During  his  term  of  service
he  visited  British  Columbia,  to  represent  the  United
States  in  an  extradition  case.

GOODE,  William  Osborne,  legislator,  b.  in
Mecklenburgh  county,  Va.,  16  Sept.,  1798 ;  d.  in
Boydton,  Va.,  3  July,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1821,  beginning  the  practice  of  his
profession  at  Boydton.  He  was  for  many  years  a
member  of  the  legislature,  taking  an  active  part
in  the  debates  on  slavery  in  1832,  and  was  sent
as  a  delegate  to  the  State  reform  convention  in
1827-'32.  He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  31  May,  1841,  till  8
March,  1843.  He  was  again,  for  several  successive
years,  chosen  to  the  state  legislature,  and  was  three
times  elected  speaker  of  the  Virginia  house  of  dele-
gates. He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1850,  and  was  again  elected  to
congress,  serving  from  5  Dec.,  1853,  to  3  March.
1859.  He  was  re-elected,  but  died  before  taking
his  seat.  Regarding  slavery,  he  was  in  favor  of
gradual  emancipation.

GOODELL,  William,  missionary,  b.  in  Tem-

fleton,  Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
'a.,  18  Feb.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1817,  spent  the  three  years  following  in
the  A ndover theologi-
cal seminary,  and  in
1822  sailed  for  the  isl-
and of  Malta,  as  a  mis-
sionary. After  a  year
spent  there  in  the
study  of  languages,  he
proceeded  to  Beirut,
where  he  remained
five  years,  enduring
many  hardships  and
dangers,  the  town  be-
ing plundered,  his
house  sacked  by  Be-
douin Arabs,  and  his
life  threatened,  after
the  repulse  of  the
Greeks  in  March,  1826.
Mr.  Goodell  went,  in
1831,  to  Constantino-
ple, where  he  labored  especially  among  the  Arme-
nians. During  his  twenty-nine  years  of  missionary
life  Dr.  Goodell  was  compelled  to  change  his  resi-
dence thirty-three  times. The  crowning  work  of


c^A^*^


(.<><  »DI


I I'M  W


079


hi>  lif.',  t<>  which  he  devoted  the  greater  part  of  Mi
during  tin-  fifteen  years  preceding  its  publica-
UOO.  WM  tbfl  translation  of  1 1 k -  Scriptures  from  tin-
mil  Greek  and  Hebrew  Into  Armeno  Tiirithti,
The  <  M<1  Testament  rm  oomplotad  in  1*41.  and  tin-
Now  Tiatamnnl  aboul  two  vears  tflwiiil  Ha
.» I m - 1 1 1  nveral  years' additional  labor  upon  tin- work,
■ad  finished  its  rcvi-ion  in  |s<;:{.  Fnfcchled  hyage
ami  lOBC  residence  in  the  HML  he  returned  total
I'm  lie  had  received  the  degree

1  D.  from  Hamilton  college  In  1864  Be  contrib-
uted to  the  New  York  "Observer"  pnperi  entitled
c«  of  tin-  Missionary  s  Farly  Life."
which  In- did  not  complete.  See  hi-  "  Memoirs,"  by
Bdward  I ».  < ; .  Prime  (New  York.  1878).— Hhi  wife.
Aliiirnil  !*.,»>.  i"  llolden.  Muss.,  in  17IMi;d.in  Phila-
delphia, 11  July,  1871, gave  her  boaband  attaint
aid  ill  his  work.— Their  son,  William,  phvsiciaii.  h.
in  Malta,  17 <»<t.,  1888,  was  graduated  al  Williams  in
1881, 100  at  Jefferson  medloal  college  in  1864  II*-
tirst  practised  his  profession  for  six  years  in  Con-
stantinople, when  he  returned  to  the  united  States,
establishing  himself  at  West  Chester,  I'a.  In  1865
he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  whereafter  lecturing
for  three  years  in  the  ine<Iical  de|tartment  of  the
Tniversitv  of  Pennsylvania,  he  was,  in  1874,  aj>-
pointed  clinical  professor  of  the  diseases  of  women
and  children. Dr.  Qoodell  has  l>cen  a  prolific  wri-

ter on subjects connected  with  his  ipeeialty,  and

is  the  author  of  "  Lessons  in  Gvnaxjology  "  (Phila-
delphia.  isxil).— Another  son,  Henry  Hill,  edu-
aaftor,  b.  in  Constantinople.  80  May,  is;{n,  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  INti'i.  He'  entered  the
army  and  served  until  18(W,  when  he  was  aide-de-
camp  on  the  >tatT  of  Col.  Hissed,  of  the  l!»th  army
corps.  lie  taught  the  modern  languages  at  Willis-
ton  seminary,  Kasthampton,  Mass.,  in  1864-'7,  and
afterward  in  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  college
at  Amherst,  of  which  institution  he  was  chosen
president.  1  duly,  1806.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"  Biographical  Record  of  the  Class  of  Sixty-two"
(Amherst)  and  of  a  **  Compilation  of  Historic  Fic-
tion" (Amherst.  1878}

Q00DEN0W,  John  M.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Massa-
chusetts in  1782;  d.  in  Stciilicnville,  Ohio,  in  1838.
He  received  a  public-school  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Stcuben-
ville,  to  which  place  he  was  an  early  emigrant.
He  was  a  prominent  mason,  served  in  the  legisla-
ture, and  held  other  offices.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat,  earring  from  7
Dec,  1829,  till  9  April,  1k{0.  when  he  resigned  to
become  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio.  He
had  a  large  practice  at  the  bar,  and  published
"American  Jurisprudence  in  Contrast  with  the
rim-  of  English  Common  Law  "(1819).  The
object  of  this  work,  of  which  only  100  copies  were
printed,  was  to  prove  that  the  courts  in  the  state
nol  possessed  of  common  law  jurisdiction.

Q00DFELL0W,  Kdunrd.  editor,  h.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  28  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at
th«-  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  184$  and  entered
the  government  service  as  aid  and  sub-assistant  in
the  U.S.  Coast  survey.  In  i860  he  became  assistant
in the I  .  S.  coast  and  geodetic survey, and  was

executive  assistant  from  1861  till  1889,  and  again
from  1H7.*>  till  1888.  He  then  became  editor  of  the
publications  .if  the  survey,  and  in  that  capacity
has  edited  the  annual  reports  for  the  rears  from
brother,  Henry,  soldier,  h.  in

Philadelphia.  Pa..  'J7  Aug..  1HW;  d.  iii  Fort  Leaven-
worth, Kansas  ",, accompanied the
ic  exjKslition  of  I»r.  Klisha  K.  Kane  from  M
until  Octolx?r,  18.VI,  and  received  the  medals
presented  l>y  the  British  government  to  thOM  who


served  on  ex  |  H-d  it  [ona  in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin.
Subsequently  he  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to
the  Philadelphia  Iwrin  I8.59.and  to  pfaafjai  I-

the  I".  S.  circuit  curt  in  1881  lb-  entered  the
National  arm\  as  captain  in  the  81a1  Pennsylvania
volunteers,  ami  scrvisl  continuously  w  it  Ii  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  until  the  liattles  of  the  Wilderness
and  S|M.ttsylvania.  receiving  the  Imwtsof  lieiiten-
aiit-colnnel  and  colonel  for  gallant  conduct  in  the
battles  of  Gettysburg  and  the  Wilderness.  In  J-V|»-
ruary.  |h»>7,  ha  beOMM  major  and  judge-advocate
in  the  I'.  S.  arm\.  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
judge-advocate  oj  the  I teiiartineiit  of  the  Missouri.

H00DH1  B,  Benjamin,  senator,  i>.  in  Salem,

Mass.,  1  Oct.,  174*;  ,1.  there,  'JH  July,  1N14.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1766,  and  early  en-
gaged in  commercial  pursuits.  He  was  a  immUr
of  the  >tate  tanata  from  17H4  till  17Ht».  when  he  was
elected  to  the  1st  congress  from  Massachusetts,
and  served  from  17*!l  till  17!»">.  His  knowledge  of
business  affairs  proved  of  service  to  him  as  a  legis-
lator, and,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Pit/simmons,
of  Philadelphia, he  drew  up  a  code  of  revenue  laws,
the  majority  of  which  are  still  in  force.  In  1796,
on  the  resignation  of  (ieorge  ("idiot,  he  was  elected
to  the  l'.  S.  senate.  Barfing  until  1H00.  when  he  re-
signed and  retired  from  public  life.  During  his
term  as  senator  he  gained  an  enviable  reputation
as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  commerce. —  His
son.  Jonathan,  merchant,  b.  in  Salem.  Mass.,  21
June,  17m;{;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  IK-4M.  received
a  liberal  education,  and  at  the  ace  of  fifteen  en-
tered the  counting-room  of  John  Norris,  of  Salem,
who  was  extensively  engaged  in  trade  with  Kurope
and  the  West  Indies.  After  two  voyages  as  super-
cargo. Mr.  Goodhue  established  himself  in  business
in  New  York  city  in  1807.  The  long  embargo,  and
the  subsequent  war  with  Kngland.  were  unfavorable
to  his  business,  and  on  receipt  of  the  news  of  the
conclusion  of  peace  he  despatched  an  express  to
Boston,  with  instructions  to  proclaim  the  tidings
in  every  town  on  the  route.  Alter  1  his  period  Mr.
Goodhue  lM'came  a  prosperous  merchant.

GOODMAN,  John,  physician.  1>.  in  Frankfort,
Kv..  88  July.  1^57.  He  was  graduated  at  George-
town college  in  185(1,  and  at  the  University  of
Louisiana  in  ls."i<» He  subsequently  began  practice

at  Louisville,  maJring  a  specialty  of  obstetrics  and

the  diseases  of  women.  In  I860  he  was  demonstrator
of  anatomy  in  the  Kentucky  school  of  medicine,  in
1868  was  appointed  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the
Louisville  medical  college,  and  in  1875  was  chosen
to  fill  the  same  chair  in  the  first -named  institution.
He  ha*  contributed  to  medical  literature  "  A  New
Method  of  conducting  the  After-Treat inent  in  the

Operation  for Veakso- vaginal  Fistula."  "Treatment
of  Chronic  Cystitis  in  the  Female."  "Menstruation
and  the  Law  on  Monthly  Periodicity."  ate.

800VMAN.  Walteri  artist,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land. 11  May.  1S:{H.  He  studied  his  profession  un-
der J.  M.  Leigh  and  at  the  Koyal  academy,  where  he
was  admitted  a  student  in  1867.  In  INtM)  he  went
to  the  Continent,  where  he  remained  three  years.
In  1*64  ha  accompanied  Seflor  Joaquin  Cuadras,  a
Spanish  artist,  to  the  West  Indies,  where  he  resided
for  five  years,  most  of  the  time  in  Cul>a.  He  not
only  painted  during  his  stay  on  that  island,  but  wrote
for  the  New  York  and  local  press.  To  the  latter  he
Contributed  a  .series  of  humorous  sketches  entitled
"I'n  Yiaje  al  Kstranjero."  He  was  arrested  and
imprisoned  in  Koro  Castle  on  suspicion  of  being
connected  with  the  Cuban  revolution  of  1869.  and
compelled  to  leave  the  inland.  After  a  year  in  the
1'nitcd  States,  he  returned  to  Kngland.  where  he
devoted  himself  to  portrait-|>ainting. He  was  the


660


GOODRICH


GOODRICH


tir-t  Kuropean  artist  to  obtain  a  commission  from
it  native  of  China.  Mr.  Goodman  has  painted  por-
traits of  Sir  Thomas  and  Lady  Brassey,  Wilkie  Col-
lins, the  Duke  of  Edinburgh,  and  others.  He  also
contributes  to  periodical  literature  Iwith  drawings
■ad  articles.  A  series  of  sketches  of  life  in  Cuba,
fust  published  In  "  All  the  Year  Round,"  have  been
since  collected  in  book-form  under  the  title  of
••  The  l'carl  of  tlie  Antilles;  or,  an  Artist  in  Cuba."

GOODRICH,  Aaron,  jurist,  l>.  in  Sempronius,
Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  6  July,  1807.  His  father  moved
to  western  New  York  in  1815,  and  the  son  spent
part  of  his  minority  on  a  farm.  He  studied  law
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  Dover.  Tenn..  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Stewart  coun-
ty, Tenn.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1847  and  1848,  and  a  presidential  elector  in
1848,  having  taken  an  active  part  in  the  canvass
of  that  year,  as  a  Whig.  He  was  appointed  by
President  Taylor  in  1849  chief  justice  of  the  re-
cently organized  territory  of  Minnesota,  and  served
three  years.  Subsequently  he  practised  law  in  St.
Paul,  and  after  the  admission  of  Minnesota  into
the  Union,  in  1858,  he  was  appointed  by  the  legis-
lature one  of  a  commission  to  revise  the  laws  and
prepare  a  system  of  pleading  and  practice.  Two
years  later  he  was  made  chairman  of  a  similar  com-
mission. Judge  Goodrich  continued  to  take  an  ac-
tive part  in  politics,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na-
tional Republican  convention  at  Chicago,  1860,
where  he  warmly  supported  his  friend,  William  H.
Seward.  In  March,  1861,  at  Mr.  Seward's  sugges-
tion, he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  secre-
tary of  legation  at  Brussels,  which  office  he  held
eight  years,  serving  repeatedly  as  charge  d'affaires
at  his  j)ost,  and  as  bearer  of  despatches  to  and  from
his  government.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  History
of  the  Character  and  Achievements  of  the  so-called
Christopher  Columbus  "  (New  York,  1874).

GOODRICH,  Charles  Augustas,  clergyman,  b.
in  Ridgefield,  Conn.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1812,  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Yates,  of  East
Hartford,  and  in  1816  was  ordained  and  installed
as  pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  in
Worcester,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  four  years.
In  1820  he  settled  in  Berlin,  Conn.,  and  in  1848
removed  to  Hartford,  where  he  held  a  pastorate.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  held
other  offices  of  trust.  He  was  associated  with  his
brother  Samuel  (Peter  Parley)  in  writing  books
for  the  young,  and  also  published  the  following
volumes  independently:  "  View  *  of  Religions"
(1829);  "Lives  of  the  Signers"  (Hartford,  1829;
2d  ed.,  New  York,  1836);  "History  of  the  United
States  of  America  "  (Boston,  1852-'5;  revised  edi-
tion, 1867);  "Family  Tourist "  (1848) ;"  Family
Sabbath-Day  Miscellany"  (Philadelphia,  1855);
"Geography  of  the  Chief  Places  mentioned  in
the  Bible  "  (New  York,  1855);  "  Greek  Grammar  "
(Hartford,  1855) ;  "  Child's  History  of  the  United
States"  (Philadelphia,  1855);  "Bible  History  of
Prayer "  (1855) ;  "  Great  Events  of  American  His-
tory " ;  "  Outlines  of  Geography " ;  and  "  Univer-
sal Traveller." — Charles  Augustus's  brother,  Sam-
uel tfriswold  (Peter  Parley),  author,  b.  in
Ridgefield,  Conn.,  19  Aug.,  1793;  d.  in  New  York
city,  9  May,  1860,  in  1823-'4  travelled  abroad,
and  on  returning  to  the  United  States  became
a  book- publisher  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  began
to  issue  juvende  tales  there.  Removing  thence
to  Boston,  from  1828  till  1842  he  edited  an  origi-
nal annual,  "  The  Token."  The  contributions  and
illustrations  to  this  were  exclusively  the  products
of  American  authors  and  artists,  and  it  contained


poems,  tales,  and  essays,  from  the  pen  of  the
editor.  The  encouragement  that  he  gave  to  young
writers  became  proverbial.  Anwwig  these  waa  Na-
thaniel Hawthorne,  the  Ix-st  of  whose  "Twice-
Told  Tales"  appeared  originally  in  "  The  Token.'*
In  ls:t8-'9  Mr.  Goodrich  was  in  the  Massachusetts
senate,  and  did  much
to  improve  and  re-
form legislation.  He
established. and  from
1841  till  1854  edited,
"  Merry's  Museum
and  Parley's  Maga-
zine." He  was  con-
sul of  the  United
States  in  Paris  from
1851  till  1855,  dur-
ing Fillmore's  ad-
ministration. While
there  he  arranged  for
the  publication  of  a
series  of  books  in
France,  under  his  su-
pervision. Mr.  Good-
rich published  alto-
gether about  200  vol-
umes, mainly  juve-
nile and  education-
al, which  achieved  a

wide  popularity.  About  170  of  the  number  were
issued  under  the  name  of  "  Peter  Parley."  Their
popularity  in  this  country  led  to  their  republica-
tion in  Europe,  and  subsequently  his  pen-name
was  fraudulently  attached  to  over  seventy  volumes
in  this  country  and  abroad.  Mr.  Goodrich  retired
from  active  authorship  in  1859.  While  most  of
his  publications  were  of  the  character  of  compila-
tions, he  issued  some  meritorious  original  books.
His  publications  include  "  The  Poetical  Works
of  John  Trumbull "  (1820) ;  "  Tales  of  Peter  Par-
ley about  America"  (New  York,  1827);  similar
books  on  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  other  countries
(1828-'34) ;  "  Outlines  of  Chronology,  Ancient  and
Modern  "  (Boston,  1832) ;  "  The  Outcast  and  other
Poems  "  (New  York,  1836) ;  "  Fireside  Education  "
(1838) ;  "  Pictorial  Geography  of  the  World  "  (Bos-
ton, 1841) ;  "  Sketches  from  a  Student's  Window  "
(1841);  "Pictorial  Natural  History"  (2  vols^
1842;  2d  ed.,  1859);  "Poems "(New  York,  1851);
"  Faggots  for  the  Fireside "  (1854) ;  "  Winter
Wreath  of  Summer  Flowers  "  (1854) ;  "  History  of
All  Nations  "  (1855) ;  "  Personal  Recollections  of
Poets,  Philosophers,  and  Statesmen  "  (1856) ; "  Thou-
sand and  One  Stories  of  Fact,  Fancy,  and  numor,
Rhyme,  Reason,  and  Romance  "  (1858) ;  "  The  Cap-
tive of  Nootka  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) :  and  "  Illus-
trated Natural  History  of  the  Animal  Kingdom  "
(2  vols.,  1859).  A  full  list  of  his  works  up  to  1857,
and  also  a  list  of  works  attributed  to  him,  is  con-
tained in  his  "  Recollections  of  a  Lifetime,  in  a  Se-
ries of  Familiar  Letters  "  (New  York,  2  vols.,  1857). —
Samuel  Griswold's  son,  Frank  Boot  t .  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  14  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1845.  He  was  first  brought  into  notice  by
his  Paris  letters  to  the  "  New  York  Times,"  signed
"  Dick  Tin  to,"  which  were  collected  into  a  vol  nine
entitled  "  Tri-colored  Sketches  of  Paris "  (New
York,  1854).  His  other  published  works  are  as  fol-
lows: "Court  of  Napoleon,  or  Society  under  the
First  Empire"  (New  York,  1857);  "History  of
Maritime  Adventure,  Exploration,  and  Discovery"
(Philadelphia,  1858);  "Women  of  Beauty  and
Heroism  *'  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  Flirtation  and  what
cnincs  of  It,"  a  comedy  in  five  acts  (1861);  "The
Tribute-Book,  a  Record  of  the  Munificent-.


(i«Hi|i|cif'!I


GOODRICH


GM


Sacrill  triotfcoa  of  the  American

during  the  War  f«>r  tlir  Union  "(New  York

* Wond-PjUBOM Women,  from  Sciniramis  I"  Fu-
genie"  ;  -markabl.  ui  u|K.n

tM  See  "(Philadelphia,  in;:!i. Em  ahw  began  om
translation  of  Balaac's  novels  into  Fnglish.  but,

after the publication  of  Iwn  vol

be  enterprise  was  abandoned. It  wee  re-
sumed in  1886  by  a  Boston  house.
GOODRN  ll.  Cherlee  Rnah,  naturalist,  b.  in
\.  V..  16  lhrah,188B;  (Lin  Plashing,  v  J  .
81  Am:..  1888. Be  was  graduated  el  Yak  in  ih-19.

ami  studied  medicine,  l>ut  never  practise!,  becom-
ing a  chemist  ami  uaturali»t.  tie  edited,  w i 1 1 1
Prof.  Benjamin  Silliiuan,  .Ir..  "The  World  of  Si-
\  it,  ami  Industry,"  illustrated  with  500 draw-
ings from  the  N.w York  exhibition  of  1888  (Nov

York,  1884),  and  was  one  of  th Uton  of  "  1'rac-

tioal  Science  and  Mechanism  "  ( I  -

i.'iullltll  II.  KHziir,  clergyman  and  loboUr,
h.  in  Wetlierstielil,  now  Hooky  ilill.  Conn..  .
1734;  d.  in  N orfblk.  Conn..  88  Nov..  1797.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1188. and  was  tutor  there
in  1 7">")  i*>.  lie  was  then  ordained  M  aCbngjegn*
tional  minister,  and  settled  in  Durham,  Conn.,  re-
taining his  jiastorate  till  1797.  In  l?(iti,  to  supple-
ment his  income,  he  l>egan  to  prepare  students  for
college.  His  thorough  scholarship  made  him  a
successful  teacher, and  during  the  following  twenty
years  he  instructed  more  than  WH)  young  men.  He
was  frequently  sent  by  the  general  association  <»f
Connecticut  as  a  delegate  to  conventions  and  syn-
ods iii  New  York  and  Philadelphia  from  1  ?<»»'»  till
Ho  was  an  able  astronomer,  and  spent  much
time  in  mathematical  studies,  calculating  the
eclipses  of  each  successive  year.  He  drew  un  the
fullest  and  most  accurate  account  ever  published
of  the  aurora  borealis  of  1780.  He  accumulated  a
library  which  was  regarded  as  the  largest  and  most
complete  ever  brought  into  the  colonies  on  private
account.  Dr.  Goodrich  was  at  one  time  a  candi-
date for  governor  of  Connecticut,  and  in  1777  his
name  was  proposed  for  tho  presidency  of  Yale,
but  the  opposing  candidate.  Dr.  Stiles,  was  elected
by  a  small  majority.  Ho  was  a  fellow  of  the  col-
lege from  177<i  till  1797,  and  served  on  its  pru-
dential committee  during  the  whole  of  Dr.  Stiles's
presidency,  and  a  j»rt  of  that  of  Dr.  Dwight.  He
1  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Princeton  col-
lege in  l?s:t.  Ilis  published  works  consist  of  ser-
mons and  addresses  (17($1-'00). —  Flizur's  son,
fhaunrey,  statesman,  b. in Durham,  Conn.,  '20

Oct.,  1759:  d.  in
Hartford.Conn.,
18  Aug..  1816.
was  graduated
at  Yale  in  177<>.
was  tutor  there
in  1779-Xl,and
al-o  Mudied  law.
lb-  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar
in 17H1.  began

to  practise  in
Hartford, and

soon attained

eminence.  He
was  a  member  of
the  state  house
of  representa-
tives ui  179:5,
and  was  then
elected  a  repre-
sentative in  congress,  serving  from  17!'*»  till  1801.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  executive  council  in


/


far  &  &-erv6~i^y*C'.


'  '7.  and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected  to  the
-  mate  fa  place  Of  I 'nah  Tracy,  deceased,  serr-
ing  till  l*i:i,  when  he  resigned,  to  accept  the  office
of  lieutenant -irov.rnor  of  ( 'oum-cl  icut.  He  was  also
mayor  of  Hartford  and  I  delegate  fa  thfl  Hartford
coii \ en i  ioii  of  1814*-  Chenneey'i  wife,  Mary  Ann.
daughter  of  Oliver  Woloott,*.  signer  of  the  IWlara-

t ion  of  Independence, waa  one  of  the  most  distin-
guished beauties  of  her  time.  Her  jMirtrait,  OB  this
page,  is  taken  from  an  original  picture  in  the
possession  of  Charles  M.  \V,,|,,,tt.— Anothi
Kli/iir.  jurist,  b.  in  Durham,  ''oiui..  81  March.
I7»U  ;  d.  it:  New  Haven.  Conn..  |  Nov..  1888,  aw
graduated  at  Yale  in  1779.  was  a  tutor  there  in
17Ml-':{.  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  luir,  and
began  practice  in  New  Haven  in  17Xt.  He  was  a
pn-sideiitial  elector  in  1797,  and  was  ohOM  "
representative  to  congress,  as  a  Federalist,
ing  from  179i>  to  1NH.  He  was  appointed  col-
lector of  customs  in  New  Haven  m  the  latter
year,  but  was  removed  by  Jefferson  Immediately
on  his  accession  to  the  presidency.  The  discus-
sion of  this  act  drew  from  JeftaaOB.  the  letter
in  which  he  avowed  his  approval  of  removal  for
political  opinions.  Mr.  Goodrich  was  judge  of
probate  for  seventeen  years,  judge  of  the  county
court  for  twelve  years,  professor  of  law  in  Yale
in  1801-'10,  and  mayor  of  New  Haven  from  1803
till  1888.  Yale  college  conferred  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  on  him  in  1830. — The  second  Flizur's  son,
Chaiinccv  Allen,  lexicographer,  b.  in  New  Haven.
Conn.,  23  Oct..  17!H>:  d.  there.  2.*)  Feb..  18(H),  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1810.  served  as  tutor  there  in
1812— *14,  and  afterward  studied  theology.  He  set-
tled in  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1813  as  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  there,  but  feeble  health
obliged  him  to  leave  in  1817.  In  1886  he  was
<  lios.ii  president  of  Williams  college,  but  declined
the  office.  He  was  professor  of  rhetoric  and  ora-
tory in  Yale  from  1K17  till  1K{!».  when  he  was
transferred  to  the  chair  of  pastoral  theology  in
that  institution,  and  held  it  till  his  death.  Dr.
Goodrich  exerted  a  wide  influence,  and  00-Operated
with  many  learned  societies.  As  a  teacher  he  in-
spired his  pupils  to  the  highest  effort.  He  was
a  liberal  benefactor  of  the  Yale  divinity-school.
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by-
Brown  universitv  in  1835.  Dr.  Goodrich  made
numerous  contributions  to  periodioal  literature,
and  in  1829  established  the  "Christian  (Quarterly
Spectator,"  with  which  he  was  connected  nearly
ten  years,  l>eing  its  sole  editor  after  \KW>.  While
a  tutor  in  Yale.  Dr.  Goodrich  published  a  Greek

? rammer  (1814),  and  in  1830,  at  the  request  of
resident  Dwight,  he  prepared  a  text-book,  "  Greek
and  Latin  Lessons"  (is:{2),  which  was  extensively
used  in  New  Fngland.  Sum  after  the  publication
of  the  "American  Dictionary,"  by  his  father-in-
law,  Noah  Weltster  (1N2X),  Dr.  Goodrich  was  in-
trusted by  its  author  with  power  to  siijN-rintcnd  an
abridgment  of  the  work,  which  he  did.  conform-
ing the  orthography  more  nearly  to  the  common
standard.  This  edition,  in  the  preparation  of  which
he  was  assisted  by  Benjamin  Silliiuan.  DenieOfl
Olmsted,  and  others,  was  issued in 1S47.  and the

"I'liiversid"  edition  of  the  same  work  appeared.

in 1866. In ls.V.»  the  supplement  was  issued,  to
which comprehensive  additions  were nunl
the  time  of  his  death Dr.  Goodrich  was  engaged
on  a  radical  revision  of  the  dictionary,  but  he  died

before  the  work  roooWod  its  Bnel  form,  and  it  was

published  under  the  supervision  of  Noah  Porter
(1ni»4).  He  was  also  engaged  in  preparing  4  new
edition  of  the  Bible,  with  Fnglish  text,  as  one  of
the  American Bible  sodetr'a  ••  committee  on  ver-


(582


(ioonsoN


(iool.wiN


simis." I»r.  Qoodffcd)  was  also  the  author  of  "So-

•  British  Eloquence  "(1868V. Aoommemorativa

ditoooiM  bf  President  Tbeodote  1).  Woolsey  baa

0  published  in  pamphlet  -  l«>nn  (New  Haven.
1800). — Chauncev  Allen's  BOD,  ('haiiiicey,  clergy-
man. i>.  in  Middietown,  Goon*  80  July,  1«17;  d.  In

New  Haven.  Conn.,  27  March,  1808. WH  graduated
at  Val.'  iii  1887, after  which  m  studied  in  thetheo-
loffioai  depertment  In  1848  be  was  made  pastor
of  the  Congregational  ohnroh  in  Maiden,  Mass.,
and  in  1849  of  the  church  in  Watertuwn,  Conn..
which  charge  he  resigned  in  1850  because  of  feeble
health.  Thereafter  he  resided  in  New  Haven,  oc-
cupied with  literary  labors, chief  among  which  was
the  continuation  of  his  father's  work  in  the  revision
of  Webster's  dictionary.  He  was  secretary  of  the
New  Haven  colony  historical  society,  for  which
body  he  prepared  and  read  valuable  papers. — An-
other son.  William  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Haven.  Conn.,  1!»  Jan.,  1885;  a.  in  Lausanne,
Switzerland,  17  July,  1874,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1S4:!.  studied  in  the  divinity-school  from  1844
till  1M47.  and  held  pastorates  in  Bristol,  Conn.,
Binghamton,  X.  V..  and  Cleveland,  Ohio.  He  died
while  on  a  foreign  tour  taken  for  his  health.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Western  Reserve
college  in  18<>4.  Dr.  Goodrich  was  a  brilliant  pul-
pit orator,  published  sermons  and  addresses,  and
was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  religious  press.

WOODSON,  John,  physician, b.  in  England;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28 'Dec.  1727.  He  was  the
lirst  English  physician  that  came  to  Pennsylvania
under  lYnn's  charter,  and  was  among  the  first  that
bought  lands  in  the  province  of  the  "Free  society
of  traders.*'  1  in  mediately  after  his  purchase  he
was  appointed  "chirurgeon"  to  the  society,  and
was  sent  to  the  province,  arriving  there  shortly  be-
fore Penn.  Previous  to  his  coming  to  this  coun-
try he  had  practised  his  profession  in  London.  In
1686  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  courts  of
common  pleas  and  quarter  sessions  and  the  or-
phans' court,  which  office  he  held  many  years.
From  1686  till  1701  he  was  one  of  the  proprietaries
commissioners  of  property,  and  in  November,  1694,
was  appointed  by  Penn  to  be  deputy-governor,  or
assistant  to  Gov.  Markham,  which  office  he  filled  un-
til October,  1696,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  an
elder  of  the  Society  of  Friends.

GOODWIN,  Daniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,
24  Nov.,  1799;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  24  Aug.,  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1820,  studied
law,  ana  emigrated  to  Michigan.  He  was  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  Michigan  in  1834-'41,  judge
of  the  supreme  court  in  1843-'50,  president  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1850,  and  a  mem-
ber of  that  of  1867.  In  1850-'81  he  was  circuit
judge  for  the  upper  peninsula  of  Michigan.  Judge
"Goodwin  served  repeatedly  in  the  legislature,  and
in  1851  appeared  for  the  people  in  the  trial  known
as  the  "  railroad  conspiracy  case." — His  son,  Dan-
iel, b.  in  New  York  city,  26  Nov.,  1832,  was  gradu-
ated at  Hamilton  college  in  1852,  studied  law  in
Auburn,  N,  7.,  and  Detroit,  Mich.,  and  in  1855  was
U.  S.  master  in  chancery  for  Michigan.  He  was
judge-advocate  of  militia  in  1856,  and  assistant
U.  S.  attorney  in  Chicago  in  1862-'4.  He  has  been
U.  S.  commissioner  for  Illinois  since  1861,  and  a
trustee  of  the  Illinois  eye  and  ear  infirmary  since
1866.  He  has  published  "James  Pitts  and  his
Sons  in  the  American  Revolution  "  (Chicago,  1882) ;
"The  Dearborns"  (1884);  "The  Lord's  Table"
(1885);  and  "Provincial  Pictures"  (1886).

GOODWIN,  Daniel  Raynes,  clergyman,  b.  in
North  Berwick,  Me.,  12  April,  1811 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, l'a.,  12  March,  1890. He  was  graduated  at


Bowdoin,  and  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, but  left  in  18515  to  become  a  tutor  in  Bow-
doin, where  he  soon  afterward  liccaine  profnssor  of
modern  languages,  first  spending  two  yean  in  Ku-
ropein  preparation.  He  remained  at  Bowdoin  until
1858,  and  while  there  took  orders  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.  iH'ing  ordained  deacon.  18  July,
1847,  and  priest.  10  Sept.,  1848.  He  became  pn-i-
dent  of Trinity  college, Hartford,  in 1868,  and

Srofessor  of  Christian  ethics,  but  removed  to  1'hila-
elphia  in  1860  to  become  provost  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  taught  intellectual
and  moral  philosophy.  In  addition  to  this,  when,
in  1862,  the  diocesan  divinity-school  was  organized,
he  took  the  professorship  of  apologetics,  which  he
exchanged  in  1865  for  that  of  systematic  divinity.
He  resigned  his  office  in  the  university  in  lsiis,
in  order  to  devote  himself  to  the  divinity-school.
He  was  made  its  dean,  and  held  the  office  till
1884,  when  he  again  became  professor.  The  uni-
versity then  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.,  and  he  had  previously  received  that  of
D.  D.  from  Bowdoin  in  1853.  He  was  sent  as  a
delegate  to  every  general  convention  of  his  church
in  the  United  States  for  twenty-five  years,  was  one
of  the  foremost  low-church  presbyters  in  Pennsyl-
vania, and  for  many  years  not  only  acted  as  presi-
dent of  the  standing  committee  of  his  diocese,  but
largely  directed  its  legislation.  Among  his  publi-
cations are  "  Southern  Slavery  in  its  Present  As-
pects," containing  a  reply  to  Bishop  Hopkins  on
slavery  (1864) ;  "  The  New  Realistic  Divinity  neither
the  Religion  of  the  Bible  and  Prayer-Book  nor  of
the  Holy  Catholic  Church  "  (1879) ;  a  "  Memorial
Discourse  on  Henry  W.  Longfellow,"  before  the
alumni  of  Bowdoin  college  (1882);  "Notes  on  the
Revision  of  the  New  Testament  Version  "  (1883) ;
and  "  Christian  Eschatology  "  (1885).

GOODWIN,  Ichabod,  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire, b.  in  North  Berwick,  N.  II..  10  Oct.,  1796;
d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  in  1882.  His  education
was  received  at  the  South  Berwick  academy.  Short-
ly after  leaving  that  institution  he  entered  the
counting-house  of  Samuel  Lord,  a  merchant  and
ship-owner  of  Portsmouth.  He  became  supercargo
and  afterward  master  of  one  of  his  employer's  ships,
and  followed  the  sea  till  1832,  when  he  established
himself  in  Portsmouth  as  a  merchant.  He  was  six
times  a  representative  in  the  legislature  between
1838  and  1856,  and  was  a  delegate  at  large  from
New  Hampshire  to  the  National  conventions  at
which  Clay,  Taylor,  and  Scott  were  nominated  by
the  Whigs  for  the  presidency,  serving  as  vice-presi-
dent of  the  first  two  bodies.  He  served  twice  in
constitutional  conventions,  and  was  several  times
an  unsuccessful  Whig  candidate  for  congress,  be-
ing the  last  nominee  of  that  party  for  governor
of  the  state.  In  1859  he  was  the  successful  Repub-
lican candidate  for  the  same  office,  and  was  re-
elected for  the  succeeding  term,  which  expired  in
June,  1861.  When  President  Lincoln  made  his
call  for  troops  in  1861  the  legislature  was  not  in
session,  and  the  municipal  banking  institutions
undertook  the  task  of  raising  and  equipping  troops.
Gov.  Goodwin  accepted  $680,000.  and  with  this
sum  raised  and  equipped  ten  regiments.  Gov.
Goodwin  was  active  in  the  Unitarian  church,  and
was  widely  known  for  his  charities.  He  was  con-
nected with  many  railroad  and  other  corporations,
i^d  with  charitable  institutions.

GOODWIN,  John  Noble,  statesman,  b.  in
Sonth  Berwick.  Me.,  18  Oct.,  1824.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1844,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1848,  and  began  practice  in
South  Berwick. He  was  elected  to  the  senate  of


GOODWIN


QOODYEAB


088


Main  nul  afterward  M ft reprcscntat  r

congress,  serving  fr..m  istii  till  1868,  when  li«  wu
appointed  chief  justice  of  Ari/ona  t«-rrit..ry.  lb-
became  the  gOSOrnorof Arizona  territory in Au-

|M|,  I drill til.' office t«o years, after

which  be  represented  the  territory  as  ■  delegate  in

i  i
GOODWIN,  Nathaniel,  genealogist,  b.  in  Hart-
for.1.  Oonik,  •".  March,  1  ?nj  :  ,i.  there,*!  Hay,  I86S.

!!<•  »n«  :ii»|>n-iit i<«*<|  tn  a  printer  in  Albany,  ami
afterward  iHvamc  a  teacher  and  land-surveyor.  At
Hartford  he  was  many  years  treasurer  and  jud.
probata)  and  was  often  employed  in  the  settlement
of  estates.  He  published  "  Descendant*  of  Thomas
Oloott"  (1845),  and  "The  Foots  Family"  (H
After  his  death  am >ea red hii  -  Genealogical  Notes

of  Bome  of  the  Hi-st  Settlers  nf  CVmneutitial  and
Harm"1 '- with  a  memoir  (1866\

GOODWIN,  William  Frederick,  author,  b.
in  [amington,  Mi-..  v.'7  Sept*  1898;  d.  in  ('uncord,
N.  II..  II  March.  187S.  He  was  graduated  at  Bow-
doin  in  1*4*.  and  taught  in  a  Ugh-eehool  in  Con-
cord. N.  II..  and  in  New  Bedford,  Mass..  from  18ol
till  1H-VI.  Hi-  was  then  graduated  at  the  Harvard
law-school  in  1894, and  began  practice  in  Concord  in
1866.  He  was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  of  the  16th
regular  infantry  in  Mav.  1861,  and  aflat  acting  as
mustering  officer  U  NOV  Hampshire,  joined  his
regiment  in  March.  IWM.  and  was  engaged  at  the
actions  of  Hoover's  (tap  and  Chickamauga,  where
he  was  wounded.  He  was  DTOTOtted  captain  for
gallant  conduct  in  that  battle,  and  was  retired  in
TtWo,  from  incapacity  resulting  from  his  wound,
after  receiving  bis  promotion  to  a  captaincy  in
1804.  After  his  retirement  be  was  disbursing  offi-
cer in  Rhode  island  in  18rto,  and  was  afterward  on
duty  in  Ohio  and  in  the  Department  of  the  Poto-
mac. Cant.  Goodwin  gave  much  time  to  antiqua-
rian and  historical  rest-arches,  and  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the"  Historical  Magazine."  He  was
the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Constitution  of
New  Hampshire  of  177(1.  1 7X4,  1?!)'J"  ;  "lb-cords
of  Narragansett  Township.  No.  1  "  (printed  private-
ly. 1*71);  and  at  his  death  bad  in  preparation
"Narragansett.  No.  "J."  now  portions  or  adjoining
towns,  which,  together  with  the  last-named  work,
was  to  constitute  a  "  History  of  Buxton,  Me.,  17&5-
1811.''  He  was  also  engaged  on  a  "  Biography  of
Gen.  Alexander  Scammel,"  ami  left  various  manu-
scripts, which  have  not  been  published.

GOODWIN,  William  Watson,  scholar,  b.  in

C onl,  Mass.,  !t  May,  iH3i. He  was  graduated

at  Harvard  in  1861,  studied  at  Bonn,  Berlin,  and
Goitiugen.  and  was  tutor  at  Harvard  from  1866  till
18(K),  after  which  he  became  Eliot  professor  of
Greek  literature,  and  still  (1XM7)  holds  that  chair.
He  was  first  director  of  the  American  school  of
classical  ■todies  at  Athens,  Greece,  in  18H2-,;j,  and
was  president  of  the  American  philological  associa-
tion fnun  lsr>'  till  1886.  Prof.  Goodwin  is  also  a
■ember of  the  Imperial  ■lrihaToiogksd  institute  of
Germany,  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
i<es,  and  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety, and  is  a  knight  of  the  Greek  order  of  the
Saviour.  He  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from
tin-  University  of  Gottingen  En  1866,andthat  of
LI..  I),  from  Amherst,  and  from  the  Cniversity  of
Cambridge,  England,  in  1888.  He  hat  bean  anax-
ve  contributor  to  literary  and  philological
journals. and  to  the  transactions  of  various  learned
ties  m  the  United  States  and  England  lb-
has  published  and  edited  various  reports,  iuclud-
>rt  on  the  American  School  of  daseiohl
Studies  in  Athens M  (Boston,  lKKb,  and  "Paperi

Of  the American School of Classical Studies at


Athens.  Vol.  1st,  edited  by  William  W.  Goodwin
and  Thomas  W.  Ludl  His  works  in-

ciiuie  "Syntax  of  the  Mood*  ami  Tonaai  <>f  the
Greek  \  m»;  revised  etL.  18<i5;

London. 1^::.: "  Klenn-nt.,  Grammar"

(Boston.  1*70;  enlarged  e<i.,  Boston  and  London,
t»  Greek  Bandar,*  with  Joseph  II.  Allen
(Bonton.  is; i  j  -.m  ...i.,  edited  by  William  \n
win,  with  alterations,  1H77);  and  an  edition  of
Xeiiojihon's  ••  Analysis."  Boon  I.  I  W.  with  .John
W.  white  (Boston  and  London,  ih77».

800DTEAR,  Charles,  inventor,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Omul,  SO  Deo,  l*<>0:  d.  in  New  York  eitv.
1  .Inly.  1H4MI.  He  was  the  son  of  Aiim-ii  Good-
year, who  was  the  first  to  make  bay-forks  of
spiniest,.,!  instead  of  wrought -iron.  The  sons
education  was  acquired  in  the  New  Haven  public
schools,  and  on  coming  of  age  he  U-canie  a  mern-
btrof  the  firm  of  A.  Goodyear  &  Sons  in  Phila-
delphia. The  business  proved  profitable  until  1KM),
when the failure of southern houses  compelled

the  firm  to suspend.

Meanwhile  the  de-
velopment of  the
India  -  rubber  In-
dustry had  hogim

large  onantitiet  of

thecru<legum  were

Imported  Into  the

I'nited  States, com-
panies for  its  manu-
facture into  shoes
were  organized,  and
indeed  there  was  an
India-rubliorniania
in  the  yean  1880-1
similar  to  the  sub-
sequent gold  -  fe-
ver and  petroleum
craze.  The  prod-
ucts of  these  com-
panies, however,  were  unsatisfactory.  It  was  very
simple  to  make  shoes  in  winter,  but  the  heat
of  the  slimmer  soon  softened  and  destroyed  them.
In  1834  Goodyear  first  turned  his  attention  to  this
substance,  and  from  then  until  his  death  the  idea
of  producing  from  it  a  solid  elastic  material  occu-

Sicd  his  entire  mind.  His  experiments  were  con-
DOted  in  Philadelphia.  New  York,  and  in  differ-
ent towns  of  Massachusetts,  with  his  family  al-
ways in  want,  and  himself  licqiiently  in  prison  for
debt ;  but  on  the  receipt  of  a  few  dollars  he  would
purchase  new  materials  and  renew  his  investi-
gations. The  first  gleam  of  hope  that  came  to
him  was  in  1k:I,">,  when  he  found  that  by  l>oiling  a
compound  of  tin-  gum  and  magnesia  in  quicklime
and  water  an  article  was  obtained  that  seemed  to
be  all  that  he  could  desire.  He  obtained  a  patent
for  the  process,  and  sold  his  product  readilv  ;  but
it  was  s<xni  found  that  a  drop  of  weak  acid,  such
as  apple-juice  or  vinegar  and  water,  destroyed
the  effects  of  the  lime  and  made  the  cloth  stickv.
A  real  later  be  found  that  the  action  of  nitric
acid  on  rubber  produced  a  "curing"  sii|K-rior  to
anything  hitherto  made.  The  secret  now  seemed
to  1k>  discovered.  A  partner  with  ample  capital
was  found,  the  abandoned  rubber-works  on  Staten
Islam!  leased,  and  a  store  on Broadway  secured.

but  the  panic  of 1SCI7 sw«  pt away  the fortnt f

his  [Mirtner.  and  left  Goodyear  jM-nniless  again.
For  sonic  time  he  vainly  endeavored  to  induce
someone  to  furnish  him  with  money,  so  that  he
might  place  his  invention  on  the  market.  He  was
regarded  m  an  object  Of  ridicule,  and  was  called
an  India  rubber maniac At this  period he  was


<3€i/~~^£~$*^>


084


GOOKIN


(JOOKIN


desorilwd  as  "a  man  with  an  India-rubber  coat  on,
[ndift-robber  shoes,  an  India-rubl>er  cap,  and  in
U\<  pockd  an  India-rubltcr  purse  and  n<>t  a  cent
in  it."  foiling  <>f  succ—  in  New  York,  he  settled
in  Koxburv.  fflff .  where  K.  M.  Chaffee  placed  at
his  dispOM  the  plant  of  the  Roxbury  rabbet  <"in-
panv,  and  for  a  time  he  prospered.  Billing  rights
under  liis  patents;  Imt  the  nitric-acid  process  cured
only  the  surface  of  the  material,  and  the  goods
were  valueless  except  in  the  form  of  thinnest
cloth.  1 1  is  bright  prospects  vanished,  his  property
IW  -..Id,  and  once  more  he  was  penniless.  He
WM  Strongly  urged  t<>  discontinue  his  experiments,
but  a  persisient  faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  his
efforts  led  him  to  persevere.  Meanwhile  he  found
that  Nathaniel  Hay  ward  (q.  v.),  in  his  employ,
was  in  the  habit  of  sprinkling  sulphur  on  the  sur-
face of  the  rubber  and  drying  it  in  the  sun.  The
effect  produced  was  similar  to  that  obtained  by
nitric  acid,  and.  believing  himself  to  be  on  the
verge  of  an  important  discovery,  he  continued  his
experiments.  Early  in  1839  he  found  that  the
application  of  considerable  heat  to  the  sulphured
article  would  cause  it  to  become  pliant  in  cold
weather,  to  have  its  elasticity  increased  at  all
times,  and  its  offensive  odor  much  diminished.
After  years  of  patient  work,  during  which  he
strove  to  determine  the  exact  conditions  under
which  the  most  favorable  results  would  ensue,
though  at  times  he  was  so  reduced  that  he  sold
his  children's  school-books  to  purchase  new  ma-
terial, he  finally,  after  being  aided  by  his  brother-
in-law,  William  DeForrest,  obtained,  in  1844,  his
patent  for  vulcanized  rubber.  He  continued  till
iiis  death  to  improve  the  process  of  vulcanization
and  to  extend  the  uses  to  which  the  improved  ma-
terial could  be  put.  As  he  was  unable  to  comply
with  certain  of  the  requirements  of  the  law  of
France,  his  patent  was  declared  void  in  that  coun-
try, and  he  was  equally  unfortunate  in  England.
There  his  method  was  superseded  by  that  of
Thomas  Hancock,  who  "  re-discovered  "  the  process
after  receiving  information  from  Goodyear,  with
whom  he  was  carrying  on  negotiations  for  the  in-
troduction of  rubber  into  England.  He  acquired
about  sixty  patents,  and  the  original  vulcanizing
patent  was  extended  in  1858,  but  an  application  in
1867  was  refused,  owing  to  the  persistent  opposi-
tion of  those  who,  during  his  lifetime,  grew  rich
by  infringing  on  his  rights.  The  benefits  con-
ferred on  humanity  by  Goodyear's  patents  have
been  nowhere  more  conspicuous  than  in  connection
with  the  military  service  during  the  civil  war.  The
great  council  medal  of  the  world's  fair  held  in
London  in  1851  was  conferred  on  him,  and  he  also
received  the  grand  medal  of  the  world's  fair  held  in
Paris  in  1855  together  with  the  cross  of  the  legion
of  honor,  which  was  presented  to  him  by  Napoleon
III.  Although  he  died  in  debt,  he  lived  to  see  his
material  applied  to  nearly  500  uses,  and  to  give
employment  to  upward  of  60,000  persons.  Dr.
Leander  Bishop  says:  "In  the  art  of  modifying
the  curious  native  properties  of  caoutchouc  and
guttapercha,  and  of  moulding  their  plastic  ele-
ments into  a  thousand  forms  of  beauty  and  utility,
whether  hard  or  soft,  smooth  or  corrugated,  rigid
or  elastic,  American  ingenuitv  and  patient  experi-
ment have  never  been  excelled."  See  Bradford
K.  Peirce's  "  Trials  of  an  Inventor"  (New  York,
I860),  and  Parton's  "  Famous  Americans  of  Recent
Times"  (Boston,  1867).

GOOKIN,  Charles,  deputy  governor  of  Penn-
sylvania. He  bore  the  title  of  colonel,  and  was
deputy  governor  of  Pennsylvania  under  William
Penn  from  February,  1709,  till  May,  1717. He  was


selected  because  of  his  thoughtful  demeanor  and
supposed  wisdom,  but  it  was  afterward  learned
that  he  was  deranged.  Until  the  session  of  1714.
harmony  prevailed  between  the  assembly  and  the
governor.  The  remainder  of  his  term  of  office
was  stormy.  On  15  Feb.,  1714,  the  day  for  tin-
convening  of  the  assembly,  the  weather  was
and  a  quorum  failed  to  assemble.  This  embittered
him,  and  when,  on  the  following  day,  an  organi-
zatioii  was  effected,  he  roundly  abused  the  com-
mittee sent  to  him,  and  drove  them  from  his  door.
He  once  removed  all  the  chief  justices  of  New
Castle  county  for  doing  their  duty  in  an  action
against  his  brother-in-law,  leaving  the  county
without  a  magistrate  for  six  weeks.  At  another
time,  when  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court  at
New  Castle  refused  to  permit  a  certain  commission
of  his  to  be  published  in  court,  he  sent  for  one  of
the  judges  and  kicked  him.  The  breach  made  by
his  eccentricities  widened  until  1717,  when,  on
petition  of  the  council,  he  was  removed.  One  of
William  Penn's  letters  says :  "  His  grandfather.  Sir
Vincent  Gookin,  had  been  an  early  great  planter  in
Ireland  in  Kings  James  I.  and  Charles  I.  days."

GOOKIN,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Kent,  England,
about  1612;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  19  March,
1687.  He  came  with  his  father  to  Virginia  in
1621.  During  the  Indian  massacre  of  1622,  Goo-
kin, with  thirtv-five  men,  held  his  plantation,  at
what  is  now  Newport  News,  against  the  savages.
In  May,  1644,  in  consequence  of  his  doctrinal
sympathies  with  the  Puritans,  he  removed  to
Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  was  soon  afterward
appointed  a  captain  of  militia  and  a  member  of  the
house  of  deputies.  In  1651  he  was  speaker  of  the
house,  and  in  1652  elected  a  magistrate.  In  1656
he  was  appointed  by  legislative  enactment  super-
intendent of  all  the  Indians  who  acknowledged
the  government  of  Massachusetts,  an  office  which
he  retained  until  his  death,  although  he  became
unpopular  because  of  the  protection  which,  as  a
magistrate,  he  extended  to  the  Indians.  He  zeal-
ously co-operated  with  John  Eliot  in  his  efforts
for  their  spiritual  instruction.  King  Philip's  war
led  to  the  passage  of  several  measures  against  the
Natick  and  other  Indians,  who  had  submitted  to
the  English.  Gookin  was  the  only  magistrate  who
joined  Eliot  in  opposing  these  measures,  and  con-
sequently subjected  himself  to  reproaches  from
his  fellow-magistrates,  and  insult  in  the  public
streets.  He  visited  England  in  1656,  and  was
authorized  by  Cromwell  to  invite  the  people  of
New  England  to  colonize  Jamaica,  then  recently
conquered  from  Spain,  He  went  to  England
again  in  the  following  year,  returning  in  1660  in
the  same  ship  with  the  fugitive  regicides,  Goffe
and  Whalley,  whom  he  aided  in  protecting.  He
was  one  of  the  licensers  of  the  Cambridge  printing-
press  in  1662.  In  1681  he  was  made  major-general
of  the  colony.  He  took  an  active  part  on  the  side
of  the  people  against  the  measures  which  termi-
nated in  the  withdrawal  of  the  colonial  charter  in
1686.  He  died  so  poor  that  John  Eliot  solicited
from  Robert  Boyle  a  gift  of  £10  for  his  widow.
His  "  Historical  Collections  of  the  Indians  of  Mas-
sachusetts," written  in  1674,  was  published  by  the
Massachusetts  historical  society  in  1792.  He  was
also  author  of  a  "  History  of  New  England."  never
published,  the  fate  of  "which  is  unknown.— His
grandson,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  1688;  d.  in
1734,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1708,  and  or-
dained in  1710.  He  published  three  sermon-  on
the  occasion  of  the  earthquake  in  October.  1727:
to  which  were  added  an  account  of  the  earthquake.
and  of  some  remarkable  thunder-storms.


GORDON


no


GOKDON. Vdonirani .1  ikIhoii.  muui.Ii.

Hampton,  N.  II..  19  April,  MM  Bf  was
graduated  hi  Brown  in  I860,  and  at  Newton  theo-
logical scmmntN  in  1  x«ui.  id'  was  ordained  8B  Jane,
1868, ami  in  tin*  same  year  Decatur  pejtOf  of  the
Baptist  church  lit  Jamaica  Plain*.  Maw.  In  1K«H»
he  accepted  a  call  to  tin'  Clarendon  street  !
church,  Boston,  of  which  hi"  instill  pastor  (1HH7).
II  i  trustee  <>f  Brown  university,  from  which

be  received  in  im77  the  degree  of  I'.  D. BM  pub-
lications inolnde "Grace  and < J 1 « •  r .
lhHO);  ••  [n Christ  Ministry  ol  I I«-«Hm«  "*

and  "Twofold Life  "  (1884). He  was  elso
inn'  of  tin-  compilers  of  the  h ymu-tiook  known  as

tin-  ■■  Barries  of  Song."

60BD0N,  Andrew  Boberteon,  Canadian  ex-
plorer. i>.  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  II  Feb*,  186L Be

was  educated  in  his  native  city,  entered  tin'  British
navy  in  1804.  was  serially  promoted  for  a  meri-
torious examination  in  1871,  and  retired  from  the
service  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant  in  October,
187M.  He  then  removed  to  Canada  and  liecaine  at-
tached to  the  meteorological  oloervatorv  in  Toron-
to, and  was  appointed  deputy  sii|>crintendenl  of
tin-  meteorological  service  of  Canada  in  1MX0.  In
pursuance  of  a  project  to  connect  Mauitol>a  and
the  northwest  to  Hudson  hay  by  means  of  a  mil-
way,  an  ex|K'ditioti,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Gordon,
was  fitted  out  in  1884  to  determine  the  length  of
that  |>art  of  the  year  during  which  the  lm\  WM
navigable,  and  to  make  surveys.  Explorations  dur-
ing three  seasons,  from  1884  till  1888,  proved  that
the  bay  would  admit  of  safe  navigation  during
four  months  of  the  year.  By  this  route  the  dis-
tance to  KuroiH'  would  Im-  lessened  l>y  many  hun-
dred miles.  He  published  offloia]  charts  and  sail-
ing directions  of  his  explorations.

GORDON.  Clarence,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city.  18  April,  1885.  His  ancestor,  John,  came
from  Gotland  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  about  1780,
and  his  father  was  a  cotton-merchant.  Clarence
was  graduated  at  the  Lewrenos  scientific  school  of
Harvard  in  1855.  He  resided  chieflv  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  till  1880,  lived  in  or  near  Boston  in  1802-'8,
and  then  removed  to  Newburg,  H.  Y\,  where  he
still  (1887)  resides.  Ho  was  sjiecial  agent  of  the
l'.  S.  census  bureau  in  1879-'83,  in  charge  of  the
invest j^tion  of  meat-production  in  the  grazing
states,  and  has  since  engaged  in  the  real-estate
business.  He  has  contributed  largely  te  journals
and  magazines,  and  besides  his  census  report  (Wash-
ington. 1KM4)  has  written  stories  for  Imivs,  under
the  peO-name  Ol  "Vieux  Moustache."  Those  in-
clude "Christmas  at  Under-Tor "  (New  York,
1884);  "Our  Fresh  and  Salt  Tutors"  (1880);  "Two
Lives  in One" (1870); and *  Boarding-School

■  08m

GORDON,  George  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Charles-
town, .Mas-.. 1!»  July, 18:25;  d.  in Frainingham,
Ma».,  80  Aug.,  18*8. Ho  was  graduated  at the
I'.S.  military  academy  in  1848,  and  assigned  to  the
mounted  rifles. He  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz  in  1847.  in  the  Imttle  of  Corro  Gordo,  where
wounded  and  bro vetted  1st  lieutenant,  took
|»art  in  the  (tattles  of  Contreras  and  Chapultepoo,
and  in  the  assault  and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexi-
co. In  a  hand-to-hand  encounter  with two  gue-
rillas near  the  San  Juan Bridge  on  81  Dec,  1847,
he  was  severely  wounded. <»n  s  Jan.,  1818,  M  was
promoted  2d  lieutenant  and  assigned  to  recruiting
service. HI  health  necessitated  leave  of  absence  in
'.  when  he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  cuv-
hool  for  practice  at  Carlisle,  Pa. 1'rom  i860
•  t  lie  was  on  frontier  duty,  and  was  promoted
to  a  1st  lieutenancy,  :t<»  Am;..  1888, Be  resigned,


usl  |«w,  and  entered  ii|>on  prac-
tice in  Bo-ton  in  l*:.;.  At  the  beginning  or  the
civil  war  In-  raised  the  'id  Massachusetts  regiment.
iM-caine  it*  colonel  on  8f  May,  1881,  and  was  made
military  governor  of  Harp

commanded  a  brigade  under  Gen.  (tanks,  and  for
his  conduct  in  the  retreat  from  BtrOObOTg  to  W8r
liamsport  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  !»  June.  1888.  He  was  engaged  in  a  large  num-
berof  battles  and  skirmishes,  tixik  part  in  the  North
Virginia  and  Maryland  campaigns,  was  in  the  sec-
ond I mt tie  of  Bull  Bun,  and  at  Antietam  fought
with  his  brigade  in  Gen.  A.  S.  Williams's  division
of  Mansfield's  corps,  and  guarded  the  ■BPSf  Poto-
mac at  Harjtcr's  Forrv  from  September  to  D

Imt,  1888.  Be  engeged  InoperenoM  ahool  Charles-
ton harlxir,  S.  C.,  in  1888-^4,  WBS  in  command  of
Florida  in  May.  1884  kept  Open  the  coiumuuicn-
t i-.iis  bf  White  river  with  Little  Book,  Ark.,  in
July,  and  tOOfc  part  in  the  operations  against  .Mo-
bile in  August.  In  1884-^6  he  was  on  duty  in  the
Department  of  Virginia  in  command  of  the  eastern
district. and  ho  was  brovottod  major-general  of  vol-
unteers on  0  April,  1865,  He  then  returned  to  the
practice  bf  law  in  Boston,  and  was  for  some  time
collector  of  internal  revenue.  He  published  "The
Army  of  Virginia  from  Coder  Mountain  to  Alexan-
dria" (Boston,  L880);  M  A  War  Diary"  (1881);  and
"From  Brook  Farm  to  Cellar  Mountain"  (1«

GORDON,  George  Phlaena.  inventor,  b,  in

Sal.in.  N.  II..  81  April.  1810  td.  87  Jan..  1878.  His
education  was  received  in  the  schools  of  Salem,  N.
II..  and  Boston,  Mass.  Turning  his  attention  to
printing  at  an  early  age  he  devoted  himself  to  the
improvement  of  job  and  treadle  presses.  He' was
granted  more  than  fifty  patents,  and  gave  his  name
to  the  press  known  in  the  I'nited  States  and  Ku-
tope  M  the  "Cordon."

GORDON.  George  William.  West  Indian  in-
surgent, d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  23  Oct.,  1885.  He
was  a  member  of  the  colonial  legislature  in  the
island  of  Jamaica  in  18<>5,  and  had  been  an  active
leader  in  mass-meetings  held  by  the  oolored  people
to  give  expression  to  various  grievances.  In  the
beginning  of  October,  1885,  in  the  district  of  Mo-
rant  bay,  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  island,  an
attempt  was  made  to  expel  the  negroes  from  cer-
tain uncultivated  lands  of  which  they  had  taken
possession.  This  called  forth  great  indignation,
and  when  on  7  Oct.  a  negro  was  tried  on  account
of  this  affair  l>efore  the  court  at  Morant  bay,  a  mob
collected,  threatening  to  liberate  him.  The  court
ordered  the  arrest  of  the  leaders  of  the  mob,  but

the  latter  overpowered  the  police. On  8  Oct.  the

court  issued  writs  for  the  arrest  of  twenty-eight  of
those  charged  with  having  participated  in  the  riot.
and  on  11  Oct..  when  the  prisoners  were  to  be
brought  In-fore  the  court,  anew  riot  broke  out.  The
Volunteer!  Who  had  been  called  OUt  were  over-
powered, and  many  of  them,  together  with  -
magistrates,  massacred,  and  thecourt-housa  burned.
According  to  an  official  statement  of  the  governor,
sixteen  whites  wen-  killed  and  eighteen  wounded.
In  HTeral  adjoining  districts  the  negroes  rose  and
plundered  the  plantations,  but.  as  far  as  known,
only  two  peBMNM  WOW  killed.  The  troops  who  had
been  mm  into  the  interior  returned,  and  report-
ed that  they  had  met  DO  armed  resistance,  that
tiny  had  not  lost  a  single  man,  hut  had  shot
and  banged,  without  the  least  form  of  trial,  hun-
dreds of  iM>rsous  suspected  of  being  implicated  in
the  reU'llion.  The  governor  claimed  to  have  re-
ceived proofs  of  the  guilt  of  Mr.  Gordon  as  one  of
the  chief  instigators  of  the  revolt,  although  the
latter  was  a  resident  of  Kingston,  where  tie


CSC


GORDON


GORDON


nodisturl>ance,  ami  had  not  been  absent  from  home
daring  the  riots.  He  whs.  however,  arrested,  taken
t,,  Iforant  bayaad  triad  bya  ootart-ffiartrial, who
adjudged  him  guilty.  The  evidence  brought  for-
ward against  him  anted  that  he  had  Ih'cii  situ  on
oneSundavat  a  certain  chapel  at  which  Paul  Bogle,
another  so-called tvlx-l leader.  worshipped; that

somebody  bad  arid  thai  Mr.  Gordon  hud  desired
ill,-  people  of  a  certain  district  in  the  parish  to  hold
a  meeting;  that  certain  placards  in  blank  had  been
found  in  Mr.  Gordon's  (jortmanteau  :  that  a  plaoaid
headed  "The  State  of  the  Island"  (in  which  there
was  not  a  single  word  of  disloyalty  or  sedition)  had
been  penned  by  Mr.  Gordon;  that  he  had  used
some  strong  language  in  a  meeting  of  the  people
he  had  some  week-  before  addressed  in  the  parish
of  Vere ;  and  that  he  had  written  a  letter  to  one
CbJabolm,  advising  him,  with  reference  to  the  suf-
ferings of  the  people,  to  "  pray  to  God  for  help  and
deliverance."  Mr.  Gordon  protested  solemnly
against  having  had  knowledge  of  or  part  in  the
plot.  Nevertheless  Gov.  Eyre  sanctioned  the  find-
ing of  the  court-martial,  and  Gordon  was  hanged
on  23  Oct.  At  the  close  of  that  month  the  num-
ber of  those  shot  and  hanged  by  the  soldiery  with-
out trial,  or  bv  order  of  the  court-martial,  was  re-
ported as  reaching  2.00().

GORDON,  Sir  James  Alexander,  British  naval
officer,  b.  about  1782;  d.  in  Greenwich  hospital,
England,  8  Jan.,  1869.  He  entered  the  navy  in
1 798,  and  rose  rapidly  in  his  profession.  He  was
at  the  battle  of  the  Nile,  served  in  the  West  Indies,
the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Adriatic;  commanded
the  frigate  "  Active  "  at  the  battle  of  Lissa,  for  which
he  received  a  gold  medal  and  a  pension  of  £300,  and,
at  the  capture  of  the  French  frigate  "  La  Pomone,"
had  a  leg  carried  away  by  a  36-pounder.  In  August,
1814.  with  a  squadron  under  nis  command,  he  en-
tered the  Potomac,  reduced  Port  Washington  and
other  batteries,  and  subsequently  forced  the  city
of  Alexandria  to  capitulate.  He  also  took  part  in
the  operations  against  New  Orleans  in  1814-'15.
In  1827  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  royal
naval  hospital  at  Plymouth.  In  1840  he  became
lieutenant-governor  of  Greenwich  hospital,  and  in
1853  was  advanced  to  the  post  of  governor  of  that
establishment.  Altogether  he  served  in  the  navy
nearly  seventy-six  years,  and  was  the  last  survivor
of  Lord  Nelson's  band  of  captains.  He  was  created
a  K.  C.  B.  in  1815 ;  in  1854,  G.  C.  B. ;  and  became
admiral  of  the  fleet  in  1808.

GORDON,  James  D.,  missionary,  b.  in  Prince
Edward  island ;  d.  in  Erromanga,  New  Hebrides,
25  Feb.,  1872.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  and  in  1864  went  to  Erro-
manga, one  of  the  New  Hebrides  group  of  islands,
as  a  missionary.  At  the  end  of  six  years  he  with-
drew from  outside  support,  and  entirely  alone
trusted  himself  unreservedly  among  the  natives
until  his  death.  During  his  residence  on  the  island
he  translated  portions  of  the  Bible  into  the  lan-
guage of  Erromanga,  besides  preparing  primers
and  hymns  for  their  use.  He  also  acquired  a
knowledge  of  the  language  of  the  island  of  Espiritu
Santo,  and  spent  a  winter  there  teaching  the  peo-
ple. He  perished  at  the  hands  of  hostile  natives.

GORDON,  John  Brown,  governor  of  Georgia,
b.  in  Uspon  county,  Ga.,  6  Feb.,  1832.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  University  of  Georgia,  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  had  practised  only  a
short  time  when  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as
a  captain  of  infantry.  He  rose  successively  to  the
rank  of  lieutenant-general.  He  commanded  one
wing  of  Lee's  army  at  Appomattox  Court-House,
and  was  wounded "  in battle  eight  times  during


^7^^*^


the  war. He  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for
governor of Georgia in 1808, but,  though his
election  was  claimed  bv  his partv,  his  opponent,
RufusB.  Bullock,
secured  the  office.
He  was  a  member
of the National
Dei ratic con-
ventions of  1808
and 1872, presi-
dential elector  for
the same years,
and in  January.
]S7:{.  was elected

to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate. He  was  re-
elected  in 1879,

but  resigned  his  ^

seat  in  1880.  He
took  an  active
part  in  the  pro-
ceedings of  the
senate,  and  gave
a  moderate  sup-
port to  the  administration  of  President  Hayes.  In
1886  he  was  elected  governor  of  Georgia.

GORDON,  Patrick,  soldier,  b.  in  1644;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  Aug.,  1736.  He  was  bred  to
arms  in  the  British  service,  and  served  from  his
youth  to  the  close  of  Queen  Anne's  reign  with  a
high  reputation.  He  was  afterward  appointed
governor  of  Pennsylvania,  arrived  there  with  his
family  in  the  summer  of  1726,  and  met  the  assembly
in  August.  In  his  first  address  he  said  that  he
had  been  a  soldier,
knew  nothing
of  the  crooked
ways  of  professed
politicians,  and
must  rely  upon  a
blunt*  straight-
forward course  in
his  communica-
tions with  them
and  in  the  admin-
istration of  the
government.  At
a  council  held  in
Philadelphia  on
26  May,  1728,  for
the  purpose  of  re-
newing treaties
with  the  Indian
tribes  there  repre-
sented, it  was  said  by  the  Indians  in  reference  to
the  governor's  address,  "The  governor's  words
were  all  right  and  good ;  we  have  never  had  any
such  speech  since  William  Penn  was  here."  Gov.
Gordon  was  equally  popular  with  his  own  people.
He  published  "  Two  Indian  Treaties  at  Conestogoe,
1728"  (Philadelphia,  1728).

GORDON,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  Pitlochie,
Scotland  ;  d.  in  Amboy,  N.  J.,  in  1722.  He  came
to  New  Jersey  in  1684,  and  settled  in  Scotch  Plains.
He  was  elected  attorney-general  of  the  eastern  dis-
trict in  1698,  chief  secretary  and  register  in  1702,
licensed  as  an  attorney  in  1704,  elected  to  the  legis-
lature, and  became  speaker  of  the  assembly.  In
1709  he  became  chiei  justice,  and  was  afterward
receiver-general  and  treasurer  of  the  province.

GORDON,  Thomas  F.,  historian,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  in  17*7;  d.  in  Beverly,  N.  J.,  17  Jan.,
1860.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  bar,
but  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  historical  and
archaeological  researches. He  published  "Digest


>>g5C^7^


tlM.S


OBI


of  tin-  Laws  ,,f  tin-  I  nit. -.1  Stat. "."  (l'liilu.|.-l|.liia,
•  f  Pennsylvania  from  it-«  Diaoov*

•  "  (Trenton, i-

i  "  (Philadelphia
"Cabinet  of  American  History";  ••  1 1 » — •
Aneienl  M  t.i-r  <>f  V

Trenton, 18  eetteer  «.f  New  York"

tw-crof  Pennsylvania"
(Philadelphia,  18

i. i»i:  no  v  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hitohln,
England,  In  1  ?:!•»;  d.  in  Ipswich.  Ku^lnml.  19  <>.  t..

Mi-  was  settled  over  a  large  in«  1«*| m>ii<1«-ii t
s4Hi.ty  at  Ipswich,  ami  afterward  at  OkfGmve]
Lane,  Wapping; and  came  t<> Massachusetts  in

Altar  laaonhiiig  a  year  to  the  Third  church
in  Roxbury.  lie  became  its  |  Must  or,  <!  July.  177».
During  the  Revolution  be  took  an  active  part  in
public  measures,  and  while  chaplain  to  tin-  Pro-
vincial congress  of  Massachusetts  preached  a  fast-
day  sermon,  strongly  expressing  his  political  sen-
timents. He  wa-  dismissed  from  his  post,  as  the
legislature  regarded  his  prayers  ai  brtandad  rather
to  dictate  tlu-ir  measures  than  to  implore  the
ilivine  ilin-ction  on  them.  He  returned  to  Kng-
laml  in  l?Mi>.  and  published  his  ••History  of  the
Rise. Progress,  ami Kstalilishinent of the Inde-

iK-iulein f  the  United  States,"  n  minute  and  gen-

erally  faithful  narrative  (4  vols.,  London,  l>v>.
The  value  of  this  work  was  somewhat  impaired  by
the  expurgation  of  such  passages  as  might  incur

{it  ion.  He  subsequently  settled  at  St.  Neot's.
luntingdonshire.  Besides  his  history,  he  pub-
lished "A  Plan  of  a  Society  for  making  rVuhoil
for  Widows  by  Life  Annuities"  (177'2);  •'  Kirst
Anniversary  Damon  after  the  Declaration  of  In-
de|H-ndence.  4  July,  1777  "  ;  and  an  "Abridgment
of  Bdwardaa  Work  on  'The  Affections."'

GORDON,  William  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  l'J  March,  1811.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  I'niversity  of  the  citv  of  New  York
in  1864,  studied  theology  in  the  "New  Brunswick
seminary,  and  was  graduated  and  licensed  to
preach  fan  1K57.  He  held  Hutch  Reformed  pas-
torates in  North  Hempstead  in  1838-'43.  in  Flush-
ing in  184.V-'9.  in  Houston  street.  New  York  citv.
in  I84v~'6&,and  in  Sehraalenburgh,  N.  J.,  till  1880,
when  he  resigned  on  account  of  failing  health,  but
continues  to  preach  occasionally  and  edits  the
"Sower  and  Mission  Monthly."  The  degree  of
S.  T.  I),  was  conferred  on  him  by  Columbia  in  1859.
He  has  been  a  constant  contributor  to  various  the-
ological journals,  and  published,  besides  sermons
•Supreme  (billhead  of  Christ  **  (New-
York,  1*44):  "Particular  Providence,  proved  l>v
the  History  of  Joseph"  (1H.V>):  "Threefold  Test
of  Modern  Spiritualism"  (1856);  " Christocracv "
(1867);  "The  Church  and  her  Sacraments"  (1870);
"Life  ..f  H.-nry  Ostran.ler.  I>.  D."  (1875);  and
"  Revealed  Truth  impregnable'1  (1878).

60EB.  Christopher,  senator,  l».  in  Boston,
Mass.,  K  Sept.  17>*:  d.  in  Walt  ham,  Mass.,  1
March.  1887.  His  father.  John  (171!>-'JMS).  was
prosecuted  and  banished  as  a  loyalist  in  1778,  but
Was  restored  to  citizenship  in  17*7  by  ad  of  legis-
lature. The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
bodied  law  with  Judge  Lowell, and  soon  ac-
quired a  lucrative  practice  in  Boston.  In  17MI  lie
pas  appointed  by  Washington  the  first  distrioi  at-
torney for  Massachusetts,  which  office  he  held  un-
til i7'.Mi.  lii  that  year  he  was  appointed,  with
William  Pinckney,  commissioner  to  kngland  under
John  Jay's  treaty  to  settle  the  American  spoliation
claims,  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  restitution
of  a  large  amount of  property. He  remained  in


London  for  sight  years,  during  the  laal  <>f  which

■  i>  >  harge  d'affaires. He  returned  to  Bl
in  1*0 1,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  Massachu-
setts in  lxoii,  Imt  served  only  OH  year. He  was  a
iiiiiiilH-rof  lioth  branches  of  the  legislature, and  in

1818  was  alaotad  I  .  s.  tsnatnr  in  place  ej  ■lames
Lloyd,  which  of&ee  be  held  till  ixi»i.  After
ing  as  a  presidential  elector  in  1*17  ha  retired  to
DfTvata  lif..  lb-  was  for  a  time  Haniel  Wcl.--
tutor  in  law.  He  left  valuable  baonasti  t<>  the
American  academy  <>f  asjanaai  and  to  the  Massa-
chusetts hiatofiaaj  society,  of  which  sanoointioni

In-  was  a  ineiiilH-r.  and  bciiucathed  nearly  $100,000
to  Harvard,  of  which  he  had  Ix-en  a  fellow.  The
Harvard  111. ran  building.  Core  hall,  which  was
completed  in  1X41,  is  named  in  his  honor.  Har-
vard gave  him  tile  degree  of  Id,.  I).

CORCAS.  Josiah.  soldier,  b.  in  Dauphin  coun-
ty. Pa..  1  July.  1M1M;  d.  in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala..  15  May.
1SH.5.  He  was  graduated  at  the  l'.  S.  military
academy  in  1X41  and  assigned  to  the  ordnance
Bona.  He  served  with  credit  in  the  Mexican  war,
rising  to  the  rank  of  captain  in  lx.V>.  After  act-
ing in  various  arsenals  as  assistant  In-  resigned  at
the  beginning  Of  the  civil  war,  and  was  placed  at
the  head  of  the  Confederate  ordnance  department
with  the  rank  of  brigadier  -  general.  After  Un-
close of  the  war  h<-  devoted  himself  to  business.
He  was  elected  vice-chancellor  of  the  University
of  the  South  at  Scwatiec.  Tcnn.,  in  lx7:j,  and  was
made  president  of  the  University  of  Alabama  in
1878,  where  he  remained  until  he  was  compelled
to  resign  owing  to  failing  health.

<iOK<«ES,  Sir  Perdinando,  proprietor  of
Maine,  b.  in  Ashton  Phillips,  Somerset,  England,
about  1685:  d.  in  Kngland  in  lt>47.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  conspiracy  of  Essex,  and  testified
against  the  latter  at  his  trial  for  treason  in  1601.
During  the  war  with  Spain  he  served  in  the  royal
navy  with  distinction,  and  in  1604  was  appointed
governor  of  Plymouth.  Being  a  friend  of  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh,  he  became  interested  in  the  hitter's
plans  for  colonization  in  the  New  World ;  and
when  Weymouth  returned  from  New  England  in

1605,  bringing  five  Indians,  (Jorges  took  three  of
them,  Mauida,  Sketwarroes,  and  Tafquantum.  into
his  home,  and  after  instructing  them  in  the  Eng-
lish language  gained  much  information  relative  to
their  country, and  determined  to  beOOBM  a  proprie-
tor of  land  beyond  the  Atlantic.  His  efforts  re-
sulted in  the  formation  of  the  Plymouth,  which
with the London  comjiany  was incorporated in

1606.  Between  these  was  divided  the  territory
extending  fifty  miles  inland  from  the  :54th  to  the
40th  parallel  of  north  latitude.  Plymouth  com-
pany had  the  northern  portion,  which  was  styled
North  Virginia.  The  patentees  were  authorized  to
maintain  the  government  for  twenty-one  years,  with
permission  to  impose  taxes,  to  coin  money,  and  to
exercise  all  the  power  of  a  well-organized  society.
After  several  unsuccessful  expeditions,  two  ships
were  despatched  from  Plymouth  in  1667,  bearing
a  party  who  erected  a  fortified  storehouse,  near
the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec,  in  Maine,  which  thev
called  Fort  Qaorge.  Owing  to  the  severity  of  the
climate  and  many  hardships,  this  colony  whs  aban-
doned in  the  following  spring.  In  1614 Gorges  en-
gaged ('apt.  John  Smith,  who  had  visited  New  Kng-
land in  the  s,-r\  lea  ..f  the  Plymouth  oaaapattr. 3a

ui  in  Maroh.  1616,  with  two  ships. His  own

1m.  .lining  dismasted,  he  returned  t<>  port,  and  the
other  made  the voyage  alone,  but  S4*.n returned.
After  other  unsuccessful  at  tempts.  Gorges  sent  out
a  party  under  Richard  Vines,  fan  18181  which
cainjK-d  on  the  Saeo  during  the  winter. In  1619


668


GORGES


GORMAN


Dernier  made  it  second  rojage. Tin  London  com-

J  any  had  now  Incurred  tin-  resentment  of  King
allies,  ami  Gorges  and  his  party  formed  a  new
corporation  on  A  Nov.,  1690,  under  the  name  of  the
■•Council  established  at  Plymouth,  in  the  county  of
Devon,  for  the  planting,  ruling. ordering,  and  gov-
erning  of  New  England  in  America."'  which  was
the  foundation  of  all  the  grants  made  in  New  F.ng-
laud.  Thi-  cor|M)ration  consisted  of  forty  pat-
entees, most  of  whom  were  persons  of  distinction.
including  thirteen  peers.  Gorges  was  styled  the
"father  of  colonization  in  America."  He  took
grants  with  John  Mason  of  the  district  called  La-
oonia,  and  attempted  settlements.  In  1688  the
council  resigned  its  charter  to  the  king;  but  Gorges
obtained  a  new  charter  in  1639,  which  constituted
him  lord- proprietary  of  the  province  of  Maine,  with
extraordinary  governmental  powers,  which  were  to
l>c  transmissible  with  the  property  to  his  heirs  and
assigns.  He  prepared  to  visit  New  England,  but
the  company  became  embarrassed  for  funds,  and
was  obliged  to  sell  the  ship  and  pinnace  which  had
been  built.  Sir  Ferdinando  had  also  become  inter-
ested in  the  Puritan  colony  of  New  Plymouth.
Tli rough  the  influence  of  his  father  and  of  Lord
Edward  Gorges,  Robert,  the  youngest,  son  of  Sir
Ferdinando,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-governor
of  New  England.  He  had  just  returned  from  the
Venetian  wars,  and  was  a  share-holder  in  the  grand

{latent  He  also  had  a  personal  grant  of  a  tract  of
and  on  the  northeast  side  of  Massachusetts  bay,
which  had  been  made  to  him  in  consideration  of
his  father's  services  to  the  company.  He  came  to
Plymouth  in  1628,  bringing  with  him  an  Episcopal
clergyman,  William  Morell.  He  attempted  to  form
a  settlement  at  Wessagusset,  which  ended  in  a  dis-
pute with  Weston,  who  had  begun  the  colony
there,  and  returned  to  look  after  it.  Robert  Gorges,
having  power  to  "  restrain  interlopers."  began  pro-
ceedings against  him.  He  returned  to  England  in
less  than  a  year,  and  his  people  dispersed — some  to
England,  some  to  Virginia.  In  1(531  a  grant  of
land  was  made  to  several  persons,  including  Ferdi-
nando Gorges,  a  grandson  of  Sir  Ferdinando.  This
territory  was  situated  on  the  Acomenticus  river,
and  several  settlements  were  made  there.  These
were  subjected  to  no  external  government  until
the  arrival  of  Capt.  William  as  deputy  governor
of  the  province,  which  was  called  "  New  Somer-
setshire." The  first  meeting  of  the  commission-
ers was  held  on  25  March,  1030,  in  Saco.  then  con-
taining 150  inhabitants,  and  was  the  first  provin-
cial government  for  this  section  of  New  England.
The  charter  of  Maine  covered  the  same  territory
as  that  of  New  Somersetshire,  and  Sir  Ferdinando
issued  a  commission  for  its  government,  and  sent
his  nephew,  Thomas,  to  be  deputy  governor.  The
first  general  court  of  this  government,  which  ex-
ercised the  powers  of  an  "executive,  legislative,
and  judicial  body  in  the  name  of  Sir  Ferdinando
Gorges,  late  proprietor  of  Maine,"  was  held  in
Saco,  25  June,  1640.  After  the  Gorges  govern-
ment was  established,  in  1641,  the  borough  of  Aco-
menticus and  the  town  of  Gorgcana  were  incorpo-
rated. Thomas  Gorges  arrived  in  1641,  and  settled
in  this  town.  He  sailed  for  England  in  1643,  leav-
ing Richard  Vines  at  the  head  of  the  government.
In  that  vear  the  four  New  England  colonies  formed
a  confederacy,  excluding  the  settlements  of  Gorges,
for  they  "  ran  a  different  course  both  in  their  min-
is! ry  and  civil  administration."  On  > the  death  of
Sir  Ferdinando,  the  estate  was  left  to  his  son,  John,
who  totally  neglected  the  province.  After  writing
repeatedly  to  the  heirs  and  receiving  no  replies,  the
Gorges  colonies  formed  themselves  into  a  body  poli-


t  i<-  for  the  purpose  of  self-government,  and  submit-
ted  U)  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts. — Sir  1-Vrdi-
nando's grandson,  Ferdinando,  I),  in  Loftas,  I
England,  in  1689;  d.  in  England,  25  Jan.,  1718,  |>e-
titioned  the  king  against  the  usurpation  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  commissioners  were  sent  out  to  adjust
the  affairs  of  the  government.  In  1677  he  sold  his
rights  to  Massachusetts  lor  £1,950.  He  published
■  America  Painted  to  the  Life"  (London,  1659).

GORHAM,  John,  phvsician,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
94  Feb..  17*3;  d.  there,  29  March,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1801,  and  afterward  stud-
ied in  Edinburgh.  In  1809  he  was  appointed  ad-
junct professor  of  chemistry  and  materia  medica  in
Harvard,  and  in  1815  was  made  professor  of  chem-
istry and  mineralogy.  He  published  an  "  Inaugu-
ral Address"  (1817);  "Elements  of  Chemical  Sci-
ence" (1819);  and  a  "Contribution  on  Sugar  "to
Thomas's  "Annual  Philosophy"  (1817).

GORH  AM,  Nathaniel,  statesman,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  27  May,  1738;  d.  there,  11  June.  1796.
After  receiving  a  common-school  education,  he  en-
gaged in  mercantile  pursuits  in  his  native  town.
He  took  an  active  part  in  public  affairs  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution,  was  a  member  of  the
colonial  legislature  from  1771  till  1775,  a  delegate
to  the  Provincial  congress  from  1774  till  1775.  and
a  member  of  the  board  of  war  from  1778  until  its
dissolution  in  1781.  In  1779  he  served  in  the  State
constitutional  convention.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  Continental  congress  from  1782  till  1783,  and
also  from  1785  till  1787,  serving  as  president  of
that  body  in  June,  1786.  For  several  years  he  was
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  He  took  high
rank  in  the  convention  that  framed  the  National
constitution,  and,  when  it  was  sitting  as  committee
of  the  whole,  he  was  called  by  Washington  to  pre-
side, and  filled  the  chair  for  three  months.  He
afterward  exerted  a  powerful  influence  in  securing
the  ratification  of  the  constitution  in  the  State  con-
vention. In  connection  with  Oliver  Phelps  he  pur-
chased from  the  state  of  Massachusetts  in  1786  an
immense  tract  of  land  on  Genesee  river,  for  the
sum  of  $1,000,000.  This  had  been  previously  ceded
to  Massachusetts  from  the  state  of  New  York.
They  soon  extinguished  the  Indian  title  to  a  part
of  this  territory,  surveyed  it  into  tracts,  laid  out
townships,  and  sold  large  parts  to  speculators  and
settlers.  In  1790  they  had  sold  nearly  all  their
property,  and,  being  unable  to  fulfil  their  contract
m  full  to  Massachusetts,  Phelps  and  Gorham  com-
promised and  surrendered  that  portion  of  the  land
which  remained  under  the  Indian  title. —  His  eldest
son,  Nathaniel,  d.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  22  Oct.,
1826,  was  a  pioneer  settler  of  this  tract,  having
been  placed  there  in  charge  of  his  father's  interests.
— Another  son,  Benjamin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27
Sept.,  1855,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1795.  He
studied  law  under  Theophilus  Parsons,  and  rose  to
eminence  at  the  Boston  bar.  He  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative to  congress  as  a  Federalist  to  fill  tne
vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Jonathan
Mason,  and  served"  from  1820  till  1821.  He  was
again  in  congress  from  1827  till  1831,  and  from
1833  till  1835.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  state
house  of  representatives.  He  gave  his  professional
services  without  compensation  to  defend  the  news-
paper press  in  libel  suits.

GORMAN,  Arthur  Pne,  senator,  b.  in  Howard
county,  Md.,  11  March,  1839.  He  received  a  pub-
lic-school education,  and  in  1852  became  a  page  in
tho  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  remained  till  18<><>.  and
on  1  Sept.  he  was  appointed  collector  of  internal
revenue  for  the  fifth  district  of  Maryland,  which


GORMAN

office  he  held  till  Man  D  Ju f  that

year  he  was  nuulo  a  director  in  tin-  <'he*a|>eakeatid

.1  company,  of  which  he  became  president

in  1878. In  Kovembar,  1888,he  was  elect.-d  to  the

Maryland  legislature  M  n I ><-m< K-mt .  re-elected  in

1871 '"'l  oboan  tpaalnr  of  Um  boom He  was

elected  |o  tin-  state  senate  in  IN?,"),  mid  served  four
year*.  In  1880  he  m  o  boson  to  Um  U.  s.  senate
as  a  Democraf  tonooaad  William  Pinkncv  White,
and  served  from  1881  till

GOBI  v  N.  John  Berry,  physician,  tx  b
barry  district.  S.  c.  U  Febl  'i7:i:<;  .1.  in  Talbot
county,  (ia.,  \'2 Nov.,  lsr.J. II.-  studied im-dicinc
in tin- Inivcivily «>f Penney  Ivania, and after  a

Erect  ice  oi  twenty  years  in  Milledgevillc  and  Tal-
OttOB.  (Ja.,  piim-il  it  laTgl  fortune,  lie  owned  a
valuable  library,  wai  fond  of  painting,  and  left  a
picture  entitled  the  "  Nightmare."  lie  published
"The  Philosophy  of  Animated  Kxi-tciicc  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1845),  and  contributed  to  periodicals.

GORMAN,  Uillis  Arnold,  soldier,  h.  near
ITwidllllblliy  Ky..  IS  .Ian..  1N14:  d.  in  St.  Paul.
Minn.,  80  May.  ls7<*».  He  was  graduated  at  the
law-school  of  the  I'niversity  of  Indiana,  was  ad-
mitted  to  the  liar,  and  began  to  practise  in  Dloom-
ington,  Ind.,  in  1885.  In  1887  and  1838  he  was  a
clerk  in  the  state  senate,  and  was  afterward  several
times  elected  to  that  body  as  a  Democrat. He  was

appointed  major  of  Gen.  Lane's  raginMnt  of  Indi-
ana volunteers  in  1840,  served  in  the  Mexican  war,
and  led  an  inde|x>ndent  rifle  battalion  at  the  battle
of  Bnena  Vista,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.
In  1847  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  4th  Indiana
regiment,  which  he  commanded  in  several  battles.
In  1H48  he  was  civil  and  military  governor  of
Puchla.  From  I fH-41*  till  1 853  he  was  a  representative
to  (.ui^ress  from  Indiana,  baring  l>een  chosen  as  a
Democrat  In  1S.V2  he  addressed  large  meetings
in  favor  of  (Jen.  Pierce's  election  to  the  presidency.
He  was  appointed  governor  of  the  territory  of
Minnesota  in  1853,  and  ex-offleio  superintendent  of
Indians,  which  offices  he  held  till  1857.  In  that
year  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
convention.  He  represented  St  Paul  in  the  Minne-
sota legislature  in  1888,  and  in  1S60  was  a  candi-
date for  presidential  elector  on  the  Douglas  ticket.
He  practised  law  in  St.  Paul  till  1861,  when  he  was
made  colonel  of  the  1st  Minnesota  regiment,  and
served  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  7  Sept.,
1861,  led  a  bayonet  charge  at  Fair  Oaks,  and  com-
manded a  brigade  at  South  Mountain  and  Antie-
tam.  He  was  at  the  head  of  the  8d  division,  8d
corps,  till  the  reorganization  of  the  army  following
Gen.  afoClellan'i  removal. In  1804  be  whs  mue-

1  out  of  the  service  and  resin 1  his  law  prac-
tice in  St.  Paul.  He  was  elected  city  attorney  in
1889,  and  held  this  office  till  his  death.

B0B08TIZA,  Manuel  Editardo  de  (go-ros-
te-tha).  Mexican  dramatist,  b.  in  Vera  Cruz.  bl
Oct,  1?*!>;  d.  in  Taciil.aya.  88  Oct,  1851.  He  was
educated  m  Madrid,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve  years
wrote  it  comedy.  He  entered  the  Spanish  guard  as
A  cadet  in  1806,  and  left  the  service  in  1*14  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  to  devote  himself  to
literary  work,  and  wrote  much  in  defence  of  liberal

*.  In  1*-j;t  he  was  banished  to  England,  but
returned  to  Mexico  in  lKJM.  in  the  same  year  was
elected  deputy  to  the  National  congress,  in  1838
rotary  of  the  treasury,  ami  in  1889  secretary  of
foreign  relations.  In  1844  be  went  m  envoy  extra-
ordinary to  the  United  states,  and  displayed  diplo-
matic skill  in  the  difficulties  regarding  the  throat

:  annexation  of  Texas.  He  fought  in  the  de-
fence of  Churubusco  in  Is  IT. Goroeuaa  took  much


(Jnlill


interest  in  education,  and  was  also  director  of  the
National  theatre.  In  1851  his  bust  was  placed  in
the  hall  of  the  National  theatre  fill  Iteat-

kuown  OOmediei  are  ••  Tel  para  (  'mil,"  "  I  jis  <  'o-tum-
brw  de  Antafio,"  and  "  Don  DiegttJto,"  which  were
published  and  n  I  in  Madrid  in  1881  :  and

of  his  later  works,  "  (  ontigo  Pan  y  <  !eboUatM  which
was  adapted  in  French  by  Scribe  under  Um  n
of  '•  I'ne  chaumicrc  el  son  cu-ur."

U0BB1B,  Peter  Deawlia olanjjman,  b,  in

Glasgow,  Scotland.  81  April.  1818;  d.  "in  Potsdam,

N.  \..  12  Sept.,  1884, lie  emigrated  to  the  United

States  in  1820,  and  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Methodist  Kpiscopal  church.  He  was  a  immUr
of  the  New  York  conference  from  IKWJ  till  his
death.  He  was  a  Member  Of  the  New  Fn^land  his-
torical society.  He  published  "The  Cburonei  and
Sets  in  the'  United  States"  (New  York.  181
"  Kpiscopal  Methodism  as  it  Was  and  Is"  (\y
"  Lives  of  Kminent  Methodist  Ministers  in  BkrMM
and  America"  (1852);  an  "  Essay  on  Episcopal
Succession";  and  "Black  River  Conference  Me-
morial." (1852.  id  vol..  1881).

SOBBINGS,  Henry  Honey  church,  naval
officer.  !>.  in  Barbadoes,  W.  1..  11  Aug.,  1841  ;  d.  in
New  York,  7  July,  1885.  He  was  the  son  of  an
English  olergl  man  of  the  established  church,  came
to  the  United  States  at  an  early  age,  and  entered
the  merchant-marine  service.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  National  ser-
vice as  a  common  sailor,  18  July,  L88B.  Three
months  later  he  was  attached  to  the  Mississippi
squadron,  and  by  1865  had  risen  through  successive
promotions  for  gallantry  to  the  rank  of  acting-
volunteer  lieutenant.  He  was  promoted  to  lieuten-
ant-commander on  18  Dec.,  18(58,  and  from  1WJ)
till  1871  commanded  the  sloop  ••  Portsmouth  "  in
the  South  Atlantic  squadron.  He  was  engaged  in
the  hydrographic  office  in  Washington,  D.  ('.,
from  1872  till  1876,  when  he  was  sent  with  the
"Gettysburg"  on  special  service  in  the  Mediter-
ranean, where  be  remained  till  1878,  contributing
letters  to  the  New  York
"  Nation."  He  was
brought  into  notice  in
1880  by  his  work  of
transporting  and  erect-
ing an  Egyptian  obe-
lNk  that  had  been  of-
fend to  the  United
States  by  the  khedive
Ismail  in  1879  at  the
opening  of  the  Suez
canal.  On  arriving  in
Alexandria  on  16 1  ><t..
187!>.  Commander  Gor*
rings,  began  his  opera-
tions with  the  assist-
ance of  100  A  rah-,  and
onii  Nov.  had  removed
1.7:10  cubic  yank  of  earth  from  around  the  pedes-
tal of  the  olielisk.  By  BMana  of  simple  and  origi-
nal machinery  devised  by  (lorringe,  the  mono-
lith w.i-  removed  from  its  pedeetal  and  placed  ■
a  horizontal  poaJUou  on  6  D<<\.  1819.  The  iron
steamer  "  Dessoug,"  owned  by  the  Firvjitian  gov-
ernment, was  then  purchased  from  Mahomet  few-
fik  for  i.'5,100,  and  the  obelisk  was  introduced
into  the  hold  UoOOgb  an  BUM'tUN  made  for  the
purpose.  The  mechanisin  by  which  the  obeliah
was  confined  in  the  vessel  was  entirely  of  Com-
mander Qorringefr  construction,  and  consisted  of
innumerable  Ihihiis  of  Meal  and  wood.  The  obe-
lisk arrived  In  New  York  on  *jn  .lulv.  1880.  By
the  aid  of  iron  tracks  and  cannon-halls  the  mono-


GORRITI


GOSFORD


lith  was  coMvcv.il  from  th<-  North  river  to  Cen-
trnl  I'ark,  where.  00  81  .Ian..  1*N1.  it  was  .iv.t-
ed  "ii  the  same  pedestal  on  which  it  had  rested  in
Rgypt The  height  ,,f  tha  shaft  is  <;:»  bat It

fH  erected  by  Thothmes  III.  at  Hcliopolis  about
1000  ii.  (  ..  and  removed  to  Alexandria  in  22  B.C.
The  total  expense  of  its  removal  to  New  York  and
erection  in  Central  I'ark  was  1108,788,  and  was
paid  l<y  William  II.  Yandcrbilt.  Subsequently
Commander  Gorringe  criticised  naval  matters  in
public  with  greeJ  freedom,  and.  on  being  called  to
aeconnt  by  the  dejmrtmcnt.  offered  his  resignation,
which  was  accepted.  He  then  engaged  actively  in
forming  the  American  ship-building  company,  in
which  he  had  a  controlling  interest.  He  secured
several  contracts  for  the  construction  of  vessels,
ami  leased  the  Heading  railroad  ship-yard  at  Port
Richmond,  Philadelphia,  but  owing  to  a  want  of
capital  the  enterprise  proved  a  failure.  Several
months  before  his  death  in  jumping  on  a  train
while  it  was  in  motion,  he  received  an  injury
from  which  he  never  recovered.  The  monument
erected  by  friends  over  his  grave  at  Sparkill.  on
the  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  is  an  exact  copy,  on  a  reduced
scale,  of  the  obelisk  that  he  transported  from  Egypt.
(See  illustration.)  He  published  a  "  History  of
Egyptian  Obelisks"  (New  York,  1885).

colli;  M' I.  Jos6  Ygnacio  (gor-re'-te),  Argen-
tine soldier,  b.  in  Jujui  in  1770;  d.  in  Sucre,  Bo-
livia, 9  Nov.,  1885.  He  studied  in  the  University
of  Cordoba,  and  then  went  to  Chuquisaca  to  be
graduated  as  doctor  in  law,  but.  at  the  death  of  his
father  in  1791  returned  home  to  take  charge  of  his
property.  There  the  revolution  of  May,  1810,
found  him,  and  he  at  once  sided  with  the  cause  of
independence,  serving  during  the  war  of  upper
Peru.  During  the  campaign  of  Salta  and  Tucu-
man  in  1819  and  1820,  he  spent  a  great  part  of  his
fortune  in  the  maintenance  of  the  Argentine  army.
In  1820  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  for  the  province
of  Salta  to  the  first  constituent  congress ;  and  in
the  same  year,  when  the  governor  of  Salta,  Gen.
G Hemes, was  called  to  the  field,  Gorriti  became

fovernor  in  his  place.  When  the  Spanish  general
larquiegui  invaded  the  province,  Gorriti  with  a
small  force  defeated  and  captured  his  vanguard,
and  forced  the  main  body  to  retire  to  upper  Peru.
In  1821  there  was  a  revolution  against  Giiemes,  and
Gorriti  was  requested  to  take  charge  of  the  gov-
ernment, but  he  refused  and  retired  to  private
life.  When  the  province  continued  in  anarchy,  he
came  forward  again,  and  took  part  in  the  defence
against  the  last  exertions  of  the  royalist  armies.
He  also  strenuously  opposed  Quiroga,  but,  when
the  latter  defeated  Gen.  Alvarado  in  1831,  Gorriti
emigrated  to  Bolivia  and  died  there.

GORTON,  Samuel,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.  in
Gorton,  England,  about  1600;  d.  in  Rhode  Island
in  1677.  He  was  imperfectly  educated,  and  was  in
the  employ  of  a  clothier  of  London,  but  in  1636
went  to  Boston,  Mass.,  hoping  to  enjoy  greater  re-
ligious freedom  there  than  at  home.  He  remained
in  Boston  until  religious  disputes  caused  him  to
remove  to  Plymouth,  where  he  fared  still  worse,
being  fined,  imprisoned,  and  finally  expelled  from
the  colony  in  the  winter  of  1637-'8  for  preaching
bereey.  He  then  went  to  Aquidneck  (now  New-
port), R.  I.,  with  a  few  followers,  but  was  publicly
whipped  for  calling  the  magistrates  "  just  asses,*'
and  lor  other  contemptuous  acts,  and  about  1641
was  forced  to  take  refuge  with  Roger  Williams
at  Providence.  He  then  settled  at  Pawtuxet,  and
purchased  land,  but  became  obnoxious  by  involv-
ing himself  in  the  disputes  of  the  colonists,  and  in
September,  1642,  having  refused  to  go  to  Boston,


on  being  summoned  by  the  authorities,  he  re-
moved to  Shawmut.  on  the  west  side  of  Narra-
fansett  bay,  where  he  bought  land  of  tie  -a< -hem,
liaiitononio.  In  June.  1048,  two  inferior  sachems
contested  his  claims  to  the  property,  and  applied
to  the  general  court  at  Boston  for  redress.  Potty
soldiers  were  in  consequence  marched  to  ShsAroj
met.  and  Gorton  and  ten  of  his  followers  u.-rc
taken  prisoners  to  Boston  in  October,  where  they
were  tried  as  "damnable  heretics."  and  sentenced
to  imprisonment  and  hard  labor  in  irons.  They
were  released  in  March,  ll>44,  and  ordered  to  leave
the  colony.  Gorton  then  went  to  Kngland  to  ob-
tain redress,  and,  having  procured  from  the  Earl  of
Warwick  a  letter  of  safe  conduct  to  the  Massachu-
setts magistrates,  and  an  order  that  his  people
should  be  allowed  peaceable  possession  of  their
lands  at  Shawmut,  he  returned  to  his  colony  in
1648,  and  renamed  it  Warwick  in  honor  of  the
earl.  Gorton's  remaining  years  seem  to  have  been
untroubled,  though  Massachusetts  did  not  relin-
quish her  claim  to  the  Shawomet  settlement  until
some  years  later.  After  his  return  he  discharged
many  important  civil  officers,  and  preached  on
Sundavs  to  the  colonists  and  Indians.  He  re-
garded the  clergy  and  all  outward  forms  with  con-
tempt, and  held  that  by  union  with  Christ  be-
lievers partook  of  the  perfection  of  God,  and  that
heaven  and  hell  have  no  actual  existence.  His
sect  survived  him  about  one  hundred  years. He

fublished  "  Simplicities  Defence  against  Seven-
leaded  Policy,  a  vindication  of  his  course  in
New  England  (London,  1646;  reprinted  in  the
collections  of  the  Rhode  Island  historical  society);
'"  An  Incorruptible  Key  composed  of  the  CX
Psalm  "  (1647) ;  "  Saltmarsh  returned  from  the
Dead  "  (1655) ;  *'  An  Antidote  against  the  Common
Plague  of  the  World  "  (1657) ;  and  "  Certain  Copies
of  Letters."  Gov.  Edward  Winslow  replied  to  '•  Sim-
plicities Defence,"  and  also  published  a  "  Narrative
of  Disturbances  made  in  New  England  by  Samuel
Gorton  and  his  Accomplices"  (1649).  See  his  life,
by  John  M.  Mackie,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biog-
raphy" (Boston,  1845).

GOSFORD,  Archibald  Acheson,  Earl  of,
governor-general  of  Canada,  b.  in  England  about
1775;  d.  27  March,  1849.  He  was  the  second  earl
of  the  name,  and  was  created  a  peer  of  the  United
Kingdom,  as  Lord  Worlingham,  13  June,  1835.
He  was  appointed  governor-general  of  Canada  in
1835,  and  arrived  at  Quebec  in  August  of  that  year.
A  spirit  of  intense  dissatisfaction,  fomented  in  Up-

Eer  Canada  by  William  Lyon  Mackenzie  and  in
lower  Canada  by  Papineau,  prevailed  in  both
those  provinces  at  the  time  of  Earl  Gosford's  ap-
pointment. He  was  one  of  a  royal  commission,  of
which  the  other  members  were  Sir  Charles  E.  Gray
and  Sir  George  Gipps,  which  had  been  appoint-
ed to  investigate  the  grievances  complained  of
in  Canada.  Both  as  chief  of  the  commission  and
as  governor.  Lord  Gosford  pushed  to  the  utmost
limit  the  policy  of  concession  and  conciliation
which  he  had  been  instructed  by  the  home  govern-
ment to  pursue.  But  all  efforts  to  allay  disaffec-
tion were  in  vain,  and  the  treasonable  character  of
the  declaration  made  at  the  meeting  of  the  six
counties,  held  at  St.  Charles,  23  Oct.,  1837,  led  the
governor-general  to  apprise  the  British  govern-
ment that  a  sterner  policy  must  be  adopted  if
Canada's  connection  with  the  empire  was  to  ba
maintained.  At  the  same  time  he  begged  to  be
relieved  of  his  office,  and  this  request  wa>  granted
by  the  home  government,  which  approved  all  that
Gosford  had  done  in  Canada,  though  his  mission
was  a  failure. He  left  Canada  on  26  Feb.,  1


GOSNnI.I>


(•OTWU.h


OM


G08NOLD,  Bartholomew,  Mkh  naviga-
tor, il.  in Virgin

panylng  Raleigh  as an  associate  in  his  un-uecenrful
nli<  nipt  to  fount]  it  colony  in  Virginia,  «•
commanded  mi  expedition  that  was  fitted  oat  at
the  expense  o(  the  Karl  of  Southampton  for  plant*
:  uglantl.  On  -'•;  March,  1601
he  sailed  from  Falmouth  with  one  tana!  and
<•<>!( mists,  ami, instead  uf  talcing  t In-  usual

southerly  course, undertook the  direct >ojsgi

across  the  Atlantic  t<»  America.  From  t  li«-  AsOCOS,
to  which  In-  was  carried  bi  opposing  wiada,  in-  took
a  westerly  course,  ami  after  ansa  weeks  ohm  in
right  of  Cape  Elisabeth  in  Maine.  Thence  bt  fol-
lowed the  coast  to  the  southwest,  ami  <m  II  M»\

anchored  to  the  cast  of  York  harbor. Hon-  he  wai

I  by  natives,  ami  then  proceeding  south  m
search  of"  a  Boremitahle  place  fur  a  settlement,
discovered,  OB  10  May,  a  promontory  which  he
named  Cape  Ood. He  ami  four  of  his  men  went

ashore,  ami this  was  the  first s|x.t in  that  region

ever  trad  by  Englishman.  s*tiliu^  around  the
cape,  and  stopping  at  an  island  now  knewn  as  No
Man's  Land,  uosnokl  landed  at  the  month  of  Buz-
zard -  bay,  and  planted  his  colony  on  an  island,
which  be  named  Elisabeth,  in  honor  of  the  queen,
hut  which  is  now  known  by  its  Indian  name  of
Cuttyhunk.  The  hostility  of  the  Indians,  scarcity
of  provisions,  ami  disputes  about  a  division  of  prof-
its had  a  discouraging  effect  on  the  colonists,  who
returned  to  England,  where  they  arrived.  23  July,
with  a  cargo  of  sassafras-root,  cedar,  furs,  and
other  commodities,  (iosnold  then  organized  a
company  for  colonization  in  Virginia,  led  by  Wing-
fiehl.  Hunt,  and  ('apt.  John  Smith.  A  charter  was
granted  by  James  I.,  10  April,  1006,  the  first  under
which  an  English  colony  was  planted  in  America.
On  19  Dec.  of  that  vear  he  sailed  with  three  small
vessels  and  one  hundred  and  five  adventurers,  only
twelve  of  whom  were  laborers,  and  after  a  tedious
voyage  reached  the  mouth  of  the  James  river.
which  they  named  after  the  king.  Sailing  up  the
river,  they  landed abottl  fifty  miles  from  its  mouth,
and  founded  Jamestown,  notwithstanding  the  re-
monstrances of  Gosnold,  who  opposed  the  selection
of  this  site  owing  to  its  unhealthy  location.  Be-
fore autumn  fifty  of  their  number,  among  them
the  projector  of  the  colony,  died.

GOSSK,  Philip  Henry,  British  zoologist,  b.  in
Worcester,  England.  0  April,  1810.  He  removed
in  infancy  to  Poole,  Dorset,  where  he  displayed  his
taste  for  natural  history.  In  1827  he  went  to  New-
foundland in  a  mercantile  capacity,  and  while
there  occupied  his  leisure  in  collecting  insects  and
in  making  colored  drawings  of  them.  After  resid-
ing there  for  eight  vears  he  removed  to  Lower
Canada,  and  pursued  his  mttiiral-historv  researches
then  for  three  years.  Sulisetpiently  he  travelled
in  the  United  States,  resided  in  Alabama for  nearly
a  year,  and  made  a  large  collection  of  drawings  of

.  es|K'cially  of  the  lepidoptera  of  that  region.
He  returned  to  Kngland  in  1839,  and  in  1844  rh>
ited  Jamaica,  where  he  spent  eighteen  months  in
studying  the  geology  of  that  island,  and  in  making
collections.  On  his  return  to  England  be  made  a
special  study  of  the  British  rotifers,  and  has  con-
ducted his  more  recent  investigations  with  the  aid
of  the  microscope.  In  18.">3  he  took  an  active  part
in  the  formation  of  public  and  private  collections
of  marine  animals.  In  1830  Mr.  Qosse  was  elected
a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society.  His  works,  which
are  numerous,  include  the  following  on  American
natural  history  :  "The  Canadian  Naturalist  "  (Lon-
"  Birds  of  Jamaica  H  (1847);  "Natural

;.  of  Birds,  Mammals,  Reptiles  and  Fishes  "


■  '51,4  rol  oceanDe*  >

and  "  A  Naturalist's  Sojourn in  Jai
••  Letters  from  Alabama (London.  lv

04)1  IM  II  U.K. Ion.  i.  musician. I..

in New  <  »il,-.,'  .  d.  in  Tij

I860.  His  father  was  ..f  (orman-
Juwish  descent  ami  his  mother  of  Creole  birth.
At  an  early  agS  he  showed  marked  iiiiisjeal  ability.
To  complete  his  musical  education,  his  father  sent
him  to  I'aris.  where  he  studied  the  piano  with
Halle  ami  Camilla  Stainatz,  and  harmony  with
Maleden.  He  also  fori I  a  friendship  with  Hec-
tor Berlioz,  who  gave  him  valuable  adviec.  His
first  ap|M-arancc  VM  made  in  I'aris  in  Ikj.i.  He
Continued  his  studies  in  musical  composition  till
1M4H,  when  he  gave  a  series  of  public  concert-  in
I'aris  with  much  success.  He  then  travelled  in
Switzerland  and  Spain,  and  made  a  European
reputation  before  returning  to  the  United  States  in
l8o8.  His  first  anpaaranof  m  this  country  wai  ntads
in  Boston,  and  he  afterward  played  in  Now  York,
in  other  citie-  .if  the  I'nited  States,  and  in  Mexico
and  South  America.  After  snsoding  some  time  in
Buenos  Ay  res  and  Montevideo,  he  went  to  Bio
Janeiro,  where  he  gave  many  concerts  and  pro-
jected a  musical  festival,  hagfaining  M  Nov..  1888L
On  the  second  even-
ing's |N'rformance  he
became  ill  while  play-
ing one  of  his  com-
|k. sit  ions,  ••  LaMort,"
and  was  removed  at
once  to  Tijuca,  where
he  died.  Gottschalk
played  principally  his
own  compositions,
which  arc  dreamy  and
sensuous,  but  without
intellectual  vigor  and
force.  He  executed
them  with  feeling  and
delicacy  of  expression,
which  appealed  to  the
popular  taste.  1 1  is
arrangements  of  the
works  of  others  are  of
no  special  merit,  nor  was  he  a  skilled  interpreter  of
the  works  of  the  masters,  His  pieces  are  chiefly
illustrative  of  tropical  and  southern  life,  and  in-
clude "Le  Bananier,"  "Ija  Savane."  "  Kicordati.'*
"  La  Marche  de  Nuit."  "<)  ma  Charmantc,"  "  IV-
ponds-moi,"  "  Manchega."  "Grande  Valse  tie  Con-
cert," "Grande  fitude  de  Concert."  "  Mazeppa,"
"  La  Moissoneuse,"  "I^a  Danse  des  Ombres,"  •
sian  Ballad-."  "La  Bamboula"  (a  wild  African
da]  •<■).  and  Ctthan  dances.  He  was  decorated  with
the  cross  of  the  legion  of  honor  and  the  order  of
Isabella  the  Catholic.  He  contributed  to  the  "  At-
lantic Monthly."  "Notes  of  a  Pianist.''  which  were
edited  by  lu*  slater  (Philadelphia,  1881>

QOTWALD,  Lnther  Alexander,  clergyman,
b.  in  York  Springs,  Adams  co.,  l'a..  II  .Ian..  U
He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettys-
burg.  in  1H57.  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there
in  1N.">9.  In  the  same  year  he  was  ordained  to  the
ministry of  the Lutheran church,  and has  held

Iiastorates  at  Shippenaburg  and  Lebanon,  l'a.,
kaytoD,  Ohio,  Chamberaborg  and  York,  l'a.,  and
Springfield.  Ohio.  He  has  been  a  successful  preach-
er, and  ha-s  held  various  ofilces  in  the  general  syn-
od, as  trustee  of  its  college  and  seminary,  and  as
a  memlier  of  the  boards  of  church  extension  and
home  missions.  I'ennsylvania  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  I).  I),  in  1H?:<.  1  >r.  (Jot wald  is  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  jieriodicals  of  his  church.


<;:•:>


(joniK


GOULD


hixI  lias  published  various  pamphlets  and  "Church
Orders:  or  tin*  Xecessity  of  a  Right  Call  to  the
Offloeofthe  Ministry "CGtottyabarg,  Pa..  I87P).

GOUGE,  William  M.,  author,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 10  Nov..  17!>(i:  «!.  in  Trenton.  X.  J.,  14  July.
is*i;{.  Hi-  edited  the  "  Philadelphia  Gazette"  and
Other  journals  and  for  thirty  years  contributed  ar-
tfoles  on  banking  t<>  various  periodicals. He  was

for  thirty  years  connected  with  the  treasury  de-
partment at  Washington.  Ee  published  "  History
of  the  American  Banking  System  "  (1835);  "  Expe-
diency of  Dispensing  with  Bank  Paper  (1887);
and  a" "  Fiscal  History  of  Texas  "  (1852).

GOUGB,  John  Bartholomew,  temperance  lec-
turer, 1).  in  Sandgate,  Kent,  England,  22  Aug.,
1817;  d.  in  Prankford,  Pa.,  18  Feb.,  188(i.  His
father  had  served  in  the  Peninsular  war  as  a  pri-
vate soldier.  The  son  received  his  education  chiefly
from  his  mother,  and,  when  twelve  years  of  age,
after  the  death  of  his  father,  was  sent  to  the  Unit-
ed States.  He  arrived  in  New  York  in  August,
1829,  and  went  to  Oneida  county,  where  he  lived
on  a  farm  for  two  vears.  He  then  obtained  a  situ-
ation in  a  publishing-house  in  New  York  city,
where  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  bookbinder.  Here
his  mother  and  sister  joined  him,  but  in  1833,  dur-
ing a  time  of  depression,  he  lost  his  situation,  and
the  family  was  reduced  to  destitution.  In  a  few
months  after  her  arrival  in  New  York  his  mother
died,  and  Gough  drifted  into  the  worst  of  dissi-
pation. For  some
years  he  obtained  a
precarious  subsist-
ence about  drink-
ing-shops  and  low
resorts  by  singing
and  by  his  remarka-
ble powers  of  comic
delineation.  He  had
always  a  passion  for
the  stage,  and  made
one  or  two  efforts
to  become  an  actor,
but  owing  to  his
habits  gained  little
favor.  He  married
in  1839,  and  became
a  bookbinder  on
his  own  account.
The  effort  to  do  his  work  without  giving  up  his
nightly  dissipations  so  affected  him  that  he  was  on
the  verge  of  delirium  tremens.  He  lost  his  wife
and  child,  and  was  reduced  to  the  utmost  misery.
In  1S42  he  was  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  where  he  was
regarded  as  a  hopeless  drunkard.  Delirium  had
taken  possession  of  him,  and,  as  he  used  to  relate
to  his  audiences  in  after  years,  the  tools  of  his
trade  seemed  to  turn  to  serpents  and  crawl  about
him.  Thousands  of  people  have  heard  him  tell
how,  in  October,  1842.  a  little  kindness  shown  him
by  a  Quaker  induced  him  to  attend  a  temperance
meeting,  to  sign  the  pledge,  and  to  keep  it,  in
spite  of  a  raging  appetite  for  drink.  A  few
months  later  some  ol  his  former  companions  in-
duced him  to  violate  his  pledge,  and  he  confessed
the  fact  at  a  public  meeting  at  Worcester.  From
the  time  of  his  taking  the  pledge  there  came  upon
him  an  irresistible  desire  to  devote  his  life  to
the  cause  of  temperance,  and  he  clung  with  sin-
gular tenacity  to  his  purpose.  He  set  forth,  car-
pet-bag in  hand,  to  tramp  through  the  New  Eng-
land states,  glad  to  obtain  even  seventy-five  cents
for  a  temperance  lecture,  and  soon  became  famous
for  his  eloquence.  An  intense  earnestness  derived
from  experience,  and  his  power  of  imitation  and


^^L^^%^.


expression.  enabled  him  to  work  on  the  sensibili-
ties i,f  his  audiences  as  few  men  have  been  able  to
do.  He  was  accustomed  to  mingle  the  pathetic
and  humorous  in  such  a  way  as  to  attract  thou-
sands to  hear  him  who  had  no  purpose  but  to  be
interested  and  amused.  In  the  first  year  of  his
travels  he  spoke  386  times,  and  thenceforward  for
seventeen  years  he  dealt  only  with  temperance.
During  that  period  he  addressed  over  5,000  audi-
ences. He  visited  England  in  1853,  by  invitation  of
the  IxHidon  temperance  league,  was  entertained  by
George  Crnikshank,  the  veteran  artist  and  total
abstainer,  and  his  first  address,  delivered  at  I
Hall,  produced  a  great  sensation.  He  intended  to
stay  but  six  months,  but  was  kept  busy  for  two
years.  In  1854  he  had  undertaken  to  speak  at  Ox-
ford, and  the  students  had  determined  to  prevent
him.  He  was  greeted  with  hisses,  cat-calls,  and
yells.  But  Gough  had  a  disciplined  temper  and
the  courage  of  his  convictions,  and  an  appeal  to  the
Briton's  proverbial  love  of  fair  play  ended  in  his
obtaining  a  hearing.  On  a  subsequent  visit,  in  1878,
he  was  received  with  distinguished  attention  by  the
Oxonians.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
1855,  and  took  up  his  old  work  with  unabated  suc-
cess. In  1857  he  made  another  journev  to  Eng-
land, and  lectured  for  three  years.  In  his  temper-
ance efforts  Mr.  Gough  always  kept  aloof  from
politics  or  anv  organized  effort  to  accomplish  re-
sults through  legislation,  relying  entirely  on  moral
influences  and  on  the  total  abstinence  pledge.
After  confining  his  addresses  to  the  subject  of
temperance  for  seventeen  years,  he  began  to  take
up  other  subjects,  literary  and  social,  though  from
first  to  last  his  chief  successes  were  obtained  on
the  temperance  platform.  After  his  popularity
had  led  him  to  vary  his  subject  and  to  lecture
before  lyceums,  he  made  a  moderate  fortune  by  his
eloquence.  His  subjects  were  such  as  to  give  full
scope  to  his  powers  of  imitation,  and  to  furnish
opportunity  to  stir  the  feelings.  "Eloquence  and
Orators"  and  "Peculiar  People"  were  topics  of
this  kind,  in  which  diverting  imitations  played  a
prominent  part,  but  he  rarely  failed  to  introduce
some  reference  to  the  evils  of  intemperance.  His
oratorv  was  not  acquired,  but  natural.  He  had  no
elocutionary  training,  his  reading  was  singularly
restricted,  and  all  his  resources  were  from  within,
yet  never  failed  to  hold  the  attention  of  his  audi-
ences.- For  several  years  Mr.  Gough  had  made  his
home  at  West  Boylston,  Mass.,  where  he  spent  much
time  among  his  books  and  friends.  He  was  engaged
in  the  delivery  of  a  lecture  at  the  1st  Presbyterian
church.  Frankford,  Pa.,  when  he  was  stricken  by
cerebral  apoplexy,  two  days  afterward  lapsing  into
unconsciousness  that  lasted  until  his  death.  Am-
herst conferred  upon  him  the  honorary  degree  of
A.  M.  A  sketch  of  his  life  was  published  by  Rev.
W.  Reid  in  1854.  His  publications  (some  of  which
have  been  translated  into  French.  Dutch,  Scandi-
navian, and  Tamil)  are  "Autobiography"  (Lon-
don, 1846;  2d  ed.,  1853);  "Orations''  (1854):
"  Temperance  Address  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  Tem-
perance Lectures"  (1879);  and  "Sunlight  and
Shadow,  or  Gleanings  from  my  Life- Work  "  (1880).
GOULD,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Topslield,
Mass.,  15  Mav,  1751 ;  d.  in  Newburyport,  Ms
May,  1841.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary
war  he  marched  at  the  head  of  thirty  minute-men
from  Topsfield,  and  participated  in  the  flghl  at
Lexington  on  19  April,  1775.  He  received  a  bullet
wound,  the  scar  of  which  was  conspicuous  on  his
cheek  throughout  his  long  life,  and  formed  the
subject  of  a  poem  by  his  daughter.  Hannah  F.
Could. He  was  commissioned  captain,  and  was


liiiri.n


GOULD


006


Mm  last  nmn  la  leave  Charlcstown  n<<  k  lit  the
nin at  c.f  the  Continental  force*  fnun  Banker  Hill
in  .inn.-.  1778.  Subsequently  ho  wu  engaged  in
tin-  liattlcs  of  White  Plains,  Bennington,  and
St  ill wiit. t.  iiihI  had  command  of  tin*  main  guard
at  West  Point  when  Arnold  11<-<1  and  Andre  was
captured. After  the  war  he  settled  in  Newnury-

1>ort,  where  the  remainder  of  his  life  was  s|M>nt. —
"•n.  Henjiiniln  Apthorp,  educator.  i>.  En  Las-
er, Mn>v,  15  Jane,  1787;  d\  in  Ronton,  %A  Oct.,
'.  wu  graduati-d  at  Harvard  in  1*11.  and  be-
cami'  principal  of  the  Boeton  Lataa^akooi,  remain-
ing there  until 1880, Daring  hi>*  administration
this institution beoaUM  one  of  the  BJOOl famous

Iireimmtorv  schools  in  the  United  States.  Mis
lealth  failing  in  1816,  Ik-  was  obliged  to  relinquish
teaching,  anil  s|>cnt two  years  in  Kurojiean  tnivel.

On  his  return  he  become  a  thip-owner  m  the  China

and  Hast  Indian  Importing  business.  Mr.  (ioiild
also  filled  Important  pabUe  oAom  in  the  state. Be

was  one  of  the  first  American  teachers  to  annotate
classical  authors,  and  published  "The  I'ri/e  Rook"
(f>  numbers,  lioston,  182O-'0)  ;"  Adams's  Latin
Grammar"  (Northampton,  \H'2~>)\  and  editions  of
-ton.  1887X  Horace  (1H2S).  and  Virgil
(1829).— Benjamin's  daughter,  Hannah  Flagg,
poet,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Mass.,  :\  Sept.,  1  ?*'.» :  d.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  5  Sept.,  isi5.>,  removed  with
her  father  to  rTewbttirporl  in  1800,  and  after  the
d'-ath of her  mother  honanM his  constant com-

( wmion,  a  fact  that  accounts  for  the  patriotism  of
ier  earlier  verses.  In  her  youth  she  was  famed  for
vivacity  and  wit.  Her  poems  were  characterized
by  true  thought,  refined  and  tender  emotion,  and
healthful,  moral  tone,  which  made  them  favorites,
and  led  to  their  frequent  appearance  in  print,  lioth
at  home  and  abroad.  She  led  a  quiet  life  in  the
homestead  where  she  resided  for  half  a  century — a
life  that  would  have  been  as  secluded  as  it 'was
unostentatious  but  for  her  genial  hospitality  and
the  many  visitors  and  distinguished  authors  who
sought  her  acquaintance.  Miss  Gould  began  her
literary  career  by  writing  for  periodicals.  She
published  "Poem's"  (Boston,  1832):  "I'oems"  (:{
vols..  1888);  -The  Golden  Vaee,  a  Cift  for  the
Young"  (1948) ;  *  Gathered  Leares  and  Miscella-
neous Fapeta"  (184(5):  "New  Poems  "(I860]  J  "The
Diamna:a  Perennial"  (1851);  "The  Youth's  Coro-
nal "(N.-w  York,  1861) ; M  Mother's  Dream, anil  other
Poema" (Boeton,  1668);  and  "Hymns  and  I'oems
for  children"  (1864), — Benjamin  Apthorp's  son,
Benjamin  Aptliorp,  astronomer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  27  Sept..  1M24.  studied  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  where  he  received  the  Franklin  gold  medal.
and  at  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1844.
For  over  a  vear  he  was  master  of  the  Roxhury  Latin-
school,  and  then  went  abroad  for  higher  studies.
He  devoted  his  attention  principally  to  astronomy.
which  he  followed  under  Carl  F.  (iauss  in  Gottin-
gen.  and  iii  1H48  he  received  thedegreeof  Ph.D.
there.  Later  he  spent  some  time  under  Francois
Arago  in  Paris  hik!  also  in  forming  the  acquaint-
ance of  noted  scientists,  including  Frederic  W.  A.

lander.  Alexander  \on  Humboldt,  and  others.
lb-  returned  to  the  United  States  In  \s\h,  and  early
in  1848  Started  in  Cambridge  an  "Astronomical
Journal"  devoted to  original  investigation,  which

'titinued  largely  at  his  own  expense  until  1861.
In  l*"il  he  was  given  charge  of  the  longitude  opera-
tions of  the  coast  survey,  ami  was  one  of  the  first
to  apply  the  telegraph  to  the  determination  of
differences  in  longitude.  Shortly  after  the  laying
of  the  Atlantic  cable  in  1H(WJ  he  established  in
leiiiia,  Ireland,  the  station  from  which  the  differ-
ence in  longitude  between  Europe  and  America


was  ascertained,  and  he  connected  the  two  conti-
nents hi  |  rvationa.  Th.  tir>t
determination* of  trans- Atlantic  longitude  bj  I
graph,  and  were  the  means  ..f  aetablishing  a  con-
nected series  of  longitude  measurements  from  the
Cral  mountains  to  Hew  Orleans.  He  was  din
of  the Dudley  oUenatorv in Albany from

till  I860,  ami  superintended  it-  construction. It

was  in  this  building  that  the  normal  clock,  pro-
tected from  atmospheric  variation  and  furnished
with  barometric  compensation,  was  first  need  so
give  time  telegraphically  to  dials  throughout  the
observatory.  Dr.  Could  Introduced  numerous  im-
provements in  coii-t ruction,  which  are  DO*  ttftas>
tensively  used  throughout  the  world  in  Other ob-
ifOflSS,  and  it  wa»  his  clock  that  gave  the  time
signals  to  New  York.  In  18nX  be  was  appointed
to  organize  and  direct  the  National  ob-crvatory  of
the  Argentine  Republic  in  Cordoba.  Ho  obtamed
from  hurope  a  complete  outfit  of  instruments, anil,
after  erecting  the  building,  began  work  with  four
assistants  in INTO. His  work  included  the  BMp-

I >ing  of  a  large  part  of  the  southern  heavens,  and
lis  ••  UraUOmetry  <>f  the  Southern  Heavens"  is  ac-
cepted as  final  authority  for  the  southern  hemi-
sphere, as  that  of  Argelander  is  for  the  northern.
Dr.  Gould  also  organized  a  national  meteorological
office,  with  a  net  of  stations  extending  from  the
tropics  toTierra  del  Fuego.  and  from  the  Andes  to
the  Atlantic.  He  remained  in  the  Argentine  Re-
public until  1886,  when  he  returned  t<>  Cambridge.
and  has  since  re-established  his  "Astronomical
Journal."  In  1862  he  was  requested  by  the  l".  S.
sanitary  commission  to  take  charge  of  its  statistics,
and  organized  in  connection  with  these  an  elaborate
system  of  anthropological  measurements,  which
were  subsequently  computed  and  tabulated.  This
was  published  under  the  title  of  "Investigations
in  the  Military  and  Anthropological  Statistics  ,,f
American  Soldiers"  (New  York.  lN<;«i).  Dr.  Could
is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  BOCJet  les,  among
which  are  the  Royal  astronomical  society  of  Ixm-
don  and  the  French.  Ruffian.  Prussian,  and  Aus-
trian academics  of  sciences  in  Europe,  and  he  was
one  of  the  original  members  of  the  National  acad-
emy of  sciences  in  the  I'nited  States.  In  1N8.1)  he
received  the  degree  of  LL.D.  from  Harvard,  and
in  1KS7  from  Columbia.  His  publications  include,
besides  numerous  shorter  articles  contributed  t<>
periodical  literature.  "  Investigation  of  the  Orbit  of
the  Comet  V  "  (Washington.  1847);  "  Report  on  the
Discovery  of  the  Planet  Neptune"  (1800);  "  Dis-
oussions  of  Observations  made  by  the  U.  8.  Astro-
nomical Expedition  to  Chili,  to  determine  the  Solar

Parallax  "  (1*"><5);  "The  Trans-Atlantic  Longitude
ns  determined  by  the  Coast  Survey"  (1868);  "  An-
cestry "f  Zaicheiis  Gould "  (1878) i  and  also  valu-
able charts  of  the  heavens,  and  reports  of  the
work  accomplished  under  his  superintendence.

60ULD,  Kmilv  Hliss.  philanthropist,  b.  sbout
1886;  d.  in  Perugia.  Italy.  81  Aug..  IsT-V  She
was  the  wife  of  Dr.  Could,  physician  to  the  Ameri-
can legation.  Mrs.  (build  founded  the  American
schools  in  Rome,  and  assisted  in  establishing  those
of  Florence.  Her  labors  were  begun  after  the  in-
undation of  the  liber,  81  Dec.  is;<>.  which  whs
the  cause  of  much  distress  and  povertx.  <  >n  20
March,  1H71,  Mrs.  Could  opened  a  home  and  school
for  the  jxiorer  class  of  Italian  children  in  a  room
lent  by  a  Yaudois  clergyman.  She  had  DO  teacher,
and  only  three  little  girls  for  scholars.  Owing  to
generous  contributions,  at  the  time  of  her  death
there  were  twenty  in  the  home  and  thirty  in  the
kindergarten.  Her  main  pur|>osc  was  to  secure  to
these children means  of obtaining a living  for


094


GOULD


Goll.D


themselves.  AaMQK  the  trii. It's,  that  of  printing
\va> proposed  us  atlu|>ti'tl tt>  this  rntl.  as  thf  in-

ummfng  cumber  of  i>ooks  ami  newspapers  in  Italy
would  demand  g<>t>d  printers. In  the  winter  of

1871  it  was  ^iiltu'«  st.'il  that  a  volume  should  be  pre-
pared by  tin-  authors  living  in  liome  at  that  time.
printed  Si  tin-  home,  and  sold  for  its  benefit.
Among  tht-  coiit ributors  won  Matthew  Arnold.
Marv  Cowdeti  CUrke,  William  W.  Story.  William
mid  Marv  Bowitt,  Howard  M.Tieknor,  ami  George
P,  Marsh.  The  book  was  not  completed  until  alter
her  death,  when  it  was  printed  at  the  home  under
the  title  of  a  "Wreath  to  the  Memorv  of  Mrs.
Emily  IUiss  Gould."

GOULD,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Branford,  Conn., 6
Dec.  1 770 ;  d.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  11  May.  1H38.
Richard,  his  great-grandfather,  came  from  Devon-
shire to  Branford  about  1700.  James  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1791,  and  was  a  tutor  there  in
L798-'5.  In  the  latter  year  he  entered  the  law-
si  -In ml  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  after  his  admis-
sion to  the  bar  became  in  1798  associated  with  its
founder,  Judge  Reeve  (see  Reeve.  Tapping),  as  pro-
fessor in  that  institution.  He  was  raised  in  1816
to  the  office  of  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Con-
necticut, from  which  he  was  displaced  in  1818  by
the  adoption  of  the  new  constitution.  In  1820
Judge  Gould  took  the  superintendence  of  the
school,  and  after  the  death  of  Judge  Reeve,  in
1888,  continued  to  conduct  it  till  1833.  He  pub-
lished "  Principles  of  Pleading  in  Civil  Actions"
(New  York-.  is:{:2;  new  ed.  by  Franklin  P.  Heard,
Albany,  1*87).— His  son,  Edward  Sherman,  au-
thor, b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  11  May,  1808;  d.  in
New  York  city,  21  Feb.,  1885,  was  an  early  con-
tributor of  tales  to  the  "  Knickerbocker  ^Maga-
zine," to  the  ''New  World,"  the  "Mirror,"  the
"  Literary  World,"  and  other  journals.  His  signa-
ture of  ••Cassio"'  in  Charles  King's  "American"
was  at  one  time  well  known.  In  1836  he  lectured
before  the  New  York  mercantile  library  association
on  "American  Criticism  in  American  Literature,"
in  which  he  opposed  the  prevalent  spirit  of  ultra-
laudation  as  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the  coun-
try. He  published  translations  of  Dumas's  "  Trav-
els in  Egypt  and  Arabia  Petnca"  (1839);  Dupre's
"  Progress  of  Democracy  "  (1841) ;  Balzac's  "  Euge-
nie Grandet "  (1841),  and  "  Pere  Goriot "  (1842) ;  and
Dumas's  "  Impressions  of  Travel  in  Switzerland,"
Victor  Hugo's  "Handsome  Pecopin,"  and  A.  Roy-
er's  "  Charles  de  Bourbon  "  (1842-'3).  In  addition
to  contributing  to  many  literary  and  theological
journals,  he  wrote  "The  Sleep  Rider;  or,  the  Old
Boy  in  the  Omnibus,  by  the  Man  in  the  Claret-col-
ored Coat,"  and  a  parody  on  a  report  made  to  the
legislature  regarding  a  riot  which  the  police  had
failed  to  suppress  (1842).  He  signed  himself  "  The
Man  in  Claret,"  and  the  work  made  a  sensation  in
literary  circles.  Besides  the  foregoing,  he  pub-
lished "  Abridgment  of  Alison's  History  of  Eu-
rope" (New  York,  1843):  "The  Very  Age,"  a
comedv  (1850);  "John  Doe  and  Richard  Roe:  or,
Episode*  of  Life  in  New  York"  (1862);  "Good
English,  or  Popular  Errors  in  Language  "  (1867);
" Classical  Elocution"  (1867);  and  "Supplement
to  Duvckinck's  History  of  the  New  Worlu  (1871 ).
— Another  son,  John  W.,  author,  b.  in  Litch-
field, emu.,  5  Nov.,  1814;  d.  at  sea.  1  Oct.,  1838,
took  a  voyage  to  South  America  for  his  health  as
a  common  sailor  in  1833,  and  in  1838  went  again
as  supercargo,  but  died  on  his  way.  In  the  inter-
vening years  he  wrote  tales  and  sketches  connect-
ed with  the  sea,  most  of  which  were  published  in
the  New  York  "  Mirror,"  A  volume  of  these  with
a  memoir,  and  his  journal  of  the  voyage  on  which


lie  died,  was  issued  by  his  brothers  for  private
circulation,  under  the  title  "John  W.  Gould's  Prt
rate  Journal  of  a  Voyage  from  New  York  to  Rio
Janeiro"  (New  York."  1839).

GOULD.  Jay,  financier. b.  in  Roxbury,  Delaware
co.,  N.  Y.,27  May,  1h:{0.  Bis  early  yean  trere  spent
on  his  father's  farm,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  lie
entered  llobart  academy.  Hew  York,  and  kept  the
books  of  the  village  blacksmith.  Be  acquired  •
taste  for  mathematics  and  surveying,  and  on  leav-
ing school  found  employment  in  making  the  sur-
veys for  a  map  of  Ulster  county.  The  accnr
this  work  attracted  the  attention  of  the  late  Johfl
Delafield.  who  applied  to  the  legislature  for  aid
in  the  completion  of  a  topographical  survey  of  the
entire  state  by  Mr.  Gould.  Mr.  Delafield  died  be-
fore  any  material  progress  was  made,  and  Mr.
Gould  undertook  to  make  the  surveys  unaided.
During  the  summer  of  1853  he  completed  a  survey
of  Albany  county,  and  surveyed  and  mapped  the
village  of  Cohoes,  and  in  the  following  year  made
the  survey  and  map  of  Delaware  county,  and  or-
ganized and  despatched  parties  to  survey  Lake  and
Geauga  counties,  Ohio,  and  Oakland  county,  Mich.
From  these  surveys  he  accumulated  $5,000.  He
published  a  "  History  of  Delaware  County  "  (1856),
and  while  projecting  other  surveys  was  prostrated
with  typhoid  fever.  On  his  recovery  he  became
acquainted  with  Zadock  Pratt,  who  sent  him  into
the  western  part  of  the  state  to  select  a  site  for  a
tannery.  He  chose  a  fine  hemlock  growth,  erected,
a  saw-mill  and  blacksmith-shop,  and  with  Mr.  Pratt
was  soon  doing  a  large  lumbering  business.  Sub-
sequently he  bought  out  Mr.  Pratt's  interest,  and
conducted  the  business  alone  till  just  before  the
panic  of  1857,  when  he  sold  out  his  entire  plant.  In
1857  he  became  the  largest  stockholder  and  a  direc-
tor in  the  Stroudsburg.  Pa.,  bank.  Shortly  after
the  crisis  he  bought  the  bonds  of  the  Rutland  and
Washington  railroad  at  ten  cents  on  the  dollar,
abandoning  every  other  interest  and  putting  all
his  money  into-  railroad  securities.  For  a  long
time  he  was  president,  treasurer,  and  general  super-
intendent of  this  company.  He  brought  about  a
consolidation  of  the  Rensselaer  and  Saratoga  road,
and  with  the  proceeds  removed  to  New  York  city
in  1859,  established  himself  as  a  broker,  and  in-
vested heavily  in  Erie  railway  stock.  He  entered
the  directory  of  that  company  and  became  presi-
dent, holding  the  office  till  the  reorganization  of
the  directory  in  1872.  He  next  made  large  pur-
chases of  the  stocks  of  the  Union  Pacific,  the  Wa-
bash, the  Texas  Pacific,  the  St.  Louis  and  northern,
the  Missouri  Pacific,  and  the  Missouri,  Kansas,  and
Texas  railroad  companies,  taking  the  latter  out  of
the  hands  of  its  receiver.  He  also  invested  deeply
in  the  stock  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  telegraph
company,  and  on  its  consolidation  with  the  West-
ern union  he  organized  the  American  union
which  was  merged  into  the  Western  union  in  1881.
In  December,  1880,  official  records  showed  that  Mr.
Gould  was  in  control  of  10,000  miles  of  railroad,
or  more  than  one  ninth  of  the  entire  mileage  of
the  country.  Early  in  1881  he  became  interested
in  the  elevated  railroad  system  of  New  York  city.
A  doubt  having  been  cast  upon  his  financial  stand-
ing, he  summoned  several  gentlemen  to  his  private
office  on  13  March,  1882,  and  spread  before  them
for  examination  certificates  of  stocks  having  a  face
value  of  $53,000,000,  all  in  his  own  name,  and  of-
fered to  produce  $20,000,000  more,  if  desired.  In
March,  1887,  Mr.  Gould  purchased  a  controlling
interest  in  the  SI.  Louis  anil  San  Francisco  railroad
company,  which  has  an  aggregate  mileage  of  nearly
900  miles,  and  is  a  joint  owner  with  the  Atchison,


(iori.n


800


.  railroad  company,  of  tie
Uniir  and  Pacific,  and  the  western  portion  of  th<-
Southern  Peeiflo  railroad  ooinpaaiML These,  with

tlir |  inks, will give  linn  control  of  mi

additional  8,000  miles  of  mil.

(.o|  I  |>.  John  M.mton,  philanthropist,  b.  in
1810;  d.  in  Hudson.  N.  Y..  8  Aug..  1874  H<«  was
ft  member  of  the  S.Mi.-t  >  of  Friends,  had  reosivede

thorough  etluwrton.  eepofMllj  in  physical  science.

iiinl  was  veil  known  M  1111  industrious  student  and
a  popular  essavist  and  lecturer  on  scientific  HO"
j.-.-ts.  II.-  hu.i  an  admirably  conducted  farm  in
Columbia  county.  N.  V..  and  took  an  active  part
in  agricultural  improvement,  lie  was  for  several
yean  president  of  the  State  agricultural  society,
and  did  moofa  t"  advance  iis  interests.  II-  MM
alao  an  earnest  temi>erance  advocate,  and  though
in  earlier  years  a  \\  hig,  and  a  MHMM  of  the  as-
sembly from  that  party  in  IM-40.  and  subsequently
acting  generally  with  the  Republicans,  he  Mid  his
MBfMMMi  principles  aliove  jwirty  allegiance,  and
was  recognized  as  a  Prohibitionist.  He  was  much
interested  in  the  subject  of  prison  reform,  and  whs
for  many  years  one  of  the  directors  and  executive
oilii mi  of  the  New  York  prison  association.

601  LD.  Nathaniel  Dunn,  musician,  h.  in
Chelmsford  (now  Bedford),  Mass.,  20  March,  17H1  ;
d.  in  Boston.  Mass..  28  May.  1H(>4.  His  name  was
originallv  Nathaniel  (Joiild  Duren.but  was  changed
in  I^im;.  in  honor  of  an  uncle,  who  adopted  him  in
1792  and  left  him  his  estate  in  1808.  His  father,
Reulx-n  Duren,  was  distinguished  as  a  builder, and
received  a  premium  for  the  model  of  a  bridge  over
the  Merrimac  at  Pawtueket  Falls.  His  son  ex-
hibited talent  for  penmanship,  and  engrossed  many
pulilic  documents  and  engraved  title-pages  for
books.  At  the  age  of  eleven  he  removed  to  the
home  of  his  uncle  in  New  Ipswich,  N.  II..  where  in
1804  he  was  instrumental  in  forming  the  first  mili-
tary band  in  that  part  of  the  state.  Afterward  he
studied  vocal  music  under  Dr.  Reuben  Finerson.
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  taught  in  the  public
schools.  In  17i>8  he  established  his  first  singing-
school  in  Stoddard.  N.  II.,  and  for  twenty  years
conducted  singing-schools  in  New  Hampshire  and
Massachusetts.  About  1807  the  Middlesex  musical
society  was  formed,  of  which  he  was  conductor  for
several  years.  This  society  published  the  "Middle-
sex Collection."  He  removed  to  Boston  in  1819,
and  taught  vocal  music  and  chirographv  there  and
afterward  in  New  York  for  ten  years.  He  then  re-
turned to  Boston,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  life  as
a  professional  penman.  He  aided  in  compiling
several  hymn-  and  tune-books  and  anthems  for
church  choirs,  and  eoni|>osed  several  tunes,  among
which  is  ••  Woodlawn."  His  principal  work  is  a
"  History  of  Church  Music  "  (ttoston,  1853).  Pre-
vious to  this  he  had  published  in  Boston  "  Com-
panion tothe  Psalmist":  ■  National  Church  Har-
mons"; "Sabbath -School  Harmony";  "Social
Harmony";  "Sacred  Minstrel";  -Beauties  of
Writing":  "  Writing-Master's  Assistant";  and
"  Progressive  Penmanship." — His  son.  Augustus
Addison,  naturalist,  1>.  in  New  Ipswich.  N.  II..  M
April.  ISO.".;  d.  in  Boston.  Mass..  15 Sept,  180ft.  He
nluai<-.i  at  Harvard  in  1885, and  at  the  medi-
cal department  In  1880.  lie  followed  his  profession
in  Boston  with  great  success,  ami  in  1856  was  ap-
pointed visiting  plivsieian  to  the  Massachusetts
general  hospital.  Meanwhile  he  DMMN  a  devoted
student  of  natural  history,  and  for  two  years
taught  botanY  and  /....".logy  in  Harvard.  He  made
dty  of  conchology,  and  st.M..!  pre-eminent
in  that  branch  of  science.  In  >ih  at  home  and  al.r  ..id.
When  Sir  Charles  Lyell  visited  the  United  States,


in  order  to  pursue  his  geological  investigations,  he
Immediately  sought  the  aid  of  I>r.  (Jould  as  a
work.-r.  In  1846  the  shells  collected  by  the  Wilk.-s
exploring  eatpeditfaw  wen  sul.mitted  to  him  forej-
ammatiou.  ami  again  in  I860  those  collated  by
•  apt.  Kinggold  and  <'a|-t.  Kogers  were  re|K>rted  mi
by  him.  I»r.  liould  was  also  a  student  of  vital
statistics,  and  contributed  MMM  of  great  value  to
nearly  every  volume of the registrar-general  of

Massachusetts. He Was  a  fellow  of the AllKI

academy  of  arts  and  sciences  and  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  otic  of  the  original  mem-
Ihts  of  the  National  academv  of  sciences.  In
In-  delivered  the  annual  address,  entitled  "  Search
out  the  Secrets  of  Nature,"  U-fore  the  Massachu-
setts medical  society,  and  was  its  president  from
1864  till  his  death.  He  was  also  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history.  Bi  was
a  large  contributor  to  |>criodicals,  and  his  publica-
tions in  book-form  include  a  translation  of  Iji-
marck's  "Genera  of  Shells"  (Boston.  lKtf:{);  "A
System  of  Natural  History"  (1833);  "Report  on
the  Invcrtehrata  of  Massachusetts "  (Cambridge,
1K41);  "  Mollusca  and  Shells  "t  Washington,  1846);
"  Principles  of  Zoologv,"  with  Louis  Agassiz  (Bos-
ton, 1848);  Dr.  Amos  Binncy's  "The  Terrestrial
Air-hrcathing  Mollusks  of  the  I'nitcd  States  and
Adjacent  Territories  of  North  America,"  edited
and  completed  (1861-1);  "A  History  of  New
Ipswich,  rfew  Hampshire."  with  Frederic  Kidder
(1868);  "The  Mollusca  of  t he  North  Pacific  Kxne-
dition  "(Washington,  1800);  and  "Otia  Concholo-
gia,"  consisting  of  descriptions  of  new  species  of
shells,  with  notes  on  changes  in  their  nomencla-
ture(Boston,  1862). — Anotherson. Charles  Duren.
publisher,  b.  in  Ipswich.  N.  II..  I  Feb..  lsn;:  ,1.  in
Boston.  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1875,  liecame  a  member  of
the  publishing  firm  of  Gould,  Kendall  and  Lincoln
in  1835.  The  title  of  the  firm  was  changed  in  1850
to  Qould  and  Lincoln,  and  Mr.  Gould  remained  a
partner  in  it  until  his  death.

QOULD,  Thomas  R.,  sculptor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1818  ;  d.  in  Florence.  Italy,  20  Nov.,  1881.
In  his  early  life  he  was  engaged  with  his  brother  in
the  dry-goods  business,  and  was  an  active  member
of  the  Mercantile  library  association.  He  did  not
devote  himself  to  art  until  in  later  life.  His  only
mast  or  was  Set  h  Cheney,  in  whose  studio  he  modelled
his  first  figure  in  188L.  He  followed  his  profession
in  Boston  until  1808,  and  among  the  works  that  he
produced  were  two  colossal  heads.  "Christ  "  and
"  Satan,"  both  of  w  hich  were  exhibited  at  the  Bos-
ton athenauun  in  1863,  but  afterward  removed  to
Mr.  Gould's  studio  in  Florence.  James  J.  Jarves,
in  his  "Art  Thoughts,"  mentions  the  "Christ."  in
its  character  of  an  opposing  conception  to  "Satan."
as  "one  of  the  finest  idealisms  in  modern  ■Ottlp*
ture."  Previous  to  the  civil  war.  Mr.  (Jould  had
acquired  a  moderate  fortune,  which  he  lost  in  the
exigencies  of  the  succeeding  crisis.  In  1868  he
went  to  Italv,  and  tattled  with  his  family  in  Flor-
ence, where  he  devoted  himself  to  study  and  work.

I  >t f his  most  celebrated statues  is  ••  The  W.  ~t

Wind."  in  marble,  which  has  l>ecn  several  times
reproduced,  and  was  brought  into  iDMMl  promi-
nence in  1H74.  through  a  charge  that  it  was  a  re-
productionof  Caiiova's  ••  I1.-U-."  with  the  exception
..f  the  drajH-rv,  which*  was  modelled  by  Sigiior
Mazzoli.  Animated  MMMMJM  OORMpOMMM
followed  this  charge,  and  it  was  proved  groundless.
Mr.  Gould  declared  that  his  deMJM  were  entirely
his  own,  and  that  not  a  statue,  bust,  or  medallion
was  allowed  to  leave  his  studio  until  finished  in  all
{Miiutson  which  denuded  their  eharar ter  and  ex-
pression. A  copy  .,f  the  "  West  Wind"  was  at  the


806


<;<>ri.i>


goukgues


Centennial  exhibition,  Philadelphia,  in  1876.  He
returned  t>'  Boston  in  the  spring  of  1878.  Among
Mr.  Qould'a  works  in  a  Bomber  ox  portreil  bust>,
including  OM  of  Emerson,  now  in  Harvard  uni-
rersit]  library;  one  of  John  A.  Andrew,  belong-
ing to  Mrs.  Andrew:  one  of  Seth  Cheney,  owned
by  John  Cheney,  of  Connecticut;  and  one  of  the

elder  Booth.  In  statuary  he  has  produced  ''Cleo-
patra." "Timon  of  Athens."  "Ariel,"  a  portrait
statue  of  "John  Hancock."  which  was  exhibited  at
the  centennial  celebration  of  the  battle  of  Lexing-
ton in  1875,  and  is  now  in  Lexington  town-hall.
His  portrait  statue  of  John  A.  Andrew,  a  commis-
sion from  the  soldiers  of  the  Grand  army  of  the
Republic,  was  placed  beside  the  crave  of  that
statesman  in  the  Hingham  cemetery,  Massachusetts,
in  l^;."i.  In  1878  Mr.  Gould  visited  Boston,  and
exhibitod  "The  Ghost  in  Hamlet."  a  front  view  of
a  head  in  alto-rilievo.  The  two  alti-rilievi  repre-
senting "Steam"  and  " Electricity,"  which  flank
the  vestibule  of  the  Boston  "  Herald  "  building,
were  among  his  latest  works.

GOILD,  Walter,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1829.  He  studied  drawing  and  perspective  under  J.
R.  Smith,  and  painting  under  Sully.  He  became  a
member  of  the  Artists'  fund  society  of  Philadelphia
in  1S4(>,  working  there  and  in  Fredericksburg,Va.,
where  he  painted  a  large  number  of  portraits,
nearly  all  of  which  were  destroyed  during  the
civil  war.  He  removed  to  Florence  in  1849,  spent
some  months  of  studv  in  Paris,  and  made  occasional
sketching-tours  in  the  east.  His  subjects  are  gen-
erally oriental,  and  illustrate  principally  the  habits
and  customs  of  the  Turks.  In  1851  he  visited
Asia  Minor,  lived  with  and  painted  portraits  of
the  imprisoned  governor  of  Hungary,  Kossuth,  and
many  other  prominent  men.  He  also  visited  Con-
stanf  inople,  and  painted  picturesof  many  important
persons  there.  "  An  Eastern  Storv-Teller,"  painted
for  the  collection  of  Matthew  Baird,  of  Philadelphia,
is  regarded  as  his  most  valuable  work.

GOULDING,  Thomas, clergyman,  b.  in  Midway,
Ga.,  14  March,  1786  ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ga.,  26  June,
1848.  He  was  educated  in  Wolcott,  Conn.,  and
studied  law  with  Judge  David  Daggett  in  New
Haven,  but  determined  to  devote  himself  to  the
ministry,  and  was  the  first  licentiate  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Georgia  that  was  born  in  the
state.  Having  been  licensed  in  December,  1813,
he  preached  in  White  Bluff,  and  was  ordained  as
the  regular  pastor  of  the  church  there  on  1  Jan.,
1816.  In  1822  he  removed  to  Lexington,  Ogle-
thorpe co.  On  the  establishment  of  a  theological
seminary  by  the  synod  of  South  Carolina  and
Georgia,  he  was  appointed  its  only  professor,  and
taught  a  class  in  theology  in  connection  with  his
pastoral  work.  At  the  end  of  a  year  the  seminary
was  transferred  to  Columbia,  S.  C.  and  he  was
professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  and  church  gov-
ernment until  Januarv,  1835,  when  he  took  charge
of  the  church  at  Columbus,  Ga.  He  was  many
years  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Ogle-
thorpe university.  —  His  son,  Francis  Robert,
author,  b.  in  Midway,  Ga.,  28  Sept..  1810;  d.  in
Roswell,  Ga..  22  Aug.,  1881,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Georgia  in  1830,  and  at  the  Presby-
terian theological  seminary  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  in
1833.  His  life  was  devoted  to  the  ministry  until
the  failure  of  his  health  in  1865,  when  he  applied
himself  to  literature.  Before  this  he  had  published
"  Little  Josephine,"  a  Sunday-school  story  (New
York,  1844);  and  "Robert  and  Harold,  or  the
Young  Marooners  on  the  Florida  Coast,"  a  story  of
adventure  for  boys  (Philadelphia,  1852).  The
latter  attained great  popularity  in  the  United


States  and  Great  Britain,  where  it  was  reprinted
by  six  different  publishers.  An  enlarged  edition
prat  published  in  Georgia  during  the  war  and  in
Philadelphia  in  186H.  After  retiring  from  the  pul-
pit he  published  "ICaroonen1  [aland"  (Philadel-
phia, 1*68);  "Frank  Gordon"  (^869);  "Fishing
and  Fishes";  "Life  Scenes  from  the  Gospel  His-
tory"; and  "Woodruff  Stories"  (INTO).

GOULEY,  John  William  Severin.  t.hysi,  ian,
b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  1 1  March,  1888.  11  is  parents
were  of  French  origin.  He  received  a  cL
education,  and  was  graduated  M.  D.  at  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  New  York  city  in
1853.  He  then  established  himself  in  practice  in
that  city,  and  performed  many  difficult  operations
in  surgery,  such  as  excising  half  of  the  lower  jaw,
the  entire  radius,  and  the  entire  lower  iaw.  In
1856  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  Vermont
medical  college  at  Woodstock,  fn  1859  he  became
attending  physician  to  Bellevue  hospital,  New
York  city.  In  1861-'4  he  was  an  assistant  surgeon
in  the  U.  S.  army.  In  1864-'6  he  was  demonstrator
of  anatomy  and  instructor  in  histology  and  in
operative  surgery  in  the  medical  department  of  t  he
University  of  New  York,  in  1866-71  professor  of
clinical  surgery  and  genito-urinary  diseases,  and
in  1876  was  reappointed.  He  has  published  various
papers,  and  a  volume  on  "  Diseases  of  the  Urinary
Organs  "  (New  York,  1873).

GOUPIL,  Bene.  French  missionary,  b.  in  An-
giers,  France,  in  1607;  d.  in  Smith's  Island,  near
Westport,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept..  1642.  He  was  known
in  his  native  town  as  "  the  good  Rene/'  He  stud-
ied to  be  a  physician,  but  left  the  profession  to  be-
come a  novice  of  the  Society  of  Jesus.  He  was
forced  by  ill-health  to  leave  the  novitiate,  and  then
became  a  "  donne  "  of  the  society—that  is,  one  who
gives  his  whole  services  to  religion,  receiving  only
a  support.  He  went  as  a  missionary  to  Canada,
and  accompanied  Father  Jogues  on  his  return
from  Quebec  to  St.  Mary's  of  the  llurons  in  Au-
gust, 1642.  The  flotilla  of  canoes,  in  one  of  which
they  sailed,  reached  Three  Rivers  on  1  Aug..  and
had  scarcely  gone  three  leagues  from  that  place
when  it  was  riddled  with  bullets  by  Mohawks  in
ambush.  During  the  panic  that  ensued  Father
Jogues  and  Rene  could  have  escaped  from  the
Mohawks,  who  were  wholly  intent  on  securing
their  Huron  prisoners.  They  surrendered  them-
selves, however,  in  order  to  be  near  the  captives.
Goupil  was  cruelly  beaten  by  his  captors,  and
dragged  from  village  to  village  for  seven  days,
witnessing  the  deaths,  one  by  one,  of  the  Huron
Christians.  He  was  engaged  in  constant  prayer
during  the  whole  agony,  and  in  the  middle  of  his
torments  instructed  the  young  Indians  to  make
the  sign  of  the  cross  and  to  pray.  This  infuriated
the  savages  still  further,  and  finally,  while  in  the
act  of  teaching  an  Indian  girl  to  make  the  sign  of
the  cross,  near  the  village  of  Andagoron,  he  was
killed  by  a  young  Mohawk.  Miracles  are  said  to
have  attested  his  sanctity,  and  his  name  occurs  in
the  list  of  martyrs  recommended  for  canonization
by  the  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  held  in  1884.
"GOIRGUES,  Dominique  Chevalier  det
French  soldier,  b.  in  Mont-de-Marsan,  France,  in
1530;  d.  in  Tours,  France,  in  1593.  He  served  in
the  Italian  wars  under  Marechal  de  Strozzi.  was
captured  by  Spaniards  in  1557,  and  then  by  the
Turks,  and"  served  several  vears  in  the  galleys.
After  his  return  to  France  he  made  a  voyage  bt
Brazil  and  the  West  Indies,  and  then  entered  tin-
service  of  Duke  de  Guise,  the  elder,  and  was  em-
ployed against  the  Huguenots.  The  massa
Pedro  Menendez  de  Avilles  of  the  French  colonists


90V!


809


had  established  themselves  on  the  si.  John's
rivir  in  Florida,  and  then  i>uilt  the  Caroline  f«>rt.
Port  Charles,  around  indignation  in  Frame
■■oag  Protestants  end  Roman  Catholics  alike.
Thi  king  mil  oomplaiats  t->  1 1*4-  Spanish  court,  but
udoz  and  his  associates,  instead  of  Im-iii^  pun-
ched for  the  deed,  received  rewards  and  MHl
Cant,  do  Gourgues,  embittered  by  tin-  cruelty  and
Indignity  that  ne  had  received  Cron  the  Spaniard*.
ilatanninttd  to  avenge  the  «loatli  of  his  Proteetanl
fotn|Hit riots,  though  be  was  himself  a  Catholic.
■  if  his  ostato,  fltto<l  out  an  eX|K<li-
tion.mid  sailed  from  France  "ii  gj  Am,'.,  1667. With
■  >ii''  suj.ill  und  two  largo  vessels,  with  a  com  mission
to  capture  slaves  at  Benin.  The  real  object  of  the
expedition  was  not  disclose!  oven  t<>  the  soldiers
who  joined  il.  Arriving  at  Gape  Blanco,  after  a
fight  with  s<nne  negro  chiefs,  he  gained  possesatoa

of  the  harbor, aod  sailed  away  for  the  We-t  Indies.
His  force  consisted  of  KM)  arquchusiors,  who  volun-
teered from  among  the  nobility  and  commonalty
of  Qasoony,  and  ho  sailors  who  eonld  serve  as  sof-
diers.  According  to  the  French  account  of  the
ex|H>ditioii,  he  did  not  declare  his  intention  until
they  were  opposite  Gape  San  Antonio  of  Culm.
He  was  Joined  there  by  Caeiqoe  Batouriouo  and
the  only  survivor  of  the  former  expedition,  Pierre
Dugiv,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  who  proved  invaluable
as  an  interpreter.  His  squadron  passed  two  bat-
teries at  the  entrance  of  the  St.  John's  river,  being
taken  for  Spanish  vessels,  and  anchored  at  the
mouth  of  the  St.  .Mary's.  The  chief  readily  joined
Gourgues  in  an  attack  on  Fort  San  Mateo,  as  the
Siianiards  had  rechristcmd  the  stone  fort  that  the
I-rench  had  built  on  the  St.  John's  river.  The  re-
doubt on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  was  easily
captured.  The  French  then  crossed  in  boats,  while
their  Indian  allies  swam  across.  The  French  ac-
counts relate  that  about  sixtv  Spaniards  sallied
from  each  of  the  two  forts,  and  that  all  were  slain
by  the  French  and  Indians  excepting  fifteen,  who
were  taken  prisoners,  aud  afterward  hanged.  The
artillery  of  the  forts  was  placed  on  board,  and  the
forts  destroyed.  Thev  then  attacked  the  principal
fort.  San  Mateo,  which  had  a  garrison  of  200  men,
and  carried  it,  killing  most  of  the  Spaniards,  a  few
only  escaping  to  the  woods.  Descending  the  river.
Qourgues  captured  the  works  at  the  mouth,  and
bangtd  thirty  more  Spaniards,  erecting  the  inscrip-
tion. ••  Not  as  Spaniards,  but  as  treacherous  robbers
and  assassins."  QonigUM  returned  to  the  port  of
La  Itochelle  on  6  June,  1508.  He  was  received
cordially  bv  Monluc,  governor  of  BoYdeaux,  but
ooldly  by  the  court,  which  feared  a  rupture  with
SiMiin.  For  several  years  he  lived  in  obscurity,
almost  In  misery,  at  Bousu  with  the  president  of
Hariguy,  till  restored  to  the  king's  favor  in  1878.
Be  was  given  command  of  a  vessel,  and  partici-
pated in  the  siege  of  La  Bochalle,  commanding  the
largest  vessel  of  the  squadron.  In  1592  Don  An-
tonio de  Crato  tendered  him  the  command  of  his

to  defend  his  right  to  the  crown  of  Portugal
against  Philip  II.  While  on  the  journey  he  d&L
:<•  du  Capitaine  de  Qourgues  dans  la
Floride "  in  Hasanior's  "L'Histoire  notable  de  la
Floride "  (Paris,  1">xi; :  Latin  version  by  De  Bry).
An  English  translation  was  made  by  Hakluyt.
(London,  1587),  reprinted  in  French's  -  Biatorioal

■tionsof  Louisiana  and  Florida"  (New  York,
■  'iirgues's  narrative,  ••  La  Bspiinai  de  la
Floride." is preserved among  the  manuscri|>t8  of
the  National library  of  Paris. It oonsistl  Ol

■oripts;  one.  that  bean  the  nameofPn
(probably  the  copyist),  has  been  published  by  Ter-
ipans  (q,  v.)  In  his  collection. A  OOpy  Of


a  manuscript DNHrVid in the  (b.urgur*  family
was  presented  in  1861,  by  thsVlssount
gues,  t<>  the  historian  George  Bancroft.

001  IM  \  \.  I.'ol..  i  I  I  |.  inn,-.  '  .iiuiilian  -tatis-
tician,  l>.  in  Pifaanira,  Bootiana,  in  17?*;  d.  in
Kdmburgh,  1  Aug..  1866,  In  l«M  he  was  em-
ployed  by  the  Imperial  government  in  making  in-
quiries into  the  condition  of  the  British  poor,  and
on  his  nporl  a  bill  was  introduced  into  the  house
of  coinnions  and  adopted.  I<ut  was  rajSCtsd  I'V  tin-
honn  Of  lords.  In  1*17  hi  arrived  in  New  York,
and  soon  afterward  proceeded  to  Canada.  I
he  secured  the  ill-will  of  the  authorities  by  calling
a  convention  of  deputies  from  the  Upper  <  'anadiaii

coiotitueiicies  to  deliberate  on  the  propriety  of

sending  commissioners  to  (Jroat  Britain  to  call  at-
tention to  the  affairs  of  the  province.  The  con-
vention petitioned  the  prince-regent  relative  to  the
alleged  mismanagement  of  the  crown  lands  and
the  hostile  attitude  taken  by  the  provincial  gov-
ernment with  relation  to  immigration,  (iourlay
was  then  ordered  by  the  authorities  to  leave  the

Srovince  within  six  months,  and.  having  failed  t<»
o  this,  he  was  arrested  in  1819  aud  confined  in
Niagara  jail.  He  was  soon  afterward  banished
from  the  province,  and  resided  for  a  time  in  the
United  States.  In  1880  the  sentence  of  banish-
ment was  annulled,  and  Gourlay's  imprisonment
was  admitted  to  have  been  illegal.  In  1842  he
petitioned  the  house  for  condensation,  and  was
granted  a  (tension  of  £50  a  year,  which  he  declined.
as  he  claimed  to  be  a  creditor  of  the  government.
Be  is  the  author  of  "A  General  Introduction  to  a
Statistical  Account  of  Upper  Canada"  (1822),  and
of  numerous  pamphlets.

GOUYION,  Jean  Baptlste,  French  soldier,  b.
in  Toul,  8  Jan.,  1747;  d.  near  Grisnello.  11  June,
1792.  He  was  an  officer  of  engineers  in  the  French
army,  came  to  America  in  1777,  served  on  the  staff
of  Latayatta,  was  appointed  major  and  afterward
lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers,  and  received  a  pen-
sion for  services  at  Yorktown.  He  returned  to
France  at  the  end  of  the  war,  became  adjutant  -
general  in  1787,  and  major-general  in  the  national
guard  in  1789.  In  1791— '2  ne  was  a  deputy  in  the
national  assembly.  He  was  made  a  lieutenant-
general,  and  commanded  the  vanguard  of  Lafay-
ette's army  when  he  was  killed.

GOYK.  William  Hazeltine,  politician,  b.  in
Weare,  N.  EL,  10  July.  1N17:  d.  there,  11  March,
1876.  He  received  a  common-school  education.
taught  in  Lynn.  Mass.,  one  vear,  and  an  equal
length  of  time  in  Boohastcr,  N.  V.  He  also  studied
law  a  short  time  in  Boston.  He  early  became  an
active  worker  in  the  anti-slavery  cause,  a  supporter
of  the  liberty  party,  and  later  a  prominent  Freo-
soiler.  While  connected  with  the  latter  party  he
became  well  known  as  a  stump  speaker,  and  gained
the  title  of  the"  silver-tongued  orator  of  New  Hamp-
shire." He  was  a  Meaner  of  the  first  Free-soil
t  on  vent  ion.  held  in  Buffalo.  N.  Y.,  in  1848,  was  a
candidate  of  his  party  for  the  legislature  year  after
year,  and  in  1851,  by  a  combination  of  Free-soilers
and  Whigs,  he  was  elected.  He  was  rc-cloeted  in
1881  and  1866.  After  the  Free-soil  organization
was  merged  in  the  Republican  party,  Mr.  Gove  was
for  many  years  an  active  Republican.  During  the
administrations  of  Lincoln  and  Johnston  he  held
the  office  of  postmaster.  In  1871,  having  become
dissatisfied  with  his  party,  he  engaged  in  forming
a  lalior  reform  party,  whose  voters. combining  with
the  I»eiuo(  rats,  elected  him  to  the  lower  branch  of
the  legislature,  of  which  Imdy  he  was  chosen  siteaker.
In  1H72  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Liberal  Repub-
lican convention  at  Cincinnati,  and  acted  theme-


B0G


(JOWAX


GOWAXS


furtli  with  the  Democratic  party,  which  elected  him
L  Ul4  ItltU  ■MMtll  in  lsT:i  "•».  I"  the  latter  year
hr  WM  ma<le  its  president.  As  a  young  man  Mr.
<io\e  was  engaged  in  the  WMhingtonku  temper-
nine  movement,  and  s|>oke  and  wrote  eloquently  in
•Id of  the  cause.  He  edited  for  a  short  time  the
"TeinjMTaiice  Manner."  publishe<l  at  Concord.  X.  11.

HOW  AN.  James  Robert,  jurist.!),  in  County
Wexford,  Ireland.  22  I>ec.  1H17.  His  parents  emi-
grated to  Upper  Canada  in  1821.  The  son  studied
law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,  and  in  1*4:!
was  elected  fudge  of  the  judicial  district  of  Sim-

, ,  I'ppcr  Canada. He  became associate  judge  of

qneen'a  bench  and  common  pleas  in  1857,  and  chair-
man of  the  board  of  county  judges,  which  regulates
the  procedure  of  the  division  courts.  He  aided  in
preparing  the  bills  to  make  the  criminal  law  uni-
form in  Canada,  embodying  a  consolidation  of  the
criminal  laws  in  force  in  the  several  confederated
provinces,  with  valuable  additions  and  improve-
ments in  procedure,  which  were  enrolled  on  the
statute-book  of  1869,  and  are  now  in  force.  In
is?:!  he  was  one  of  the  royal  commissioners  to  in-
vestigate charges  against  the  ministry  in  connec-
tion with  the  Canada  Pacific  railroad  contract.
When  the  consolidation  of  the  statute  law  for
Ontario  was  determined  in  1876,  Judge  Gowan  was
appointed  with  other  judges  on  a  commission  is-
sued for  that  purpose,  and  rendered  important
service,  for  which  he  received  a  gold  medal  from
the  government  of  Ontario,  tie  retired  from  the
bench  in  1883.  He  has  been  interested  in  educa-
tional matters,  serving  as  chairman  of  the  board
of  public  instruction  from  its  foundation,  and  for
many  years  as  chairman  of  the  senior  high-school
board  of  the  county  of  Simcoe.  He  was  appointed
to  the  senate  in  1885.  In  1855  he  established  the
first  legal  periodical  in  his  province,  "  The  Upper
Canada  Law  Journal,"  to  which  he  was  a  frequent
contributor.  The  degree  of  LL.  I),  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Queen's  college  in  1883.  "The  Ad-
dresses and  Proceedings  in  Connection  with  the
Retirement  from  the  Bench  of  His  Honor  Judge
James  Kohert  Gowan,"  with  selections  from  print-
ed matter  regarding  his  career,  have  been  published
for  private  circulation  (1884).

GOWAN,  Ogle  Robert,  member  of  the  Cana-
dian parliament,  b.  in  Ckmnty  Wexford,  Ireland,
in  17!Hi :  d.  in  Toronto  21  Aug.,  1876.  His  father,
Capt.  John  Hunter  Gowan,  of  Mount  Nebo,  was  a
leading  county  magistrate  and  distinguished  in
crushing  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798.  In  early  life
he  edited  the  "  Antidote,"  a  newspaper  in  Dublin.
He  removed  to  Canada  in  1829,  residing  for  a  time
in  Escott,  Leeds  co.,  Ontario,  and  subsequently  in
Toronto.  During  the  rebellion  of  1837  he  was  ap-
pointed captain  in  the  Leeds  militia,  and  was  pres-
ent at  the  capture  of  Hickory  island,  near  Kings-
ton, in  1838.  In  the  same  year  he  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  of  militia.  At  the  engagement
between  the  British  troops  and  the  invaders,  at
••  the  Windmill,"  near  Prescott,  in  November,  1838.
he  commanded  the  right  wing  of  the  British  forces,
and  was  three  times  wounded.  For  his  braverv  on
that  occasion,  Lieut.-Col.  Gowan  was  thanked  in
the  military  general  orders,  and  by  a  general  order
of  4  Dec,  1838,  his  regiment,  as  a  mark  of  distinc-
tion and  approbation,  was  hereafter  to  be  knoWn
as  "  The  Queen's  Royal  Borderers."  He  was  sm-
sequently  appointed  to  the  command  of  2d  res-
ilient of  Leeds  militia,  and  during  the  MeKenzie-
Papineau  rebellion  of  1837-'9  he  was  designated
"  the  right  arm  of  British  power  in  America,"  be-
ing the  bead  of  a  most  powerful  body  of  loyal  men
organized  and  sworn  to  support  British  supremacy.  |


For  twenty  years  he  was  the  mad  master  of  the
Orange  lodges  of  North  America,  of  which  he  was
the  founder.  He  IMl  tneml>er  of  the  Canadian
parliament  from  1884  till  1*41.  and  was  an  anient
supporter  of  the  administrations  of  Lords  S
Metcalf.  and  Cathcart.  Mr.  Gowan  asa  post-ofBof
InspOOtOT,  and  afterward  a  license-oflicer  in  Toron-
i  ■.  lie  was  the  author  of  "  Annals  of  Orangeism "
and  "  Orangeism  :  its  Origin  and  Historv."

GOWANS,  William,  antiquarian  bookseller,
b.  in  the  parish  of  Lismahagow,  Scotland,  29  March,
1803 ;  d.  in  New  York  citv, 27  Nov..  1870.  His  par-
ents desired  to  educate  him  for  the  ministry,  but
he  was  disinclined  for  so  serious  a  profession  and  re-
t  umed  to  work  on  his  father's  farm.  In  June,  1821,
the  family  emigrated  to  the  United  State-,  and.
alter  working  on  a  flat-boat  on  the  Mississippi.  Will-
iam became  a  gardener  in  New  York  city  in  1825,
and  afterward  successively  a  stone-cutter,  stevedore,
vender  of  newspapers,  and  bill-distributer  for  the
Bowery  theatre.  In  May,  1827,  he  obtained  a  clerk-
ship in  a  small  book-store,  and  in  the  following
year  began  to  trade  on  his  own  account,  buying
at  auctions  and  vending  as  a  book-pedler  in  the
streets  of  New
York  city.  In
1828  he  opened  a
book-stall  on  the
sidewalk  in  Chat-
ham street.  Here
he  remained  two
years,  and  there-
after opened  a
small  store  in  the
"  Arcade  "  build-
ing, but  soon  re-
turned to  Chat-
ham street.  In
1837  Mr.  Gowans
became  a  book
auctioneer.  In
1840  he  paid  a
brief  visit  to  his
native  land,  and
on  his  return  to
New  York  city
once  more  be-
came a  dealer  in
second-handbooks,  finally  settling  in  Nassau  street,
where  he  remained  till  his  death.  His  earliest  pub-
lications were  "  Pha»don  "  (New  York,  1833),  and
"  The  Phamjx  "  (1835).  From  time  to  time  followed
re-publications  of  rare  tracts  and  pamphlets,  in  lim-
ited editions,  most  of  them  historical  Americana
After  the  death  of  his  wife  in  1863  he  retired  from
contact  with  his  fellow-men,  and  spent  his  time  in
his  store  and  at  the  book  auctions.  At  these  places
it  had  for  a  long  time  become  the  rule  to  knock
down  all  lots  for  which  there  were  no  bona-fide  bid-
ders at  the  auctioneer's  estimated  value  to  Mr.
"  Chase,"  his  commercial  pseudonym.  Many  were
the  anecdotes  related  illustrating  his  peculiarities.
A  single  one  may  be  mentioned.  While  the  writer
was  in  conversation  with  the  dealer  on  one  occa-
sion, a  person  entered  the  Nassau  street  shop  and
asked  for  a  rare  book,  which  was  handed  to  him
with  the  price,  in  answer  to  the  customer's  inquiry.
"Is  that  not  very  high  t"  the  latter  asked:  and
Gowans, taking  the  work  from  his  hand. said :  '•  Well,
I'll  put  it  higher,"  and  to  the  astonishment  of  the
clerical  customer  replaced  the  volume  on  the  shelf.
When  the  latter  remarked  that  he  would  take  it,
the  irate  antiquarian  answered  that  it  was  not  for
sale,  and  turning  his  back  on  him  resumed  the  in-
terrupted conversation  with  the  writer. Gowans's


<WjZM«/,


(}<W


QR  \


first  l*H,k  catalogue  was  issued  in  1848,  hi*  last  one,
••"a-  brochure*  wan  inters|ieraBd
witli  valuable  dotal  M  booka,aad  remarks  on  Doted
ii-  with  whom  the  nut  In  >r  had  come  in  OOBtact.
Among  tlMM  ttiTv  AihIiiIm.ii,  Hurr.  Dennett  For-
rest, Fanny  Keinble,  1 1 :» 1 1  ••«  ■  k .  MaodonaM  Clarke,
tin-  HWd  |H.<t.  Pot,  and  Simnis.  (m.whii-'s  stock  Of
U«.k»  at tin-  tiBM  of  lii»  death tiiimlMTt-il  nearly

UOO.ooo  rohrmaa.  tad  were  disposed  of  by  auction.

catalogue was in sixteen parts, mrntaintng

•  1  the  aale  began  •'«•  Jan.,  1871.  ami

ended  B  l'< •!•..  1878,  lasting  for  aboal  a  month  in

maoa. His  funeral  discourse  tree  deliTared

by  tin-  Bar.  John  Thompson.  I>.  !>..  ami  Manorial

team  were  written  by  his  frieod  and  physician,

I»r.  Bamaal  s.  Purple,  and  tba  Her,  s.  I.  Prime,

l>.  1 1  .  .  .f  the  "  New  York  Observer."

SOU  IN.  Franklin  Itciijiimin.  railroad  iniin-
«:;.t.  l).  m  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  u  Fab*  1888;  d.  in
waahiagton,  I>.  <'..  i-i  Deo*  i*s!».  He  was adaoatod
at  Bnmltaburg.  Md. In  1858  he  aatared  into  the

business  of  miniiiir  coal,  which  be  00OB  aliamloticil.
and  began  the  study  of  the  law.  He  was  admitted
t<>  tin-  luir  in  1880.  ami  began  practice  in  Scluiylkill,
riatac  to  distinction  in  his  profession.  In  18<52  he
was  elected  district-attorney  of  Schuylkill  county.
On  resuming  his  general  practice  at  the  liar,  he  was
retained  aj  eoaaoal  for  the  Philadelphia  and  Road

ing  railmad.  and  of  the  Girard  coal-trusts,  in  con-
nection with  their  large  interests  in  the  mining
region.  In  1869  he  was  chosen  to  the  presidency
of  the  former  oomnany,  and  filled  the  office  un-
til 1881,  when  because  of  oppositition  to  his  plans
for  the  relief  of  the  finances  of  the  road  he
failed  of  a  re-elect  ion.  Hut  he  was  again  chosen
in  1882.  In  1872  he  was  elected  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  of  Pennsylvania,
ami  in  this  body  ranked  as  one  of  its  ablest
ejeoabare.  Mr.  Oowea  conceived  and  eetabUahed
the  I'hiladelphia  and  Reading  coal  and  iron  com-
pany, which  is  probably  the  largest  land  and  min-
ing company  ever  organized  in  this  country.  To
him  is  also  due  the  honor  of  being  the  one  who
conceived  and  put  in  oj>eration  the  movement
against  the  famous  organization  known  as  the
44  Aiollie  Manures,"  which  had  produced  a  reign
of  terror  in  the  coal  region,  extending  over  a  pe-
riod of  twenty  years,  and  which  the  ordinary  ma-
chinery of  the  law  had  been  unable  to  suppress.
In  the  trials  which  followed  this  movement  in
1876,  Mr.  Oowen  was  one  of  the  counsel  for  the
commonwealth.  He  was  an  orator  of  force  and
aloqaaaea,  and  aae  eminent  as  a  financier  and  rail-
road manager.  His  argument  in  the  case  of  the
State  a&  Thomas  Munlcv  (one  of  the  Molly  Maguire
trials)  ha>  been  published  (Potterilla,  Pa-  1878).

QOTENECHE V UAKKEDA,  Jose  Manuel

(go-yav-nay'-chay),  count  of  Guaqui.  .South  Ameri-

■oldier, b. in  Areqiiipa. Peru, 18  .lune.  177"»:

d.  in  Madrid, Spain,  L5  Oat,  ink;. He  eatarea

tin-  military  service  as  a  cadet  in  the  organized
militia,  ami  in  1798  wao  lieutenant  of  the  cavalry  of
Cainana.  He  went  to  Spain  in  1786,  and  in  (801
was  sent  to  the  dilTerent  countries  of  KurojK?,  to
study  the  progress  of  military  tactics  ami  their  ap-
plication for  the  defence  <>f  Spain.  <>n  his  return
he  nix'  to  the  rank  of  brigadier,  and  after  the
entry  of  the  French  into  Madrid  was  appointed
bl  Soult  to  go  to  South  America  in  the  interest  of

the  Preach  domination,  but  on  his  way  ejpoaasd

the  cause  of  I-Yrdinaml  VII. In 1-  -  aj>-

pointed  captain-general  ami  preeidenl  of  the  aurii-
i  of  Cuzeo,  and  in  that  year  marched  against
the  revolutionist^  and  defeated  them.  ,'">  <  »<•!..  near
La I'aZ. After the declaration of inde|M|idelice


'  in  H  -.  N  May,  I s l • ».  <  '•<  •  veneche  marched

again*! the republican  foteaf  of  that  provim  .

ooaqaering  the  whole  npper  part  of  it. He  subae-

qaantly  won  other  battles,  but  his  lieutenant.  Tris-
tan, was  defeated,  ami  Qoyaaaahaj  dJajaatod  with

the  prosecution  of  a  war  of  which  he  could  ■
•ad,  linked  for  his  relief,  and  retired  to  Sjiain  in
181M.  There  he  fought  againel  the  French  under
Siult,  and  Was  rewarded  with  the  grand  crow  of
babel  la  Catolica.  the  title  of  count  of  (iuaqui,
and  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general.  ||,.  continued
I  to  serve  the  Ung  as  councillor  of  state,  senator,
and  coiniiiaiider-in-chief  of  several  provinces,  re-
ceived many  orders,  and  in  1K4<»  was  elevated  to
the  rank  of  hereditary  grandee  of  Spain.  The  his-
torian Funes  says  of  him:  "  (ioyetieche  wan  Bona*
partist  in  Madrid,  federalist  in  Seville,  autiK-rat  in
Montevideo,  royalist  in  BOOBM  Ayres,  ami  deaPOl
in  Peru."—  His'l.rother.  Jose  Sebastian.  Peruvian
If.  ('.  bi-hop.  h.  in  An-quipa.  11»  .Ian..  1784:  d.  in
Lima.  1!»  Feb..  1878,  studied  in  the  Callage  of  the
Immaculate  Conception  of  Arequipa,  and  in  the
I'niversity  of  Lima,  where  in  180fi  he  was  appoint-
ed assistant  professor  of  theology,  and  in  the  same
{'ear  was  graduated  in  law  at  tfie  royal  atidicncia.
Ie  was  apiNiiuted  assessor  of  the  commercial  and
mining  tribunals,  but  in  1807  entered  holy  orders
and  Itecame  successively  curate  of  Calca  and  of
Santa  Marta  in  Arequipa.  He  was  also  for  some
time  ecclesiastical  governor  of  that  bishopric,  and
in  1811  prclK-ndary  of  the  cathedral.  In  1810  he
was  appointed  inquisitor,  and  in  1817  bishop  of
ArequiiMi,  being  consecrated  in  1818.  When  the
independence  of  Peru  was  proclaimed,  23  July,
1821,  he  accepted  the  situation,  although  his  broth-
er, the  count  of  Guaqui,  belonged  to  the  opposite
party.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  archbishop  of
Lima,  and  during  his  incuml>ency  organized  the
seminary  of  that  citv.

UK  ACE,  Thomas  L.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Charlestons.  ('..  18  Nov..  1814.  At  the  age  of
fifteen  he  entered  the  Roman  Catholic  seminarv  in
Charleston,  with  the  view  of  becoming  a  priest.
He  left  after  a  year  and  became  a  member  of  the
order  of  St.  Dominick  in  St.  Rose's  convent.  Ky.
He  was  afterward  sent  to  Rome,  and  studied  the-
ology for  seven  years  in  the  College  of  the  Minerva.
He  was  ordained  pric-t  el  BOBM,  -1  Da&,  1839,  re-
turned to  the  United  States  five  years  afterward,
and  was  engaged  in  missionary  work  for  several
years  in  Kentucky  ami  Tennessee.  In  Memphis
he  built  the  Church  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  one
of  the  finest  in  the  city,  as  well  aj  the  convent  of
St.  Agnes,  and  an  orphan  asylum.  He  was  conse-
crated bhnop  of  St.  Paul  in  the  cathedral  of  St
Louie  by  Archbishop  Kenrick.  24  July.  1888.  The
administration  of  tliis  large  diocese  taxed  him  to
the  utmost,  and  in  1N7."»  he  succeeded  in  having
northern  Minnesota  set  off  as  a  vicariate,  and  John
Ireland  was  appointed  his  coadjutor.  Dakota,
which  had  also  been  under  his  jurisdiction,  was
plaoad nader a rioar apoatollo  hi  1878.  Although
the  diocese  of  St.  Paul  was  thus  reduced  within
comparatively  narrow  limits,  it  contained  in  1884
one  hundred  and  fifty  priests  and  Offer  two  hun-
dred churches,  with  hospitals, asvlums.  protectories,
and  schools. Rishop  Grace  celebrated his silver

i'ubiiee  iii  July.  1884, and  in  tbeaajaa  feat  rarignad
lis  see.  and  boOMM  titular  bishop  of  Mcnnith.

GRAKMK.  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Balgowan.
Scotland,  20  Oct,  U»hn:  ,j.  jn  Graeme  Park,  near
Philadelphia.  Pa..  4  Sept..  1772.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1717.  in  the  company  of  Sir  William
Keith,  lieutenant-governor  of  Pennsylvania.  Hav-
ing previously  studied mad  farina,  shortly  after  his


700


GRAFF


GRAHAM


arrival  he  entered  on  its  practice  in  Philadelphia,

occupying  ■  prominent  place  in  his  profusion
throughout  his  life.  In  17*27  he  was  appointed
naval  officer  at  Philadelphia,  was  again  ohoatffl
in  1741,  and  oontinned  to  fill  the  office  for  over
twenty  years  thereafter.  In  February.  1  ?•,'<».  he
became  a  member  of  the  provincial  council,  in
1781  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  in  which  office
he  served  several  years,  in  1749  was  chosen  the
tir-t  nieelfllMlt  of  St.  Andrew's  society,  and  in
1751-  3  was  physician  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,
of  which  charity  he  was  one  of  the  founders.  He
was  one  of  the  early  members  of  the  American
philosophical  society  of  Philadelphia.

GRAFF,  Frederick,  engineer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  27  Aug.,  1775;  d.  there  13  April,  1847.
I  IN  early  life  was  devoted  to  the  trade  of  a  car-
penter, and  he  acquired  skill  as  a  draughtsman.
When  twenty  years  old  he  met  with  an  accident,
and  was  employed  by  II.  B.  Latrobe,  as  his  assist-
ant engineer,  in  erecting  the  first  water-works  in
Philadelphia,  which  were  in  Centre  square,  the  site
of  the  present  city-hall.  On  1  April,  1805,  he  was
elected  superintendent  and  engineer  of  the  works.
These  were  found  to  be  wholly  inadequate  after
several  years  of  trial,  and  in  1811  he  recommended
Pairmount  as  the  proper  place  for  the  water-works,
and  was  intrusted  with  their  construction.  At
this  time  the  pipes  were  made  of  wood,  but  he  de-
vised the  iron-pipe  system  which  is  now  univer-
sally used.  He  brought  the  work  to  perfection,
and  patterns  of  his  fire-plugs  and  stop-cocks  were
sent  to  England.  His  experience  and  ability  now
became  acknowledged  throughout  the  country,  and
he  supplied  detailed  information  to  about  thirty-
seven  corporations  in  the  United  States,  including
New  York  and  Boston.  He  was  engaged  for  forty-
two  years  in  the  service  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
and  a  monument  to  his  memory  is  erected  in  the
grounds  at  Pairmount  water-works.  In  1822  the
city  water  committee  sent  him  a  resolution  of
thanks,  and  he  was  presented  with  a  silver  vase.
In  1828  he  received  another  from  the  water  com-
mittee "  as  a  testimonial  of  respect  for  his  talents
and  zeal  effectually  displayed  in  overcoming  un-
foreseen difficulties  encountered  in  the  construction
of  the  northeast  reservoir  at  Fairmount."

GRAFF,  John  Michael,  Moravian  bishop,  b.
in  Saxe-Meiningen,  Germany,  28  Sept.,  1714 ;  d.
in  Salem,  N.  C,  28  Aug.,  1782.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Jena,  came  to  this  country
in  1751,  and  served  for  two  years  as  an  itinerant
evangelist  in  Pennsylvania  and  the  neighboring
colonies.  After  this  he  took  charge  of  the  Mora-
vian church  at  Nazareth,  Pennsylvania,  where  he
labored  until  1761.  During  the  French  and  Indian
war  Graff  displayed  no  little  prudence  in  caring  for
the  safety  of  his  parishioners.  On  several  occasions
hostile  bands  of  the  savages  came  into  the  neigh-
borhood of  Nazareth,  but  never  ventured  to  attack
the  town.  From  Nazareth  he  was  transferred  to
the  new  Moravian  settlement  in  North  Carolina,
where,  in  1773,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
southern  governing  board,  and  on  6  June  of  the
same  year  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy.  In  this
office,  amid  many  trying  circumstances,  he  labored
with  great  zeal  and  "courage  until  his  death.

GRAFFENRIED,  Emanuel,  Baron  de, pioneer,
d.  in  1735.  In  1711,  by  request  of  Queen  Anne,  he
undertook  to  colonize  in  America  the  Palatine  ref-
ugees that  had  fled  to  England,  and  was  granted
a  tract  fifty  miles  square  in  North  Carolina.  Ac-
companied by  Lawson,  the  surveyor-general  of  the
northern  provinces,  he  ascended  the  Neuse  river  in
1711  to  discover  how  far  it  was  navigable,  and  also


to  explore  the  neighboring  country. They  were
■eiaed  by  a  party  of  sixty  well-armed  Indiana  and

taken  to  a  village  of  t he  Tuscarora*.  where  a  coun-
cil was  assembled.  Complaints  were  made  of  the
conduct  of  the  mm  tiers  in  Carolina,  especially  that
of  Lawson.  who  had  divided  their  territory  into
lots.  After  a  discussion  of  two  days,  the  death  of  '
the  prisoners  was  decreed.  A  fire  was  kindled,  a
ring  formed  around  the  victims,  and  the  council
assembled.  No  reprieve  was  granted  to  Lawson,
but  after  five  weeks  Graffenried  was  permitted  to
return,  after  promising  to  occupy  no  land  with-
out the  consent  of  the  tribe,  lie  founded  the
town  of  New  Berne,  afterward  established  a  col-
ony in  Virginia,  and  still  later  returned  to  Eu-
rope, where  he  died,  leaving  a  fortune.  His  son
remained  in  this  country  and  left  many  descend-
ants in  the  south.

GRAFTON,  Edward  C,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass. ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  June,  1876.
His  father,  Joseph,  rose  to  the  rank  of  major  in  the
regular  army,  won  distinction  in  the  war  of  1812,
and  afterward  became  surveyor  of  customs  in  Bos-
ton. The  son  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in
1841,  and  became  passed  midshipman  in  1847.  Efa
was  commissioned  lieutenant,  15  Sept.,  1855 ;  lieu-
tenant-commander, 16  July,  1862;  commander,  20
Dec,  1866,  and  was  retired,  18  Jan.,  1871.  At  the
time  when  the  Confederate  ram  "  Merriraac  "  at-
tempted to  raise  the  blockade,  Lieut.  Grafton  was
flag-officer  of  the  frigate  "  Minnesota,"  then  lying
near  the  mouth  of  the  James  river.  In  the  engage-
ment that  followed  in  Hampton  Roads  he  played
an  active  part.  On  being  commissioned  lieutenant-
commander  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
steam  gun-boat "  Genesee,"  and  participated  in  the
bombardment  of  Fort  Morgan,  Mobde  bay.  In
1866  he  was  in  command  of  the  "  Gettysburg,"  of
the  North  Atlantic  squadron.

GRAFTON,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  9  June,  1757 ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  16  Sept.,
1836.  His  early  education  was  confined  to  the
elementary  branches.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
as  a  Congregationalist,  but  in  1787,  having  changed
his  views,  he  united  with  the  1st  Baptist  church
in  Providence,  R.  I.  Soon  afterward  he  accepted
a  call  to  Newton,  Mass.,  and  was  ordained  as  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  that  place,  18  June,  1788.
Here  he  remained  for  nearly  half  a  century.  He
was  one  of  the  best-known  and  most  honored
preachers  of  his  denomination.  He  was  for  a  time
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Newton
theological  institution.

GRAHAM,  Charles  Kinnaird,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  New  York  city,  3  June,  1824;  d.  there,  15
April,  1889.  He  was  entered  in  the  U.  S.  navy  as
midshipman  in  1841,  and  served  in  the  Gulf  during
the  war  with  Mexico.  In  1848  he  resigned,  returned
to  New  York,  and  devoted  himself  for  several  years
to  the  study  of  engineering.  About  1857  he  was
appointed  constructing  engineer  of  the  Brooklyn
navy-yard,  the  dry-dock  and  landing-ways  being
built  under  his  supervision.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  volunteered  in  the  National  army,
about  400  men  in  his  employ  in  the  navy-yard  fol-
lowing his  example.  The  Excelsior  brigade  was
organized,  in  which  Graham  subsequently  became
rttajor  and  colonel.  Throughout  the  early  part  of
thfe  contest  he  was  actively  engaged  in  the  Army
of  \he  Potomac.  In  November,  1862,  he  was  com-
missioned brigadier-general,  and  fought  at  the
battle  of  Gettysburg,  where  he  was  severely  wound-
ed. He  was  afterward  assigned  to  the  command
of  a  gun-boat  flotilla  on  the  James  river  under  Gen.
Butler,  and  was  the  first  to  carry  the  national


GRAHAM


GRAHAM


701


«l  up  that river. II. •  sultscquently  took  part

in  the  iitt.uk  -'ii I  r,  and  remained  "ii

duty  at  different  |«>ints  until  the  cloaa  "f  the  war,

wh.n  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  engineering  in

fork  city. He  wu  i  major-general

i:t  Man  Ii,  1868.  Among  the  enter-
priiH  with  which  he  has  since  bud  II '11111  nil  J  m
the  llnnnlwav  pavement  commission  and  the  Beach
pueuniatie  transit  company.  (Jen.  Graham
chief  engineer  <>f  the  dock  department  frmn  1*73
till  1875,  and  surveyor  of  the  |H»rt  of  New  York
from  1*7*  till  1868,  when  he  beoaoM  naval  oAoar,

and  hel.l  that  |H>st  until  1  **.-».

81  Ml  \M.  Iluvld,  lawyer.  I.,  in  L<uid..n.  L'ng-
land,  8  Feb.,  1806 :  d.  in  Nice,  Prance,  87  May.
At  the  time  of  his  birth,  Mr.  Graham's  father,  an
irishman,  was  leaving  (Jr.-at  Britain  for  political
reasons.  The  son  was  educated  partly  at  Coluiu-
l»ia  and  partly  under  the  sii[iervision  of  his  father,
who,  according  to  Prof.  Charles  Anthon,  was  one
of  the  l*«st  scholars  in  the  country.  Young  (iraham
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  10  thel>ar.  Dur-
ing 1*42  lie  served  as  corporation  counsel.  He
was  subsequently  appointed,  in  conjunction  with
Arphaxad  Loomis  and  David  Dudley  Field,  "to
revise,  reform,  simplify,  and  abridge 'the  rules  of
practice,  pleadings,  forms,  anil  proceedings  of  the
courts  of  record  '  of  the  state  of  New  York,  under
the  constitution  adopte<l  :{  Nov.,  1*4(1.  This  WM
the  forerunner  of  the  present  system  of  practice,
and  occupied  Mr.  (iraham  and  his  associates  sev-
eral years.  Meantime  he  was  successful  as  a  lawyer,
especially  in  criminal  cases.  In  the  trial  of  Bfciaop
Benjamin  T.  Onderdonk  before  the  house  of  bish-
ops in  1*44.  Mr.  Graham,  as  counsel  for  the  defend-
ant, added  greatlvtohis  reputation.  On  the  open-
ing of  the  New  York  university  in  the  spring  of
1*3*.  he  was  appointed  nnrfessor  of  the  law  of
pleading  atid  practice.  Mr.  Graham  is  the  author
of  "  Practice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of
New  York  "  (New  York,  1832).  It  passed  through
a  second  edition  (ls.'{('»).  and  he  had  finished  revis-
ing the  first  volume  of  a  third  (1H47)  at  the  time  of
his  death.  Healso  published"  New  Trials  "  (1884  ;
new  e<l.,  greatly  enlarged,  by  D.  Graham.  Jr.,  and
Thomas  W.  Wiitterman,  3  vols.,  1856), and  "Courts
of  Ijaw  and  Equity  in  the  State  of  New  York  "
<New  York,  1*39).  "  In  addition  to  the  above,  he
issued  an  annotated  edition  of  Smith's  "  Chancery
Practice,"  which  was  published  as  Che  second
American  edition  of  that  work  in  1*42.

GRAHAM,  Georarp,  soldier,  b.  in  Chester  coun-
ty. Pa.,  in  1758:  d  near  Charlotte.  N.  (X.88  March.
1886.  His  mother  was  left  a  widow  with  six  chil-
dren, and  but  slender  means.  The  son  emigrated
to  North  Carolina,  and  was  educated  at  the  (Queen's
museum.  Charlotte.  When  only  seventeen,  with  a
few  others,  he  rode  all  night  to  reach  Salisbury,
and  there  seized  two  Tory  lawyers.  Dunn  and
Boot  he by name, and carried them to  Camden.

S.  C,  where  they  were  imprisoned,  but  tabeeanent-

ly  sent  for  safe-keeping  to  <  'harlest.ni  as  "  PefOQM
inimical  to  the  country.*'  lie  served  throughout
the  Revolutionary  war.  and  onSOofc,  1780*  was  one
of  twelve  who  attacked  and  drove  back  a  superior
British  force  seven  miles  t..  the  south  of  Charlotte.
He  was  also  active,  when  the  enemy  was  ■nOHnped
his  residence,  in  attacking  their  foraging
parties.  After  the  declaration  of  peace  he  send
ml  terms  in  the  legislature,  was  for  a  long  time
clerk  of  the  curt  ,,f  Mecklenburg  county,  beeame
major-general  of  militia,  and  filled  other  respon-i-
ble  offices. —  Hi-  brother.  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in
Chester  count  v.  Pa..  18  <M.,  1708;  d.  in  Lincoln
county,  N.  <  \.  14  Nov..  1888. At  the  age  of  atvw


he  accompanied  his  widowed  mother  lo  North
ina.  He  was  educated  at  Queen's  museum  in
Charlotte,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  enlisted  in
the  4th  regiment  of  North  Carolina  regular  troops,
under  Col.  Archibald  Lytic.  He  was  called  int..
a.ti  ii  the  autumn  Of 177*,  and  a.

[tallied  (Jen.  Rutherford  tO  the  banks  .if  t|,
vaiinah  soon  after  the  defeat  <>f  (Jen.  Ashe  at  Brier
Creek.  He  was  with  Qen.  Lincoln  while  the  latter
was  manoMivring  Bgalnel  I'revost,  and  was  in  the
severe  battle  at  Sloiio  in  .Line,  177'.'.  lb-  was  after-
ward prostrated  by  a  fever,  and  returned  home,
but  rejoined  the  army  after  the  tall  of  Charleston,
lb  was  appointed  adjutant  of  the  Mecklenburg
regiment,  and  saw  considerable  service,  meeting
the  enemy  while  covering'  the  retreat  of  Major
William  R.  Da\i.\  near  Charlotte,  in  the  autumn
of  17*0.  In  the  latter  encounter  he  was  cut  down
by  a  British  dragoon,  and  received  six  sabre  thrusts
and  three  bullet-wounds.  After  recovering  from
these,  he  raised  a  company  of  mounted  rifieinen,
and  with  fifty  men  disputed  the  passage  of  the
British  army  at  Cowan's  ford.  Subsequently,  with
the  assistance  of  some  troops  from  Rowan,  he  sur-
prised and  captured  a  British  guard  at  Hart's  mill,
only  a  short  distance  from  headquarters  at  Hills-
borough, and  the  next  day  was  with  Gen.  Henry
Lee  when  l'vles  was  defeated.  The  following  Sep-
lamhaT  he  was  appointed  major  of  a  legion  of
cavalry  he  had  been  ordered  to  raise,  and  went
toward  Wilmington  to  rescue  Gov.  Burke,  who  had
been  abducted  from  Hillsborough  by  Panning,  a
noted  loyalist.  South  of  Fayette  ville  he  met  a
band  of  Tories,  and  after  a  severe  skirmish,  defeated
them,  although  his  force  numbered  only  130  against
the  enemy's  600.  After  he  had  engaged  in  two  or
three  other  bold  enterprises,  the  surrender  of  Corn-
wallis  put  an  end  to  hostilities  in  the  south.  He
married  in  17H7.  and  in  1792  erected  iron- works
and  settled  in  Lincoln  county.  He  had  previous-
ly resided  in  Mecklenburg  county,  which  he  fre-
quently represented  in  the  state  senate.  In  1814,
1.000  men  were  raised  in  North  Carolina  to  aid
the  Tennessee  and  Georgia  volunteers  against  the
Creek  Indians.  Graham  was  given  the  command
and  commissioned  major-general.  He  arrived  with
his  corps  just  after  the  Creeks  had  submitted  to
Gen.  Jackson,  (Jen.  Coffee,  and  (Jen.  Carroll,  after
the  battle  at  the  Horse  Shoe,  For  many  years
afterward  he  was  the  senior  officer  of  the  Mb.
division  of  the  state  militia. — His  son.  James,
lawyer,  b.  in  Lincoln  county,  N.  C.  in  January,
17!»:i :  d.  in  Rutherford  county.  N.  ('..  in  September,
1851,  was  graduated  at  the  Cniversity  of  North
Carolina  in  1X14.  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  successfully  in  his  native  county
for  many  years.  Removing  to  Rutherford  county,
he  served  several  terms  in  the  legislature  in  l*22-'9,
and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving
from  2  Dec.,  1*33.  till  3  March.  1843,  excepting  from
68  March,  1&36,  to  5  D- .  ..  1888,  when  a  Democratic
house  declared  his  seat  vacant,  although  it  was  not
given  to  his  OOBVpotitOE.  Mr.  Graham  was  again
chosen  at  a  new  election.  He  was  also  elected  to
the  88th  congress,  serving  from  1  Dec.,  1*4.*).  till  3
March,  1*47,  when  he  retired  and  devoted  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  to  farming. —  Another  son,
William  Alexander,  senator,  b.in  Lincoln  cunt  v.
N.  CL,  •">  Sept..  18M  ;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y..
11  Aug..  INT."),  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
North  Carolina  in  1*24.  admitted  to  the  Iwif  at
NcwImtii,  N.  ('..and  Ugan  to  practise  law  in  Hills-

bOfOtlgn. He  was  several  times  elected  to  the  state

legislature  between l>:t:i  and  1840,  and  was  more
than  once  chosen  speaker. In  1*40  he  was  elected


GRAHAM


GRAHAM


^^6.^


to  tin-  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  m-casioned
l.v  the  resignation  <>f  Robert  Strange,  serving  from
..  isju.  to  •'!  March.  1848.  In  1844  be  was
•tooted  governor  bj  the  whiff  on  ■  larger  rote
than  waeerer  before  polled. Be  was  te-etoted  in

is4<»  i>y  an  increased

majority,  but  de-
clined a  third  terra,
and  retired  to  pri-
vate life.  lie  WM
offered the  Spanish

mission  by  President

Taylor  in  1849,  but
declined  it,  and  in
1850  became  secre-
tary of  the  navy  in
Fillmore's  cabinet,
but  resigned  in  1852
in  consequence  of
having  been  nomi-
nated by  the  Whigs
for  vice-president  on
the  ticket  with  Gen.
Scott.  During  his
term  of  office  as  sec-
retary he  projected  and  carried  out  the  important
expedition  to  Japan  under  Com.  Perry.  Gov.  Gra-
ham served  as  senator  in  the  2d  Confederate  con-
fiess  from  '.ll  Feb.,  1864,  until  the  end  of  the  war.
ie  was  also  a  delegate  to  the  Union  convention  at
Philadelphia  in  1806,  which  was  called  to  sustain
the  policy  of  Andrew  Johnson.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  acting  as  one  of  a  commission  that
had  been  appointed  to  settle  the  boundary  dispute
between  the  states  of  Maryland  and  Virginia.

GRAHAM,  George  Rex,  editor,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  18  Jan.,  1813.  He  was  early  intended
for  the  bar,  but  the  death  of  his  father  compelled
him  to  relinquish  this  ambition,  and  he  lived  with
his  uncle  in  Montgomery  county,  Pa.,  where  he
employed  every  spare  moment  in  reading.  In  1832
he  returned  to  Philadelphia  and  began  to  learn  the
trade  of  a  cabinet-maker,  meanwhile  devoting  six
hours  daily,  after  his  work  was  completed,  to  lit-
erary pursuits.  A  few  years  later  he  was  enabled
to  enter  a  law-office,  and  in  1839  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  had  already  contributed  a  series  of
papers  to  the  Philadelphia  press,  which  met  with
such  favor  that  he  was  invited  to  become  the  editor
of  the  "Saturday  Evening  Post,"  and  afterward
was  one  of  its  proprietors.  His  relations  with
this  journal  continued  until  1846.  He  purchased
in  1839  a  monthly  called  "Atkinson's  Casket,"
which  he  published  until  1841,  when,  uniting  with
it  the  "  Gentleman's  Magazine,"  he  began  the  pub-
lication of  "  Graham's  Magazine."  This  periodical
attained  a  large  circulation  under  his  management,
and  its  contributors  included  William  C.  Bryant,
J.  Feniraore  Cooper.  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  Edgar
A.  Poe,  and  Bayard  Taylor.  For  many  years  it  was
the  best  periodical  of  its  kind  published  in  the
United  States.  In  1846  he  purchased  the  "  North
American,"  and  in  1847  the  "United  States  Ga-
zette,'' which  he  incorporated  with  the  "  North
American."  Later  he  engaged  in  stock  operations,
losing  thereby  much  of  his  money,  and  was  com-
pelled to  part  with  the  "  North  American  "  and  the
"  Magazine."  But  subsequently  he  regained  con-
trol of  the  "  Magazine,"  and  continued  its  publica-
tion until  about  1851.  He  then  lived  by  his  pen,
but  failing  health  led  to  his  being  supported
through  the  liberality  of  George  W.  Childs.  At
present  (1887)  he  is  an  inmate  of  the  New  York
ophthalmic  hospital,  where  he  is  awaiting  an  op-
eration for  cataract  on  both  eyes.


GRAHAM,  Hear]  Hale.  Jurist,  1».  in  London,
England,  l  July,  1731;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  I*a..  v!4
Jan.,  l  ?'.)<). He  came  to  this  country  with  hie  father.

William  (iraham.  in  1733,  and  settled  in  Chester
county.  I'a.  He  !>ecame  a  lawyer,  and  was  a  man
of  large  influence  in  the  province.  He  held  the
office  <•!  register,  recorder,  prothonotary,  and  clerk
of  the  several  courts  of  Chester  county,  and  Cross
17(>1  till  17M9  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  courts
of  the  comity.  During  the  latter  year  Delaware
county  was  created,  and  he  was  commissioned
president  judge  of  its  court  of  common  pleas.  In
1790  he  was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  constitutional
convention  of  the  state,  and  died  during  the  sit-
ting of  the  convention,  which  body,  out  of  respect
to  his  memory,  adjourned,  and  sent  three  of  their
members  to  Chester  to  attend  his  funeral.

GRAHAM,  Isabella,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Lan-
arkshire, Scotland,  29  July,  1742:  d.  in  New  York
city,  27  July,  1814.  She  was  the  daughter  of  John
Marshall,  who  educated  her  carefully.  In  1765  she
married  Dr.  John  Graham,  a  physician  of  Paisley,
and  accompanied  him  with  his  regiment  to  Canada,
where  she  spent  four  years.  Her  husband  was  then
ordered  to  the  island  of  Antigua,  where  he  died  in
1774.  Mrs.  Graham  returned  to  Scotland,  but  in
1789  came  to  New  York  city,  and  established  a
school  for  young  ladies,  in  which  for  many  years
she  was  eminently  successful.  Before  leaving  Scot-
land she  had  founded  the  Penny  society,  now
known  as  the  Society  for  the  relief  of  the  destitute
sick,  and  she  continued  to  labor  in  the  same  field
in  New  York.  Among  the  more  important  of  the
institutions  established  by  her  are  the  Widows  and
Orphans'  asylum  societies,  the  Society  for  the  pro-
motion of  industry,  and  the  first  Sunday-school  for
ignorant  adults.  She  also  aided  in  organizing  the
first  missionary  society,  and  the  first  monthly  mis-
sionary prayer-meeting  in  the  city  of  her  residence.
She  was  the  first  president  of  the  Magdalen  society,
systematically  visited  the  inmates  of  the  hospital
and  the  sick  female  convicts  in  the  state-prison,
and  distributed  Bibles  and  tracts  long  before  there
was  a  Bible  or  tract  society  in  New  York. — Her
daughter,  Joanna,  who  survived  her,  was  the
mother  of  George  W.  Bethune  (q.  v.).  Of  the
"Life  and  Letters"  of  Mrs.  Graham  (1816;  last
edition,  London,  1838)  more  than  50,000  copies
have  been  sold  in  this  country,  and  many  editions
issued  in  England  and  Scotland.  See  "  Letters  and
Correspondence,"  selected  by  her  daughter,  Mrs.
Bethune  (New  York,  1838) ;  and  Mason^  "  Memoir
of  Isabella  Graham,"  published  by  the  American
tract  society.

GRAHAM,  James  Lorimer,  consul,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  January,  1835 ;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy,
30  April,  1876.  He  was  partly  educated  at  Amiens,
France,  where,  on  account  of  his  precocious  liter-
ary talent,  he  was  selected  to  deliver  a  poetical  ad-
dress of  welcome  to  Lamartine  when  the  latter
visited  the  school  in  1848.  Mr.  Graham  lived  for
a  time  in  Rio  Janeiro,  and,  after  returning  to  New
York,  was  a  passenger  in  the  steamer  "  San  Fran-
cisco," which  foundered  in  a  gale  off  Cape  Hat-
teras.  His  experience  in  this  wreck  injured  his
health  and  hastened  his  death.  In  1856  he  mar-
ried and  settled  in  New  York,  where  he  became
widely  known  through  his  taste  for  art  and  litera-
ture and  his  brilliant  conversational  talents.  Asa
member  of  the  Century  club,  the  Geographical  so-
ciety, and  kindred  institutions,  he  made  the  ac-
quaintance of  many  artists  and  authors.  He  spent
the  years  1862-'3  in  Europe,  and  after  remaining
in  New  York  until  1866  again  went  abroad.  Mean-
time he  had  been  busily  engaged  in  acquiring  what-


II  AM


HAM


708


erer  curio-iiie-  he  hud  found  in  hi-  trawl-,  until
h«-  bad  l  irge  oollectionaof  ooina.  autographs,  draw-
.  and books. Some  time  after  nil  return  t<>
Iraham  WM  appointed V.  &  consul-
general  for  Italy,  and  maided  in  Florence. Whan

the  capital  was  transferred  to  Rome,  ha  preferred

the  office  of  n  lUnple  oodmJ  rather  than

change  In-  home.

GRAHAM,  John,  i  lergyman,  b.  in  Edinburgh,

and,  in  1694;  d.  in  woodbary,  ConiL,  It

•amber,  1774 lb  was  a  descendant  <>f  ooaol  tha

marquises  of  Montrose. !!<•  was  educated  at  Glas-

.  and  studied  medicine. Coming  t"  tufaoamv

a ith  emigrants  from  Londonderry  in  171*.  ha

lir-t  raaided  al  Enter,  N.  II.,  but  afterward  BtndJad

theology,  and  was  ordained  as  the  tir-i  clergymen

Stafford,  Conn*  in  1788. Be  obtained  hi-.  dla-

mi— al  in  17:H  00  the  ground  of  insufficient  -ii|>-
|'<.rt.  and  in  17M  ho  was  called  to  the  2d  church
Soathboiy,  then  Woodbury,  when-  ha  ipani
forty  years.  Daring  the  great  New  Fngland
revival  of  1?4()  he  was  especially  active.  Mr.
Graham  was  the  author  of  ••  A  Ballad  against  the
Church  of  England  in  Connecticut"  ilSW),  a
•  Tract  "  on  the  same  subject,  ami  "A Rejoinder

to  Johaaon'i  Answer." (pea  chandler's  "Life  of

Samuel  Johnson.") — His  son,  Andrew,  physician,
d.  in  1785,  was  a  {uttriot  of  the  Berolution,  and
represented  Woodbury,  Conn.,  for  many  wars  in
the  legislature.  In  the  battle  of  Danbury  he  acted
as  regimental  surgeon,  and  in  the  engagement  at
White  Plains,  X.  Y..  was  taken  prisoner  and  was
not  released  until  the  surrenderor  Gen.  Corn  wall  is.
— Andrew's  -on,  John  Andrew,  advocate,  b,  in
Southhury,  Conn.,  10  June,  1704;  d.  in  New  York
city.  80  An;'.,  1x41,  was  admitted  to  the  Connecti-
cut l»ar  in  l?s.'».  and  at  once  removed  to  Rutland,
Vt  He  subsequently  went  on  an  unsuccessful
mi— ion  t<.  England  to  obtain  the  consecration  of
Ri-hop  Peters  from  the  Fngli-h  hi-hops,  and  on  a
second  visit  to  Europe  in  1«90  he  received  the  de-
gree of  LI*  I),  from  the  I'niversity  of  Aberdeen.
After  1806  he  resided  constantly  in  New  York  city.
and  baaattM  well  known  as  an  able  criminal  lawyer.
Il<-  published  "A  Descriptive  Sketch  of  the  Pre-ent
State  of  Vermont"  (London,  1797);  a  volume  of
speeches  (1818);  and  ••Memoirs  of  John  Home
Tooke;  also.  Proofs  Identifying  him  as  the  Author
of  Junius"  (New  York.  iH^H).— John  Hodges,
naval  officer,  -on  of  John  Andrew,  b.  in  Vermont.
B  March.  17»4;  d.  in  Newbury.  N.  H..  ifi  March,
1878,  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman.  IN  June,
1818,  was  promoted  to  be  lieutenant,  5  March.
1M17.  and  captain,  7  March,  1849.  He  was  placed
on  the  reserved  list  in  186a  and  made  commodore
on  the  retired  li-t.  4  April,  1*<>7.  He  served  in  the
war  of  1N12,  and,  while  a  midshipman  under  Com.
Chaunoey  on  Lake  Ontario,  was  one  of  twelve  offl-
who  took  part  in  an  expedition  against  the
Rritish  stronghold  opposite  Black  Rocs,  N.  Y.
Nine  of  the  party  were  killed  or  severely  wounded.
Among  the  latter  was  young  Graham,  who  subse-
quently was  compelled  to  aabmil  to  the  amputa-
tion ofa  leg  In  the  engagement  on  Ijike  Cham-
plain.  11  sept.,  1*14.  he  had  command  of  Com.
McDonougha  Bag-ship  Altar  the  declaration  of
peace.  Com.  (iraham  wa-  engaged  in  shore  duty. —
John  Larimer,  lawyer,  another  son  of  John  An-
drew. 1..  in  London,  England,  80  March,  17!»7:  d.
in  Plashing,  N.  Y..  28  July,  l m?ij,  was  admitted  to
the  New  York  !>ar  in  1881,  and  soon  acquired  a
large  practice.  In  1884  he  was  appointed!  n  p
of  the  state  university,  and  from  1*40  till  1K44
was  postmaster  of  New  York  city.  He  occupied
important  offices  in  the  state  militia,  and  in  1801


received  an  ap|<ointiiniit in the trea-un d<  |

llient at Washington. He  Wit-  elected to  the  collli-

i  the  University  of  the  ciU  "'  n.  in

which  institution  he  founded  a  DM  m-IioImi

(.1:  \ll  \M.  John,  diplomatic,  b.  in  Ihunfries,
Prince  William  oo.,  \'a..  m  1774;  d.  in  Weaning

ton. I>.  C„  0 Am;.. 1880. He was  graduated at

Coiutnliia  in  171M),  and  amlgratad  to  Kenta
where  in-  laavaaantad  Lawia  county  in  tha  lagJahv
lure. He  was  then  sent by  President  Jefferson  to
the  territorv  of  Orleans  a-  aecretary,  and  subse-

i|Ueiitly  held  a  similar  office  in  the  American  lega-
lion  in  Spain.  Doling  the  time  when  James  Madi-
BatJ  was  secretary  of  state,  (iraham  wa-  chief  clerk

under  him. In  1818  ha  accompanied  ■  commit

to  obtain  political  information  in  Rueno-  Ayrea,
and  wrote  an  elaborate  lepOft,  which  wa-  printed
by  the  state  depart ineiit.  He  v\a-  next  ,-eiit  by
President  If on  me  aa  minister  to  the  court  of  Por-
tugal, then  resident  in  Rio  Janeiro.  His  health
gave  way  under  the  Rrazilian  climate,  and  he  died
soon  after  returning  to  Washington. —  His  brother,
George,  acting  secretary  of  war,  b,  in  Ihimfrie-,
Prince  William  co..  Ya..  alnmt  177'.';  d.  in  Wash-
ington, I>.  C„  in  August,  \Ki0,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1790,  studied  law. and  practiaad  in  hi-
native  town.  He  afterwanl  removed  to  Fairfax
count  v,  and  raised  and  commanded  the  "  Fairfax
light-horse"  during  the  war  of  1812.  On  the  re-
tirement of  (Jen.  Armstrong  from  the  war  depart-
ment after  the  burning  of  Washington,  (iraham
was  placed  in  charge  as  chief  clerk.  During  the
la-t  two  years  of  Madison's  administration,  and
until  relieved 'by  John  C.  Calhoun  in  the  first  year
of  Monroe's  term,  he  was  acting  secretary  of  war.
In  1  HIS.  at  Mr.  Calhoun's  request,  he  made  a  long
and  perilous  journey  to  inspect  a  settlement  which
had  been  made  by  Gen.  Lallemande.  Napoleon's
chief  of  artillery,  with  000  armed  colonists,  at  Or-
coguises  RlufTs,  on  Trinity  river.  Finding  the
colonists  on  Galveston  island,  he  induced  them  to
submit  to  the  authority  of  the  United  States  and
abandon  their  enterprise.  On  his  return  he  be-
came president  of  the  Washington  branch  of  the
U.  S.  bank,  which  office  he  held  until  he  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  of  the  land  office  in  ls^t.
Betting  in  the  latter  capacity  during  the  remainder
of  his  life.  While  connected  with  the  bank  he  was
employed  by  the  government  to  wind  up  the  "  In-
dian factorage  "  affairs,  and  in  doing  so  is  said  to
have  Bared  the  country  not  less  than  Jf'J.'AOOO.

GRAHAM,  Sylvester,  vegetarian,  b.  in  Suflield,
Conn.,  in  17!M;  d.  in  Northampton.  Mass..  11  Sept.,
1851.  His  father  was  an  English  clergyman,  a
graduate  of  Oxford,  who  came  to  this  country  and
settled  in  Suffield.  At  nineteen  years  of  age  he
U  gan  to  teach. and  continued  as  long  as  his  health
would  permit.  In  1N*23  he  matriculated  at  Am-
herst with  the  intention  of  preparing  for  the  min-
istry, but.  having  exhibited  unusual  powers  of  elo-
cution, he  was  denounced  as  a  "stage  actor"  and
a  "mad  enthusiast."  and  did  not  complete  the
course.  He.  however,  entered  the  Presbvterian
ministry  soon  after  his  marriage  in  1888. fn  1830

he  wa-  employed  by  the  Penaarlranla  tein|N-rance

-ocietv  as  a  lecturer,  and  while  thus  engaged  he
Ikthiiii'  convinced  that  the  prevention  and  cure  of
mtamparaaaa  would  In-  U-st  achieved  by  the  adop-
tion ofa  purely  vegetable  diet,  which  he  supposed
would  take  away  the  de-jrc  for  stimulant.-.  He
subsequently  applied  this  theory  to  all  form-  of
disease.  He  published  an  "  Raaayoa  the  Cholera"
(1832):  "Graham  lectures  on  the  Science  of  Hu-
man Lift"  (8  vol-..  Boston,  1889);  "Bread  and
Rivad-making";  "A  Leafia  to  Young  Men  on


704


GRAHAM


GRANBERY


chastitv";  and  " Th««  Philosophy  of  Baered  Ilis-
onlv  nin>  volume  of  which  was  completed),
GKAh  AM,  William  Montrose,  soldier,  l>.  In

Prince  William  county.  Va.,  in  17S)N;  d.  in  Mexico.
8  Sept..  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  In  1817,  and  entered  the  army  m
lieutenant  df'artillery.  Ho  was  promoted  through
the  various  grades  to  be  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
11th  infantry  in  April.  1*47.  He  served  on  re-
cruiting duty,  constructing  military  roads  in  Mis-
si>>ippj  and  in  Florida,  and  in  garrison  until
1885.  He  took  part  in  the  campaigns  against  the
Seminole  Indians  in  l885-*8  and  in  1841-2,  being
twice  severely  wounded.  In  the  Mexican  war  he
was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto,  Resaca  de
la  Palme,  Monterey,  Contreras,  Churubusco,  and
Molino  del  Rev,  where  he  was  killed  while  leading
an  assault  on*  the  enemy's  works. — His  brother,
James  Duncan,  topographical  engineer,  b.  in
Prince  William  county,  Va.,  4  April,  1799;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  28  Dec,  1805,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1817,  and  became  lieu-
tenant of  artillery.  He  was  promoted  several  steps
in  this  arm  of  the  service,  and  employed  on  topo-
graphical duty,  but  it  was  not  until  1829  that  his
specialty  was  recognized.  He  was  then  brevetted
captain  and  afterward  major,  that  he  might  enter
the  corps  of  topographical  engineers,  receiving
the  full  commission  of  major  in  1838.  In  1839-'40
he  was  astronomer  of  the  surveying  party  that,  in
behalf  of  the  United  States,  established  the  bound-
ary-line between  the  latter  and  the  then  new  re-
public of  Texas.  In  1840  he  was  appointed  com-
missioner for  the  survey  and  exploration  of  the
northeast  boundary  of  the  United  States,  and  was
employed  along  the  Maine  and  New  York  frontiers
until  1843.  In  the  same  year  he  was  ordered  to
duty  as  astronomer  on  the  part  of  the  United
States  for  the  joint  demarcation  of  the  boundary
between  the  United  States  and  the  British  prov-
inces, under  the  treaty  of  Washington.  He  was
thus  employed  during  the  Mexican  war.  On  its
conclusion  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  the
commission  reading,  "for  valuable  and  highly  dis-
tinguished services,  particularly  on  the  boundary-
line  between  the  United  States  and  the  provinces
of  Canada  and  New  Brunswick."  In  1850  Col.
Graham  was  engaged  by  the  states  of  Maryland,
Pennsylvania,  and  Delaware,  to  examine  certain
disputed  questions  regarding  the  intersection  of
the  boundary-line  of  those  states.  He  made  a
thorough  survey  of  the  line  originally  made  by  Ma-
son and  Dixon,  and  published  a  voluminous  report
thereon.  He  was  employed  in  the  final  settlement
of  the  questions  resulting  from  the  war  with  Mexi-
co, and  during  1851  was  U.  S.  astronomer  in  the
survey  of  the  boundary-line  between  this  country
and  Mexico.  For  the  next  ten  years  he  was  in
charge  of  various  harbor  improvements  on  the
northern  and  northwestern  lakes,  in  which  he  dis-
covered the  existence  of  a  lunar  tide  (1858-'9).  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  superintending  en-
gineer of  the  sea-walls  in  Boston  harbor,  and  of
the  repairs  of  harbor  works  on  the  Atlantic  coast
from  Maine  to  the  capes  of  the  Chesapeake.  He
was  promoted  to  be  colonel  of  the  engineer  corps,
1  Jane,  1863.  He  was  a  member  of  several  scien-
tific societies. — Another  brother,  Lawrence  Pike,
soldier,  b.  in  Amelia  county,  Va.,  8  Jan.,  1815,  was
appointed  8d  lieutenant  of  the  2d  dragoons  in  1837,
and  subsequently  promoted  1st  lieutenant  and  cap-
tain. In  1842  he  served  in  the  campaign  against
the  Seminoles,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Ijochahatchee,  In  the  Mexican  war  he  was  bre-
vetted major  for  gallantry  in  the  engagements  at


Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  and  promoted
major,  14  June,  1858.  In  Octol>er.  1861,  he  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Bth  cavalry,  colonel
1th  cavalry,  9  May,  1804,  and  brevet  brigadier*
generaj  for  meritorious  services  during  the  civil
war,  18  March,  1805.  Previously,  in  August,  1861,
he  was  oommieeioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, and  in  1802  raised  and  commanded  a  1 »
of  cavalry  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  after-
ward acted  as  president  of  a  general  court-martial
at  St.  Louis,  and  of  a  board  for  the  examination  of
invalid  officers  at  Annapolis.  He  was  mastered  oaf
of  the  volunteer  service,  £4  Aug.,  1865,  and  placed
on  the  retired  list,  18  Dec.,  1870.

M!. VII  AM  K,  James,  historian,  b.  in  Glasgow,
Scotland,  21  Dec,  1790;  d.  in  London,  England.  8
July,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  John's  col-
lege, Cambridge,  and  in  1812  was  admitted  an  ad-
vocate at  the  Scottish  bar.  After  practising  for
fourteen  years,  and  finding  that  his  health  required
a  residence  in  a  milder  climate,  he  removed  to  the
south  of  England,  where  he  began  a  "  History  of
the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  United  States  of
North  America  till  the  British  Revolution  of
1088."  The  first  two  volumes  appeared  in  1827,
and  a  new  edition  (4  vols.)  in  1880,  bringing  the
work  down  to  the  year  1776;  but  its  thoroughly
American  spirit  interfered  with  its  success  in
England,  and  for  several  years  it  was  little  known
in  the  United  States.  In  1841  a  genial  notice  of
the  "  History,"  by  the  historian  Prescott,  appeared
in  the  "  North  American  Review,"  in  which  it  was
styled  "  the  most  thorough  work,  and  incompara-
bly the  best  on  the  subject,  previous  to  Mr.  Ban-
croft's." A  Philadelphia  edition  (4  vols.)  was  pub-
lished in  1845,  and  one  (2  vols.)  in  1846-'8,  the
former  containing  a  memoir  of  Grahame  by  Josiah
Quincy.  Mr.  Quincy  also  published  a  work  en-
titled ""  The  Memory  of  the  Late  James  Grahame,
the  Historian  of  the  United  States,  Vindicated
from  the  Charges  of  Mr.  Bancroft "  (Boston,  1846).
In  1837  Mr.  Grahame  undertook  to  continue  the
"  History"  to  the  close  of  the  Revolution,  but  was
compelled  bv  failing  health  to  relinquish  literary
labor  of  all  kinds.  The  last  production  of  his  pen
was  the  pamphlet  "Who  is  to  Blame  t  or,  Cursory
Review  of  the  American  Apology  for  American
Accession  to  Negro  Slavery  "  (London,  1842).

GRAINGER,  James,  Scottish  physician,  b.  in
Dunse,  Scotland,  about  1723 ;  d.  in  the  island  of
St.  Christopher  in  1767.  He  served  as  a  surgeon
in  the  British  army,  and  afterward  practised  medi-
cine in  London,  and  still  later  in  the  West  Indies.
He  published  a  treatise  on  "  Dysentery  "  (London,
1756),  one  on  "West  India  Diseases "  (1704),  and
other  professional  writings.  Besides  translations
from  Tibullus,  an  "Ode  to  Solitude,"  and  other
poetical  productions,  he  published  in  1 764  a  poem
on  "The  Sugar-Cane,"  in  which  he  described,
sometimes  in  absurd  poetical  diction,  but  with
picturesque  force  and  interesting  detail,  the  scen-
ery and  life  of  the  plantations  and  all  the  processes
connected  with  sugar-culture.

GRANBERY,  John  Cowper,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Norfolk,  Va.,  5  Dec,  1829.  He  was  graduated
at  Randolph-Macon  college  in  1848,  and  the  same
year  became  a  preacher  in  the  M.  E.  church,  south.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  chaplain  in  the  Con-
federate army.  From  1875  till  1882  he  was  pro-
fessor of  moral  philosophy  and  practical  tli
in  Vanderbilt  university,  Nashvule,  Tenn.,  and  in
the  latter  year  was  appointed  a  bishop  in  the  M.  K.
church,  south.  Randolph-Macan  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.  He  has  published  a
"  Bible  Dictionary  "  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1882).


ORANDIN


SGKK


908


I. H\MWN. Vital Justin. I
bWtopt  ''•  '"  Bt,  Picrn  eur-Orno,  Pnux

Mi-  wa->  educated  at  I'n-cigne,  ami  in  di-
vinity at  .Marseilles,  where  In-  was  ordained  prie-1
in  1HM.  Hi*  whs  *ent  to  British  Ami-ricn  in  the
nunc  year,  ami  in  1850  was  consee rated  coadjutor
pot  St.  Boniface.  In  is7l  he  became  the  first
bishop  <>f  St.  Albert,  Canada. Bishop  <»randin,  in

tin-  riWnhagp  of  his  official  duties,  lias  travelled

v  for  80  years  past  over  British  North  Ann-rica.

i.li  vMiMtiN  i.  Louis  de,  buccaneer,  b.  in  Paris

in  1648;  <1.  at  uea  about  1686. He  belonged  to  a  good

family. An  officer  having  treated  him  as  a  child.

.diuont  forced  him  to  accept  a  dial!'  |
wounded  him  mortally,  ami  was  arrested,  but  was
pardoned,  and  entered  tin-  navy,  wlu-rc  In-  dis-
tinguished himself  by  his  bravery  and  intelligence.
Be  obtained  command  of  a  privateer  and  sailed  to
Martinique,  where  he  captured  a  Dutch  mcrchaut-
man,  valtu-d  at  400,000  francs,  hut,  having  s|H-nt  the
entire  sum  in  dissipation,  lie  fled  to  Santo  Domingo,
and  Joined  the  hnflOaiMWS  His  fine  appearance,
distinguished  manners,  and  daring  gained  for  him
the  confidence  of  his  new  associateo.  Placing  him-
self at  the  head  of  a  certain  numla>r  among  them.

he  captured  bo  iots  llaraoaibo,  ami  in  1818  rarto

CaU'llo,  participated  in  April.  1688,  with  Graaf
and  Van  Morn  in  the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  in
August  <>t  the  sunn-  war  succeeded  in  netting  jx>s-
sessionof  the  town  of  Cani|>eachy.  where  he  gained  a
large  booty.  In  order  to  obtain  the  freedom  of  two
of  his  companions,  who  had  Ih-i-ii  made  prisoner-  by
the  commander  of  Mcrida,  he  offered  in  exchange  to
surrender  t  he  governorof  Campeachy,  and  to  release
the  captured  garrison.  The  commander  refused  to
consent,  and  cv.-n  answered  Grandmont's  threat  to
destroy  the  entire  town  and  massacre  all  the  in-
habitants by  Baying  that  lie  had  money  enough  to
rebuild  it  and  men  enough  to  repeoplc  it  ;  where-
upon  the  buccaneer  cut  off  the  heads  of  five  Span-
iards, burned  the  citv,  blew  up  the  fortifications,
and  on  the  festival  ol  St.  Louis  burned  logwood
valued  at  200,000  crowns  in  honor  of  Louis  \  I  V..
who,  as  a  reward  for  his  courage  and  military  tal-
ent, had  created  him  "  lieutenant  of  the  king/'  and
had  desired  to  appoint  him  governor  of  the  south-
ern part  of  Santo  Domingo.  But  Grandmont,
with  the  object  of  rendering  himself  still  more
worthy  of  the  favors  of  his  master,  determined  to
enter  on  a  new  campaign,  and  sailed  from  Santo
Domingo  in  October,  Kisi;,  with  a  single  vessel  and
a  crew  of  180  men.  The  vessel  probably  perished.
as  nothing  further  was  heard  of  it.

GRANGER,  Daniel  Tristram,  lawyer,  b.  in
Saco,  Me.,  18  July,  1807;  d.  in  Rastport,  8?  I).-. -..
1854. He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1888,  his

Krt  in  the  commencement  being  an  oration  in
ench,  then  first  introduced  among  the  exercises.
He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Judge  Kth<-r  Shep-
ley,  was  admitted to  the bar  in  1H29,  and  began

5 ■notice  in  NewfieKL  In  July.  1*W,  he  movedto
Cast  port,  and  became  a  partner  of  Frederic  Bobbs,
and  in  1887  he  assumed  the  management  of  the
whole  of  the  extensive  business  of  the  firm.  In
lNo |  he  was  appointed  a  judge  on  the  supreme
bench  of  Maine,  but  declined  the  appointment  bt-
caiise  (,f  failing  health.  He  was  distinguished
rhout  the  state  for  his  profound  legal  learn-
-  sagacity  as  a  counsellor,  the  extreme  care
with  which  his  cases  were  prepared,  and  the  fluency
ami  earnestness  with  which  tliev  wen  presented,

88  LNGER,  Gideon,  statesman.  i>.  in  SufReld,

Conn.,  lit  July.  1?»'>?:  d.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  V..  81
D 1888. He  was  graduated  at Vale  in l?*',.
became  a  lawyer,  ami  served for  several  years  in
VOL. II. — 15


the legislature of Connecticut,  where  he  took  a

leading  part  in  the  establishment  of  the  school
fund,  of  which  he  has  sometime*  been  called  the
father, lb- became pc  J <>f the

United  States  in  1*01.  and  held  that  oflice  for
thirteen  years,  discharging  it*  arduous  duties  dur-
ing tile Whole of

Mr.Jeftnon'sand

during  a  large
part  of  Mr.  Madi-
son's administ  ra-
tion. On  leaving
Washington,  in
1814,  be  •
lished  himself  at
Canandaigua,  N.
V..  and  |  few
yean  afterward
ix-canie  a  iiiciiiImt
of  the  New  Vork
senate.  He  was
conspicuous  for
his  advocacy  of  tin-
great  system  of
internal  improve-
ment-, with  which
the  name  of  his
illustrious  friend,
D.-Witt  Clinton,  is
identified.  In  1*21  failing  health  compelled  him  to
withdraw  from  public  service.  He  delivered  a  4th  of
July  oration  at  Sufl'uld  in  17!>7,  which  is  in  print,
and  his  "  Political  Kssays,"  under  the  signature  of
Algernon  Sidney  and  Kpaminondas,  were  published
in  pamphlet-form.— I  lis  son.  Francis  statesman,  b.
inSullleld.  Conn.,  1  Dec.,  1T!>2  :  d.  in  Canandaigua.
N.  V.,  28  Aug.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1811,  was  educated  as  a  lawyer,  and,  on  his  father's
removal  to  Canandaigua  in  1814,  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Ontario  bar.  For  many  vears  he  repre-
sented Ontario  county  in  the  legislature  of  New
York,  and  was  twice  an  unsuccessful  candidate
of  his  party  for  governor,  being  defeated  by  a
small  Democratic  majority.  In  183(5  he  was  the
candidate  of  the  National  Republicans,  or  Whigs,
for  vice-president  of  the  I'nited  States,  on  the
ticket  with  William  H.  Harrison.  Two  yean  after
ward  he  was  elected  to  congress.  On  the  acces-
sion of  Gen.  Harrison  to  the  presidency  in  1841,
Mr.  Granger  was
called  to  a  place
in  the  cabinet,  and
discharged  the  du-
ties of  postmas-
ter-general with
efficiency  until
the  dissolution  of
the  cabinet  under
President  Tyler.
He  deelined  the
off.  r  of  a  foreign
mission,  and  was

once more elected

a  representative  in
congress,  of  which
he  had  been  a
■Manner  for  sever-
al pn-\  ions  terms.
At  the  close  of
the  87Kb  congress  he  declined  re-election,  and  re-
tired to  private  life.  But  he  still  occasionally
attended  meetings  of  his  old  Whig  friends,  and
his  silver-gray  hair  gave  the  name  to  a  party  that
originated  in  a  convention  of  which  he  was  presi-
dent. He was  also,  by  ap|x>intinent of  the  gov-


^j^r*0


Tor,


grangf.r


GRANJA


HBOTOf  N'W  York,  h  IMBbar  of  the  peace  oon*
rentton  In  Waehingtoii  in  February,  1k»u.  He
was  a  nan  <»f  Kr,>i,t  Intelligence,  of  quick  wit,  of

warm  In-art.  of  popular  manners,  of  inqiosing  ap-
pearance, and  of  impressive  tpoeoh,  singularly
fiai'pv  in  tcii)|H-raiiu-nt.  ami  making  everybody
happv  annmd  him.  Webster  ami  Clay.  I'r.-ston
md  Crittenden,  Edward  Brerett  and  Abbott  Law-
rence, and  man;  others  of  all  sections  ami  partial

wen-  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  him. Be  married

in  |si:  Cornelia  Etataon  Van  Banawlawr,  of  I'tica.
N.  V..  who  di«-<l  in  1*2:1.  leaving  two  children,  one
of  whom  became  the  wife  of  the  late  John  Eliot
Thayer,  <>f  Boston,  and  is  now  Mrs.  Robert  C.
Winthrop.  The  other  was  Gideon  Granger,  a
graduate  of  Yale  in  1843,  educated  to  the  law,
who  died  at  Canandaigna  five  days  after  his  father,
:i  Sept,  1N08.— Amos  Phelps,  cousin  of  Francis,
politician,  b.  in  Suffield,  Conn.,  8  June,  1789;  d.
in  Syracuse.  N.  Y.,  20  Aug.,  1800,  settled  in  Man-
lios,  Onondaga  w..  X.  Y.,  in  1811,  and  engaged
in  mercantile  business.  He  raised  and  command-
ed a  company  of  militia  that  served  at  Sackett's
Marlx.r  in  the  war  of  1812-15.  He  removed  to
Syracuse  in  1H20,  and  acquired  a  fortune  through
real-estate  investments.  He  was  chairman  of  the
Whig  delegation  from  New  York  in  the  National
convent  inn  of  1852  that  nominated  Winfield  Scott
for  the  presidency.  In  the  Auburn  convention  of
1858  he  wrote  and  offered  the  resolutions  which,  it
is  claimed,  originated  the  Republican  party.  He
was  elected  to  congress  in  1854  and  in  1850.

GRANGER,  Gordon,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
in  1821 ;  d.  in  Santa  Pe,  New  Mexico,  10  Jan.,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1845,  and  took  part  in  the  principal
battles  "of  the  Mexican  war,  being  brevetted  1st
lieutenant  and  captain  for  bravery  at  Contreras
and  Churubusco  and  at  Chapultepec.  When  the
civil  war  began  he  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
McClellan  in  Ohio,  then  in  Missouri,  being  en-
gaged at  Dug  Spring,  and  brevetted  major  for
gallant  services  at  Wilson's  Creek,  and  on  2
Sept.,  1861,  became  colonel  of  the  2d  Michigan
cavalry.  On  26  March,  1862,  he  was  made  a
brigadier-general,  and  commanded  the  cavalry  in
the  operations  that  led  to  the  fall  of  Corinth.  He
beet  me  a  major-general  of  volunteers  on  17  Sept.,
1862,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Army  of
Kentucky.  He  conducted  operations  in  Tennessee
in  the  spring  of  1863,  repelled  Forrest's  raid  in
June,  and  took  part  in  Rosecrans's  Tennessee  cam-
paign. He  distinguished  himself  in  the  battle  of
Chickamauga,  was  soon  afterward  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  4th  army  corps,  and  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  operations  around  Chatta-
nooga and  in  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge.  He
commanded  a  division  at  Fort  Gaines,  Ala.,  in
August,  1864,  and  was  in  command  of  the  13th
army  corps  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Morgan,  and
throughout  the  operations  that  resulted  in  the
fall  of  Mobile  in  the  spring  of  1865.  He  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  U.  S.
army,  for  services  at  Chickamauga  and  Chattanoo-
ga, brigadier-general  for  gallantry  in  the  capture
of  Mobile,  and  major-general  for  the  capture  of
Forts  Gaines  and  Morgan.  He  was  mustered  out
of  the  volunteer  service  on  15  Jan.,  1866,  was  pro-
moted colonel  on  28  July,  I860,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  commanded  the  district  of  New  Mexico.

GRANGER,  Robert  Seaman,  soldier,  b.  in
ZaneeviUe,  Ohio,  24  May,  1810.  His  father  was  a
cousin  of  Gideon  Granger,  and  his  mother  a  sister  of
Attorney-Genual  Henry  Stanbery.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  IT.  S.  military  academy  in  1838,  became


a  1st  lieutenant  of  infantry  in  1839,  served  in  the
Florida  war,  and  was  assistant  instructor  of  tactics
at  West  Point  in  1843-'4.  He  served  in  the  war  w  it h
Mexico,  receiving  promotion  as  captain  on  8  Sept.
1S47.  and  afterward  on  the  Texas  frontier.  <  >n  27
April,  1861,  he  was  captured  with  Maj.  Sibley's
command  on  the  coast  of  Texas,  and  put  on  parole
not  to  serve  in  the  field  till  August,  1862,  when  he
was  exchanged.  He  was  made  a  major  on  9
Sept.,  1861,  organized  a  brigade  at  Mansfield,  ( >hio,
was  commandant  at  Louisville.  Ky.,  and  on  1  Sept.,
I860,  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  Ken-
tucky volunteers,  and  commanded  the  Kentucky
state  troops,  being  engaged  at  Shepherdsville,  in
the  skirmish  at  Lebanon  Junction,  and  in  the  action
at  Lawrenceburg,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  colo-
nel, U.  S.  army.  He  received  his  commission  as
brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volunteers  on  20  Oct.,
1802,  and  commanded  a  division,  and  during  1868
the  districts  of  Nashville  and  middle  Tennessee
consecutively.  In  the  first  part  of  1804  he  super-
intended the  defences  and  organized  the  depot  at
Nashville.  He  was  then  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  district  of  northern  Alabama,  and
was  engaged  in  the  capture  of  Gen.  Roddy's  camp,
in  the  expulsion  of  Gen.  Wheeler  from  middle
Tennessee,  and  in  the  defence  against  Gen.  For-
rest's raid.  In  October,  1804,  he  defended  Decatur
against  Gen.  Hood's  army,  made  a  sortie  on  the
Confederate  siege-works,  and  received  the  brevet
of  brigadier-general  for  these  services.  He  com-
manded in  northern  Alabama  in  1805  during  the
occupation.  He  was  brevetted  major-general,  U.
S.  army,  for  services  during  the  rebellion,  was  pro-
moted lieutenant-colonel  on  12  June,  1865,  colonel
on  16  Aug.,  1871,  and  was  placed  on  the  retired
list  on  1  Jan.,  1873.

GRANJA,  Juan  de  la  (gran'-ha),  Spanish  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Balmaseda,  Spain,  about  1785 ;  d.  in
Mexico,  0  March,  1853.  He  was  in  business  in  Mad-
rid from  1800-'14,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  polit-
ical disturbances  in  Spain,  he  resolved  to  settle  in
Mexico.  After  travelling  widely  in  that  country  and
the  United  States,  he  engaged  in  mercantile  business
in  Mexico  in  1820-'0,  but  in  the  latter  year  fixed
his  residence  in  New  York,  where  he  established
the  "  Noticioso  de  Ambos  Mundos,"  probably  the
first  Spanish  newspaper  published  in  this  country.
He  called  the  attention  of  the  Mexican  govern-
ment to  the  proposed  annexation  of  Texas,  and  in
acknowledgment  of  his  services  was  appointed,  in
May,  1838,  vice-consul  of  Mexico  in  New  York.
When  in  1842  the  truth  of  his  assertions  of  an  in-
tended annexation  of  Texas  became  apparent,  the
Mexican  government  declared  him  a  Mexican  citi-
zen, and  promoted  him  to  consul-general  in  New
York.  In  1840  he  resolved  to  share  the  fate  of  his
adopted  country,  and  sailed  for  Mexico,  where  he
was  elected  member  of  congress  for  the  state  of
Vera  Cruz,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  discus-
sion of  the  treaty  of  peace  with  the  United  States
in  1848,  being  one  of  the  few  deputies  who  voted
in  the  negative.  Afterward,  Granja  devoted  him-
self to  his  long-cherished  idea  of  establishing  tele-
graphic communication  in  the  republic,  lo  ob-
tain the  means  for  his  preliminary  studies,  he
embarked  first  in  a  mining  enterprise  in  San
Luis  Potosi,  and  afterward  established  a  hook-
store  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  After  many  failures
he  formed  a  company,  and  on  5  Nov..  1851,  the
first  telegraphic  line  in  Mexico,  from  the  capital
to  Nopalucan,  a  distance  of  forty-five  leagues,  was
opened.  The  line  was  now  rapidly  extended  :  l>ut
Granja  had  overtaxed  his  strength,  and  the  unusual
labor  soon  caused  his  death.


OB  \\T


GRANT


lis


BH  \  N  I  . \nii.  . tthor, b. in Glasgow
land.  8  I J;  .1.  in  Edinburgh,  I

Iut.  Duncan  MauVicar,  «a-  mi  offieer  in  a
Highland  regiment,  bef  Mother  ■  member  of  the
family  <>f  StewarUof  Invernahyle,  Argyllshire.  In
vr  iiml  her  daughter  oame  t<>  this
country,  and  settled  at  Claveraci  on  the  Hudoon,
where  bet  bnohand  whs  stationed  with  h

mcnt.  Here  Anur  was  taught  t<>  read  by  her
mother,  mill learned to epeaJI hutch. In 17»»<>

IfaoVtoar  oonduoted  bit  mutiny  through

tin-  wilih>riu<eB  to  Oswego,  accompanied  by  bit  WIM
mnl  child.  In  tin-  -uiiiiiht  of  17iiv»  her  tal-
traded  the  attention  of  Madame  Schuyler,  with
whom  sin-  Molded  in  Albany  for  several  years.
Soon  after  the  compiest  of  Canada.  MacVicar  re-
signed from  the  army  ami  beOattM  a  settler  in  Ver-
mont, where  lie  received  a  grant  of  laml  from  the
British  government,  to  which  he  made  large  addi-
tion* by  purchase from his  brother  ollici-Pv Hk

enter  of  prosperity  whs  interrupted  by  Impaired

health  anil  low  spirits,  mnl  in  \lt\H  he  decided  to
return  to  his  native  land.  Anne  eflBOBanojeJed  her
parents,  and  at  the  age  of  thirteen  left  the  New
world  never  to  see  it  again.  Unfortunately  for
Mm-Vicar  mnl  "the  young  American  heiress,"  be
took  his  departure  from  the  country  without  dis-
posing of  his  property,  which,  soon  after,  upon  the

beginning  of  the
war,  was  confis-
cated by  the  new
republican  gov-
ernment. He
was,  therefore,
comiM-lled  to  de-
i!  chiefly  upon
us  limited  pay
as  barrack  ■iims-
terof  Fort  Aultu>-
tus  in  Inverness-
shire,  to  which
ixi-ition  he  had
been  appointed  in
177:!.  and  his
daughter  was  no
longer  looked  up-
on as  an  beireaa.
Her  residence
there  terminated
in  1779  with  her
marriage  to  the  Rev.  James  Grant,  the  military
chaplain  and  an  accomplished  scholar,  when  they
removed  to  the  parish  of  Laggan.  to  which  he  had
been  appointed.  Her  lines  had  fallen  in  pleasant
places.  In  the  simple  life  of  a  Highland  parish.
many  happy  vears  passed  in  Laggan.  In  INU
Mr.  Grant  died,  leaving  his  widow  with  eight  chil-
dren dependeni  anon  her  own  exertions.  Her
Kiems.  written  during  a  series  of  years,  were  col-
eted  in  an  octavo  volume  in  lew,  mid  through
tin-  aid  of  the  celebrated  Duchess  of  Oordon  three
thousand  sul>scrilH'rs  were  ohtained.  This  was  fol-
lowed in  1800  by  her  "  Letters  from  the  Moun-
tains" Through  the  efforts  of  Miss  Lowell,  <>f
Boston,  and  a  few  other  ladies,  an  American  edi-
tion of  this  work  was  published  in  that  city,  and
the  profits,  amounting  to  three  hundred  pound-,
remitted  to  Mrs.  Grant  Her  beat-known  work,
m  at  the  age  of  fifty-two,  and  issued  in  Lon-
don in  1808,  is  entitled  "Memoir*  <>f  an  Ameri-
can Lady."  It  is  a  charming  picture  of  New  York
colonial  life,  and  one  that  was  greatly  admired  by
Sir  Walter  Scot t  and  Robert  Sonthey, who  said  tin
iptionof  the  breaking  up  of  the  ice  in  the  upper
Hudson  was  "quite Homeric." A  second  edition


£^T?Vt-- /J-TfcJUv/C^


of  the  memoir  of Mr>.  Schuyler  appear«-d  in  1809,

and  was  reprinted  the  mm*  year  in  Boetoa  ami

"  her  editions  were  leaned  in  the  hit-
ter city  in  ls:!'i  and  1846,  while  a  third  edition  was
published  in  London  in  1*17.  Tin-  previous  Ameri-
can editions  !>eing  out  of  print,  another  ■pnonul
in  in7»5.  aooompanied  by  a  fine  ■teal  portrait  of

Grant,  and  a  memoir  written  by  her  godooa,
the  senior  editor  of  this  work,  to  whom  she  gave
her  husband's  name.  Mrs.  Grant  removed  in  1*10
from  Stirling,  where  she  had  resided  since  her
bneband'i  death,  to  Edinburgh,  which  continued
to  l>e  her  home  for  twenty-eight  year-.  The
following  she  published  "  Essays  on  the  Superatl-
lions  of  the  Highlanders."  a  work  full  of  enthu-
siasm for  the  people  among  whom  she  so  long  re-
sided. Si  conspicuous  w„s  her  pre-eminence  in
her  Ix-autiful  translations  of  Highland  poetry  and
her  thorough  knowledge  of  the  people,  that  the
earlier  volumes  of  the  Waverley  novels  were  fre-
quently attributed  to  her  pen.  ••  Eighteen  Hun-
dred and  Thirteen,"  a  metrical  poem,  appeared  in
181  L  followed  by  her  last  literary  production,  en-
titled "  Popular  Models  and  Impressive  Warnings
for  the  .Sons  and  Daughters  of  Industry."  which
was  published  in  I H 1  .">.  During  the  interval  of
twenty-three  years  between  the  appearance  <>f  her
last  volume  and  her  death.  Mrs.  Grant's  literary
lalxirs  were  no  longer  necessary  for  her  support,  as
she  was  in  n-ccipt  of  a  pension  of  £100  from  the
British  government,  in  consideration  of  her  lit-
erary talents,  which,  with  the  profits  of  her  writ-
ings, the  emolument  from  her  pupils,  ami  several
legacies  from  friends,  rendered  her  life  free  from
pecuniary  cares.  Among  the  latter  was  one  of
$5,000,  as  a  mark  of  affectionate  veneration  for
her  character,  from  .John  Lowell,  Jr.,  of  Boston,  who
became  acquainted  with  Mrs.  (irant  during  a  resi-
dence of  several  years  in  Edinburgh.  Her  house  in
Manor  place  was  frequented  bv  Scott.  Francis  Jef-
frey. Henry  Mackenzie,  and  other  magnates  of  the
Scottish  literary  world;  and  few  Americans  of  dis-
tinction visited  Edinburgh  without  being  wel-
comed by  Mrs. Grant,  usually  designated  "of  Lag-
gan," to  distinguish  her  from  her  friend  and  con-
teiii|K>rary.  Mrs.  Grant  of  Carron.  To  the  closing
year  of  her  long  life  ■heoontinoed  to  oorreaponH
with  Mrs.  Alexander  Hamilton  and  many  other
American  friends.  She  was  buried  beneath  the
shadows  of  the  stately  castle  of  Edinburgh,  and
near  her  resting-place,  in  what  is  known  as  the
Auld  West  Kirk,  is  the  grave  of  Thomas  De
QuinoeT.  Her  letters,  with  a  memoir  by  her  only
son,  John  Peter  Grant,  appeared  in  :i  role.  (Lon-
don, 1844:  revised  edition.  1846  mid  1858),  Mr.
Grant  died  in  1870,  leaving  a  widow  and  four  chil-
dren, two  of  whom  are  sons,  in  the  service  of  the
British  government.  The  accompanying  portrait
is  copied  from  a  miniature  made  at  the  age  of
threescore  and  ten.  while  an  earlier  one,  jtaintcd
In  Sir  John  Watson  Gordon  for  Mrs.  Douglas
Cruger,  Of  New  York,  was  by  her  heirs  presented
in  1*7*1  to  her  daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  John  1*.
(irant.  of  Edinburgh.  Boa  "The  Boetsand  Poetry
of  Scotland"  (New  York.  Lfl

(•RANT,  Asahel,  missionary,  b. m  Marshall,
Allegheny  <o.,  N.  v..  17  Aug..  iso7:  d.  in  Mosul.

Asiatic  Turkey,  25  April.  1844.  Be  studied  medi-
cine, and  had  acipiired  a  large  practice  in  I'tha,
N.  V..  when,  in  1884  his  attention  was  directed  to
missionary  work.  The  field  of  <  >roomiah,  a  dis-
trict in  Bersia  along  the  Turkish  frontier,  was  se-
lected by  him,  and  hi  May,  isi5,  he  awed  from
Boston,  leaching  his  new  home  in  October.  Dr.
Grant's  character  as  a  physician  secured  him  the


roe


GRANT


GRANT


favor  of  the  Persian  governor,  and  tin-  Xestorian
bbhopf  ami  pri.--ts  gave  bin  ■  hearty  welcome.

For  the  years  he  worked  with  gnat  assiduity
MMMf  this  reiiuiaiit  <>f  the  once  great  Nestorian
church.  Schools  were  est  abb-hed  both  for  hoys  and
uirk  ami  great  good  was  wrought  among  those
who  OMM  iiiuler  hi*  influeiiee.  His  wife's  death
and  his  own  falling  health  led  him  to  return  to  the
United  States,  but  receiving  the  appointment  of
inisMonnrv  to  those  Nestorians  who  lived  in  the
rugged  hilU  of  Koordistan.  known  as  the  ••  Wal-
deneM  of  the  Beet—  the  Protestants  of  Asia,"  he
■gain  went  to  Persia  a  year  later,  and  opened  a
school.  Ascertaining  that  an  alliance  had  been
made  tending  toward  the  destruction  of  the  in-
dependence of  this  people,  he  endeavored  to  per-
Buade  them  to  make  terms  with  the  Turks;  but
this  they  were  unwilling  to  do,  and  in  consequence
a  massacre  occurred  in  1843,  in  which  10,000  were
killed.  The  missionaries  were  compelled  to  fly  for
their  lives,  and  Dr.  Grant,  settling  for  awhile  in
Mosul,  devoted  all  his  energies  to  the  work  of  re-
lieving the  wretched  fugitives  who  crowded  the
citv.  He  published  "  The  Nestorians,  or  the  Lost
Tribes,  with  Sketches  of  Travel  in  Assyria,  Ar-
menia, Media,  and  Mesopotamia"  (London  and
Boston,  1H41).  See  "Memoir  of  Asahel  Grant,
M.  D."  (New  York,  184?)  and  "Grant  and  the  Nes-
torians" (Boston,  1853).

G KANT,  Clement  Rollins,  artist,  b.  in  Free-
port.  Me.,  10  July,  1849.  At  the  age  of  eighteen
he  went  to  Europe,  spending  some  months  in  study
and  observation  in  Great  Britain  and  France,  and
on  his  return  established  a  studio  in  Boston  and
became  a  member  of  the  Boston  art  club.  His
specialty  is  landscape  and  portrait  painting.
Among  his  pictures  are  "Amy  Wentworth,"  an
illustration  of  Whittier's  poem.  "  Marguerita" ;  "  O
for  the  Touch  of  a  Vanished  Hand";  "Delusions
of  the  Past,  1692,"  which  was  exhibited  in  1878;
"  A  Normandy  Fisherwoman  " ;  and  "  CEnone."

GRANT,  George  Monroe,  Canadian  educator,
b.  in  Stellarton,  Pictou  co.,  Nova  Scotia,  22  Dec,
1835.  He  was  educated  at  the  West  River  semi-
nary of  the  Presbyterian  church,  winning  a  bur-
sary that  entitled  him  to  a  theological  course  in
the  University  of  Glasgow.  On  his  return  to  Nova
Scotia  he  became  a  missionary  in  the  maritime
provinces,  and  in  May,  1863,  pastor  of  St.  Mat-
thew's church,  Halifax.  In  1877  he  was  appointed
principal  of  Queen's  university,  Kingston.  In  the
summer  of  1872  he  accompanied  Sandford  Flem-
ing across  the  continent,  and  published  "  Ocean  to
Ocean." He  is  editor  of  "  Picturesque  Canada."

GRANT,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Ballendalloch,
Scotland,  in  1720;  d.  13  April,  1806.  He  was  ap-
pointed major  of  the  Montgomerie  Highlanders  in
1757,  and  in  September,  1758,  marched  with  800
men  to  reconnoitre  Fort  Duquesne.  Dividing  his
forces  in  order  to  tempt  the  enemy  into  an  am-
buscade, he  was  himself  surprised  and  defeated,
with  a  loss  of  295  killed  and  prisoners.  He  and
nineteen  officers  were  captured.  He  was  appointed
governor  of  East  Florida  in  1760,  and  sent  by  Gen.
Amherst  early  in  1761,  with  1,300  regulars,  to  re-
duce the  mountaineers  in  Carolina.  In  May,  1761,
he  led  the  expedition  against  the  Cherokees,  de-
feating them  in  a  severe  battle  at  Etchoe.  In  the
battle  of  Long  Island,  August,  1776,  he  com-
manded the  4th  and  6th  brigades  of  the  British
army.  In  December,  1776,  Lord  Howe  gave  him
the  command  in  New  Jersey  at  a  most  critical
period;  the  American  victories  of  Trenton  and
Princeton  immediately  followed.  In  1777  he  WM
made  a  major-general,  led  the  1st  and  2d  brigades


'P^eu.is/'


at  Brandy  wine,  and  at  Gcrimintown,  4  Oct.,  forced
the  left  of  the  American  army  to  give  way.  He
defeated  Lee  at  Monmouth,  and  on  4  Nov.  sailed
in  command  of  the  troops  sent  against  the  French
West  Indies.  In  December  he  took  St.  Lucia,  and
in  1791  was  made  governor  of  Stirling  castle,  a
lieutenant-general  in  November,  17*2,  and  a  gen-
eral in  May,  1796.

GKANT,  Sir  James  Alexander,  Canadian  phy-
sician, b.  in  Inverness-shire,  Scotland,  8  Aug..  1829.
His  father  was  Dr.  James  Grant,  of  Edinburgh,  and
his  paternal  grandfather  was  a  writer  on  archaeo-
logical subjects.
When  Dr.  Grant
was  one  year  old
his  parents  re-
moved to  Canada.
He  was  educated
at  Queen's  college,
Kingston,  and  at
McGill,  Montreal,
where  he  took  his
medical  degree  in
1854.  He  settled
in  Ottawa,  and  has
ever  since  enjoyed
a  lucrative  prac-
tice. He  has  also
been  physician  to
all  the  governors-
general  of  Canada
from  the  time  of
Lord  Monk  to  the  present  (1888).  In  1872  he  was
elected  president  of  the  Canadian  medical  associa-
tion, and  shortly  afterward  of  the  St.  Andrew  so-
ciety of  Ottawa,  and  in  1885  was  elected  an  honor-
ary member  of  the  British  medical  association.  In
1867,  as  a  Conservative,  he  was  elected  as  the  first
member  from  the  county  of  Russell  to  the  Domin-
ion parliament,  was  re-elected  in  1872.  but  was  de-
feated in  1874.  While  in  parliament,  Dr.  Grant  in-
troduced the  original  Pacific  railway  bill,  and  was
the  first  to  advocate  the  admission  of  the  North-
west territory  into  the  Dominion.  He  was  knighted
in  1887.  In  addition  to  contributions  to  medical
periodicals,  he  has  published  papers  on  geology.

GRANT,  Lewis  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Vermont  about
1820.  He  was  commissioned  major  of  the  5th
Vermont  infantry.  15  Aug.,  1861 ;  lieutenant-colo-
nel, 25  Sept.,  1861 ;  and  colonel.  16  Sept..  1862.
He  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of  the  2d  division,
6th  corps,  at  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville,  and
was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
27  April,  1864.  He  was  brevetted  major-general
of  volunteers  on  19  Oct.,  1864,  and  mustered  out  of
service,  24  Aug.,  1865.

GRANT,  Robert,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24
Jan.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1873,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1879.  Subsequent-
ly he  entered  on  the  practice  of  law  in  Boston.
Mr.  Grant  has  written  some  clever  verse  and  sev-
eral novels.  His  published  works  include  "The
Little  Tin  Gods  on  Wheels,"  a  satire  in  verse
(Cambridge,  1879);  "The  Confessions  of  a  Frivo-
lous Girl"  (Boston,  1880);  "The  Lambs"  (1888);
"  Yankee  Doodle,"  a  +  B  K  poem  delivered  at  Har-
vard (1883) ;  "  An  Average  Man,"  contributed  origi-
nally as  a  serial  to  the  "  Century  "  magazine  (1883);
"The  King's  Men,"  with  others  (New  York,  1884);
"  The  Knave  of  Hearts  "  (Boston.  1885) :"  A  Ro-
mantic Young  Lady"  (1886);  "Face  to  Face"
(New  York,  1886);  and  a  poem  on  the  250th  anni-
versary of  the  Boston  Latin  -  school,  which  was
published  with  other  exercises  under  the  title  of
"The  Oldest  School  in  America"  (Boston,  1885).


OR  wr


OB  wr


100


BEAJVT,  i  tarmi  v.  I'm  <>f

t hi-  I  mi  Point  Pleasant.  Clermonl

;  <1.  on  Mount
or. MM Saratoga, N. V.. 2'.i -1 1 1

ipanying  riewof  Orant'tmrthplaot.) Be

WM  <>f  Scottish  ancestry,  hut Mis  family  had  1n-.ii


American  in  all  its  branches  for  eight  generations.
il<-  was  a  descendant  of  Matthew  (J rant,  who  ar-
rived at  Dorchester,  Mass.,  in  May.  1030.  His
father  was  Jesse  R.  Grant,  and  his  mother  Hannah
Simpson.  They  were  married  in  June,  1821,  in
Clermont  countv,  Ohio.  I'lysses.  the  oldest  of  six
children,  spent  his  boyhood  in  assisting  his  father
on  the  farm,  a  work  more  congenial  to  his  tastes
than  working  in  the  tannery  of  which  his  father
was  proprietor.  He  attended  the  village  school,
and  in  the  spring  of  1839  was  appointed  to  a  ca-
detship  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy  by  Thomas
L.  Hamer.  .M.  C.  The  name  given  him  at  birth
was  Hiram  Ulysses,  but  he  was  always  called  by
his  miildle  name.  Mr.  Hamer.  thinking  this  his
first  name,  and  that  his  middle  name  was  probably
that  of  his  mother's  familv.  inserted  in  the  official
appointment  the  name  of  Dhwi&  The  officials
at  West  Point  were  notified  by  Cadet  Grant  of  the
error,  but  they  did  not  feel  authorized  to  correct
it.  and  it  was  acquiesced  in  and  became  the  name
by  which  he  was  always  known.  As  a  student.
Grant  showed  the  greatest  proficiency  in  mathe-
matics, but  he  gained  a  fair  standing  in  most  of
his  studies,  and  at  cavalry-drill  he  proved  himself
the  l>est  horseman  in  his  class,  and  afterward  was
one  of  the  l>est  in  the  army.  He  MM  graduated  in
1843,  standing  twenty-first  in  a  class  of  thirty-nine.
He  was  commissioned,  on  graduation,  as  a  brevet
2d  lieutenant,  and  was  attached  to  the  4th  infantry
and  assigned  to  duty  at  Jefferson  barracks,  near
St.  Ixmis.  (See  portrait  taken  at  this  period  on
page  711.)  In  May.  1844,  he  accompanied  his  regi-
ment to  ( 'amp  Salubrity.  Ivouisiana.  He  was  com-
missioned Id  lieutenant  inScptcml>er,  1K45.  That
mouth  he  went  with  his  regiment  to  Corpus  Christi
(now  in  Texas)  to  join  the  army  of  occupation,  un-
der command  of  (ien.  Zachary  Taylor.

He  participated  in  the  battle  "of  Palo  Alto,  8
May,  1840;  and  in  that  of  Resaca  de  la  Pal  ma,  9
May,  he  commanded  his  company.  On  19  Aug.  he
set  out  with  the  army  for  Monterey.  Mexico,  which
was  reached  on  19  Sept.  He  had  DMA  ■ppointod
regimental  quartermaster  of  the  4th  infantry,  and
was  placed  in  charge  of  the  wagons  and  j»aek-train
on  this  march.  Daring  the  as-anlt  of  the  'Jl-t  on
Black  Fort,  one  of  the  works  protecting  Monterey,
instead  of  remaining  in  camp  in  charge  of  tM
quartermaster's  stores,  he  charged  with  his  regi-
ment, on  horseback.  I>cing  almost  the  only  •
in  the  regiment  that  was  mounted.  The  adjutant
was  killed  in  the  charge,  and  Lieut.  (J rant  was
designated  to  take  his  place. On  the  '23d.  when


the  troops  had  gained  a  pMtion  in  the  city  of  Mon-
lunteer  was  called  for,  to  make  his  way
to  the  rear  under  a  heavy  fire,  to  order  up  ammu-
nition, Lieut.  Grant  volunteered,  and  ran  the  gant*
let  in  safety,  accomplishing  his  mission.  Garla
brigade,  to  which  the  4th  infantry  btioagod,  wan
transferred  from  Twiggs's  to  Worth's  division,  and
onhrnl  back  to  the  mouth  of  the  RJo  Grande,
where  it  embarked  for  Vera  Cruz,  to  join  the  army
under  (ien.  Scott.  It  landed  near  that  cit\on9
March,  1847,  and  the  investment  KM  immediately
begun.  Lieut.  Grant  served  with  his  regiment
during  the  siege,  until  the  capture  of  the  pj
March,  1S47.  ( >n  I'.i  April  his  division  DMJM  Mi
march  toward  the  city  of  Mexico;  (,nd  he  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Cerro  (Jordo.  17  and  1*  April.
The  truope  entered  Pueblo  on  IS  May.  and  Lieut.
Grant  was  there  ordered  to  take  charge  of  a  large
train  of  wagons,  with  an  escort  of  fewer  than  a
thousand  men,  to  obtain  forage.  He  made  a  two
days'  march,  and  procured  the  necessary  supplies.
He  participated  in  t he  capture  of  San  Antonio  and
the  battle  of  Churubusco,  20  Aug.,  and  the  battle
of  Molino  del  Rev,  8  Sept.,  1847.  In  the  latter  en-
gagement he  was  with  the  first  trooj»s  that  en-
tered the  mills.  Soring  some  of  the  enemy  on  the
top  of  a  building,  he  took  a  few  men,  climbed  to
the  roof,  received  the  surrender  of  six  officers  and
quite  a  number  of  men.  For  this  service  he  was
brevetted  a  1st  lieutenant.  He  was  engaged  in
the  storming  of  Chapultc|>ec  on  13  Sept..  distin-
guished himself  by  conspicuous  services,  was  highly
commended  in  the  reports  of  his  superior  officer.*.
and  brevetted  captain.  While  the  troops  were  ad-
vancing against  the  city  of  Mexico  on  the  14th.
observing  a  church  from  the  top  of  which  he  be-
lic\ed  the  enemy  could  be  dislodged  from  a  defen-
sive work,  he  called  for  volunteers,  and  with  twelve
men  of  the  4th  infantry,  who  were  afterward  joined
by  a  detachment  of  artillery,  he  made  a  flank  move-
ment, gained  the  church,  mounted  a  howitzer  in
the  belfry,  using  it  with  such  effect  tl.at  Gen.
Worth  sent  for  him  and  complimented  him  in
person.  He  entered  the  city  of  Mexico  with  the
army,  14  Sept.,  and  a  few  davs  afterward  was  pro-
moted to  be  1st  lieutenant,  tie  remained  with  the
army  in  the  city  of  Mexico  till  the  withdrawal  of
the  troops  in  the  summer  of  1848,  and  then  accom-
panied his  regiment  to Pascagoula,  Miss.  He  there
obtained  leave  of  ibMN  and  went  to  St.  Louis,
where,  on  22  Aug.,  1848,  he  married  Miss  Julia  B.
Dent,  sister  of  one  of  his  classmates.  He  was  soon
afterward  ordered  to  Sackett's  Harbor,  X.  V.,  and
in  April  following  to  Detroit,  Mich.  In  the  spring
of  1851  he  was  again  transferred  to  Sackett's  Har-
Iwir.  and  on  5  July.  isr>:2.  he  sailed  from  New  York
with  his  regiment  for  California  via  the  Isthmus
of  Panama.  While  the  troops  were  crossing  the
isthmus,  cholera  carried  off  one  seventh  of  the
command.  Lieut.  Grant  was  left  l>ehind  in  charge
of  the  sick,  on  Chagres  river,  and  displayed  great
skill  ami  devotion  in  caring  for  them  and  supply-
ing means  of  transj>ortation.  On  arriving  in  Cali-
fornia, he  sjient  a  few  weeks  with  his  regiment  at
Benicia  hirracks.  and  then  accompanied  it  t<>  Fori
Vancouver.  Oregon.  On  5  Aug.,  18o3,  he  was  pro-
moted to  the  captaincy  of  a  company  stationed  at
HuinlNildt  bay,  Cal..  and  the  next  SeptemU'r  hu
went  to  that  |K>st.

II.-  resigned  his  commission,  31  July.  18m\  and
settled  on  a  small  farm  near  St.  Louis.  He  was
OngJkged  in  fanning  and  in  the  real-estate  business
in  St.  Look  until  May.  istkl.  when  he  removed  to
(ialena.  III.,  and  there  become  a  clerk  in  the  hard-
ware and  leather  store  of  his  father,  who  in  a  letter


710


GRANT


GRANT


gg  <;.n.  .las.  Grant  Wil-..ii.  dated  20  Miircli.  1806,
•  After  Uljmm'i  funning  and  real-estate
,\]Miiin.iit-  in  St.  "Louis  county,  Mo.  failed  to  !>c
sclf--upporting.  hfl  MUM  to  DM  at  this  place  [Cov-
ington. Ky.]  for  ad  \  ice  and  assistance.  I  l«HI«d
him  to  Simpson,  my  next  oldest  son,  who  had  charge
of  my  Galena  business,  and  who  was  staying  with
0M  on  account  of  ill  health.  Simpson  sent  liim
to  the  (ialena  store,  to  stay  until  something  else
might  turn  up  in  his  favor,  and  told  him  he  must
Confine  his  wants  within  $800  avear.  That  if  that
would  not  rapport  him  he  must  draw  what  it  lacked
from  the  rent  of  his  house  and  the  hire  of  his  06-
groM  in  St.  Louis.  He  went  to  Galena  in  April,
18(H),  about  one  year  before  the  capture  of  Sum-
ter ;  then  he  left."  That  amount  would  have  sup-
ported his  family  then,  but  he  owed  debts  at  bt.
Louis,  and  did  driiw  $1,500  in  the  year,  but  he  paid
back  the  balance  after  he  went  into  the  army."
When  news  was  received  of  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  a  public  mooting  was  called  in  Galena,
ami  ('apt.  Grant  was  chosen  to  preside.  He  took  a
pronounced  stand  in  favor  of  the  Union  cause  and
a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.  A  company  of
volunteers  was  raised,  which  he  drilled  and  accom-
panied to  Springfield,  111.  Gov,  Yates,  of  that  state,
employed  Capt.  Grant  in  the  adjutant-general's  de-

fartment,  and  appointed  him  mustering  officer.
Ie  offered  his  services  to  the  National  government
in  a  letter  written  on  24  May,  1861,  but  no  answer
was  ever  made  to  it.  On  17  June  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  21st  Illinois  regiment  of  infantry,
which  had  been  mustered  in  at  Mattoon.  The  regi-
ment was  transferred  to  Springfield,  and  on  3  July
he  went  with  it  from  that  place  to  Palmyra,  Mo.,
thence  to  Salt  River,  where  it  guarded  a  portion  of
the  Hannibal  and  St.  Joseph  railroad,  and  thence
to  the  town  of  Mexico,  where  Gen.  Pope  was  sta-
tioned as  commander  of  the  military  district.  On
31  July,  Grant  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a
sub-distric1  under  Gen.  Pope,  his  troops  consisting
of  three  regiments  of  infantry  and  a  section  of  ar-
tillery. He  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  7  Aug.,  the  commission  being  dated
back  to  17  May,  and  was  ordered  to  Ironton,  Mo.,
to  take  command  of  a  district  in  that  part  of  the
state,  where  he  arrived  8  Aug.  Ten  days  afterward
he  was  ordered  to  St.  Louis,  and  thence  to  Jeffer-
son City.  Light  days  later  he  was  directed  to  re-
port in  person  at  St.  Louis,  and  on  reaching  there
found  that  he  had  been  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  district  of  southeastern  Missouri,  embracing
all  the  territory  in  Missouri  south  of  St.  Louis,  and
all  southern  Illinois,  with  permanent  headquarters
at  Cairo.  He  established  temporary  headquarters
at  Cape  Girardeau,  on  the  Mississippi,  to  superin-
tend the  fitting  out  of  an  expedition  against  the
Confederate  Col.  Jeff.  Thompson,  and  arrived  at
Cairo  on  4  Sept.  The  next  day  he  received  informa-
tion that  the  enemy  was  about  to  seize  Paducah,
Ky.,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tennessee,  having  already
occupied  Columbus  and  Hickman.  He  moved
that  night  with  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  one
battery  of  artillery,  and  occupied  Paducah  the
next  morning.  He  issued  a  proclamation  to  the
^citizens,  saying,  "  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  opin-
ions, and  shall  deal  only  with  armed  rebellion  and
it  -aiders  and  abettors."  Kentucky  had  declared
an  intention  to  remain  neutral  in  tHe  war,  and  this
prompt  occupation  of  Paducah  prevented  the  Con-
federates from  getting  a  foothold  there,  and  did
much  toward  retaining  the  state  within  the  Union
lines,  (icn.  Sterling  Price  was  advancing  into  Mis-
souri with  a  Confederate  force,  and  Grant  was  or-
dered, 1  Nov.,  to  make  a  demonstration  on  both


sides  of  the  jjffi— IraHppi,  to  prevent  troops  from
being  sent  from  Columbus  and  other  ]<oints  to  re-
enforce  Price.  ( >n  6  Nov.,  Grant  moved  down  the
river  with  altout  :i,000  men  on  steamboats,  accom-
panied by  two  gun-boats,  debarked  a  few  men  on
the  Kentucky  side  that  night,  and  learned  that
troops  of  the  enemy  were  being  ferried  acros>  fan  '
Columbus  to  re-enforce  those  on  the  west  side  of
the  river.  A  Confederate  camp  was  established
opposite,  at  Belmont,  and  Grant  decided  to  attack
it.  On  the  morning  of  the  7th  he  debarked  his
troops  three  miles  above  the  place,  left  a  strong
guard  near  the  landing,  and  marched  to  the  attack
with  about  2,500  men.  A  spirited  engagement  took
place,  in  which  Grant's  horse  was  shot  under  him.
The  enemy  was  routed  and  his  camp  captured,  but
he  soon  rallied,  and  was  re-enforced  by  detachments
ferried  across  from  Columbus,  and  Grant  fell  back
and  re-embarked.  He  got  his  men  safely  on  the
steamboats,  and  was  himself  the  last  one  in  the
command  to  step  aboard.  He  captured  175  prison-
ers and  two  guns,  and  spiked  four  other  pieces,  and
lost  485  men.  The  Confederates  lost  642.  The
opposing  troops,  including  re-enforcemente  sent
from  Columbus,  numbered  about  7,000.

In  January,  1862,  he  made  a  reconnoissance  in
force  toward  Columbus.  He  was  struck  with  the
advantage  possessed  by  the  enemy  in  holding  Port
Henry  on  Tennessee  river,  and  Port  Donelson  on
the  Cumberland,  and  conceived  the  idea  of  captur-
ing them  before  they  could  be  further  strengthened,
by  means  of  an  expedition  composed  of  the  troops
under  his  command,  assisted  by  the  gun-boats.  He
went  to  St.  Louis  and  submitted  his  proposition  to
the  department  commander,  Gen.  Halleck,  but  was
listened  to  with  impatience,  and  his  views  were  not
approved.  On  28  Jan.  he  telegraphed  Halleck.  re-
newing the  suggestion,  and  saving,  "  If  permitted,
I  could  take  and  hold  Fort  Henry  on  the  Tennes-
see." Com.  Foote,  commanding  the  gun-boats,  sent
a  similar  despatch.  On  the  29th  Grant  also  wrote,
urging  the  expedition.  Assent  was  obtained  on  1
Fet>.,  and  the  expedition  moved  the  next  day.  Gen.
Tilghman  surrendered  Fort  Henry  on  the  6th,  after
a  bombardment  by  the  gun-boats.  He  with  his  staff
and  ninety  men  were  captured,  but  most  of  the  gar-
rison escaped  and  joined  the  troops  in  Fort  Donel-
son, eleven  miles  distant,  commanded  by  Gen.
Floyd,  who,  after  this  re-enforcement,  had  about
21,000  men.  Grant  at  once  prepared  to  invest
Donelson,  and  on  the  12th  began  the  siege  with  a
command  numbering  15,000,  which  was  increased
on  the  14th  to  27,000;  but  about  5,000  of  these
were  employed  in  guarding  roads  and  captured
places.  His  artillery  consisted  of  eight  light  bat-
teries. The  weather  was  extremely  cold,  the  water
high,  much  rain  and  snow  fell,  and  the  sufferings
of  the  men  were  intense.  The  enemy's  position,
naturally  strong,  had  been  intrenched  and  fortified.
There  was  heavy  fighting  on  three  successive  days.
On  the  15th  the  enemy,  fearing  capture,  made  a
desperate  assault  with  the  intention  of  cutting  his
way  out.  Grant  detected  the  object  of  the  move-
ment, repelled  the  assault,  and  by  a  vigorous  at-
tack secured  so  commanding  a  position  that  l  he
enemy  saw  further  resistance  would  be  useless.
Floyd  turned  over  the  command  to  Pillow,  who  in
turn  resigned  ir  to  Buckner, and  Floyd  and  Pillow
escaped  in  the  night  on  a  steamboat.  Over  o.lMM)
infantry  and  the  greater  portion  of  Forrest's  cav-
alry made  their  escape  at  the  same  time.  On  the
Kith  Buckner  wrote  proposing  that  commissioners
be  appointed  to  arrange  for  terms  of  capitulation.
Grant  replied:  "No  terms  other  than  an  uncon-
ditional and  immediate  surrender  can  be  accepted.


OR  WT


711


I  propose  to  BOW  immediately  ui»m v-ur  works."

.rri~.ii  whs  surrendered  the  mm  day,  un-
conditionally. The  rupture  included
♦k'>  cannon,  ami  17,600 -mall-arms. The  killed  ami

wounded  nuinbared  about  I  aft  loss  was

•J.iMI  in  killed,  wounded,  ami  Driaatng.  Thai  wi-
the first  enpture  of  a  | > r> > 1 1 1 i r i < ■  1 1 1 strategic  point

-iiue  tho  war
began,  and  in-
deed tin-  only
substantial  vie-
t«.ry  thus  far
for'  the
tional  arm*. It

opened  up  two

important  uavi-
gable  rivcrs.and
left  the  enemy
tin  itnag  foot-
hold in  Ken-
tucky or  Ten
nessee.  Grant
was  soon  after-
ward made  a
major  -  general
of  volunteers,
his  eommi>Mi>n
dating  from  Hi
Feb.,  and  his
popularity  throughout  the  country  l>egan  from  that
day.  He  urged  a  prompt  following  up  of  this  vic-
tory, and  set  out  for  Nashville,  28  Feb.,  without
waiting  for  instructions,  but  telegraphing  that  he
should  go  if  he  received  no  orders  to  the  contrary.
For  this,  and  under  the  pretence  that  lit-  had  m>t
forwarded  to  his  sii|>criors  in  command  certain
reports  showing  the  strength  and  positions  of  his
forces,  he  was  deprived  of  his  command,  and  or-
dered to  remain  at  Fort  Henrv.  He  was  not  re-
stored to  command  until  13  March,  when  his  ser-
vices were  again  required  in  view  of  the  enemy's
having  concentrated  a  large  armv  near  Corinth,
Miss,,  and  he  transferred  his  headquarters  to  Sa-
vannah, on  Tennessee  river,  on  the  17th.  lie
found  the  forces  under  his  command,  numbering
about  38,000  men,  encamped  on  lwth  sides  of  the
river,  and  at  once  transferred  them  all  to  the  west
ride  and  concentrated  them  in  the  vicinity  of  Pitts-
burgh Landing.  He  there  selected  a  favorable  posi-
tion, and  put  his  army  in  line,  with  the  right  resting
at  Shilofa  Church,  nearly  three  miles  from  the  river.
I  lew  as  directed  not  to  attack  the  enemy,  but  to  await
the  arrival  of  Gen.  Budl's  army  of*  40.000  men,
which  was  marching  southward  through  Tennessee
to  join  Grant.  On  6  April  the  Confederate  army.
numbering  nearly  50.000  men.  commanded  bv
Ceii.  AlU-rt  S.  Johnston,  made  a  vigorous  attack
at  daylight,  drove  the  National  troops  Iwiek  in
some  confusion,  ami  continued  to  press  the  ad-
vantage gained  during  the  entile  day.  Gen.  John-
ston was  killed  alxuit  one  o'clock,  and  the  com-
mand of  the  Oonfederateo  devolved  upon  Gen.
Beauregard;  .">.00(>  of  Grant's  troops  did  not  ar-
rive on  the  field  during  the  day,  so  that  hi*  com-
mand was  outnumbered,  end  it  required  all  his
efforts  to  hold  his  porition  on  the  river  until  even-
ing. I^ate  in  the  afternoon  the  head  of  BoeU'i
column  crossed  the  river,  but  not  in  time  to  par-
ticipate actively  in  the  fighting,  as  the  enemy's  at-
tacks ha<l  coated. Grant  Bought  ehelter  that  night

in  a  hut  :  but  the  •UTgeona  had  made  an  amputat-
ing hospital  of  it.  and  he  found  the  tight  so  pain-
ful that  he  went  out  into  the  rain-storm  and  si.  p|
under  a  tree.  Me  had  given  orders  for  an  advance
all  along  the  lines  the  next  morning. BueU'ftroofM


had  now  joined  him.  and  the  attack was  pushed

with  man  rigor  that  ti nemj  were  steadily  dr

back,  and  retreated  nineteen  miles  to  Corinth. <  >n
tin*  dav  (i rant's  sword-scabbard  wan  broken  bv  a
bullet.  '  Hie  lorn  in  the  battle  wan  1,984  killed. -
wounded,  2.HH5  missing:  •  he  enetnv

acknowledged  a  I"--  id  1.72*  killed,  H.012  wounded,
and  167  ttuering :  total,  KUtlH);  but  then'  an-  evi-
dences that  it  was  much  greater.  The  National  omV
eers  estimated  the  <  loafeoefate  dead  alone  at  4.<«H».
On  the  nth  tien.  Ilalleck  arrival  at  beadqnarl
ami  took  command  in  person. The!  listed

now  of  the  right  and  left  wings,  centre,  and  re-
serve, commanded  resjH-ctivelv  by  Gena  Thomas,
Pupa,  Huell,  and  McClernand,  numbering  in  all
nearlv  120.000  men.  The  enemy  was  behind  strong
fort incat ions,  and  numbered  over  50,000,  (irant
was  named  second  in  command  of  all  the  tr
but  was  eapeeeaUj  intrusted  with  the  right  wing
ami  reeerva. On  60  April  an  advance  was  begun

against  Corinth,  but  the  enemy  evacuated  the  place
and  retreated,  without  fighting,  on  30  May.  <  >n
21  June,  Grant  moved  his  headquarters  to  Mem-
phis. Gen.  Halleck  was  ap|H)int«sl  gcneral-in-chief
of  all  the  armies,  11  July,  (irant  returned  to  Cor-
inth on  15  July,  and  on  the  1 7th  Halleck  set  out  for
Washington,  leaving  (irant  in  command  of  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee;  and  on  BB  Oat,  he  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the
Tennessee,  including  Cairo,  Forts  Henry  and  Don-
elson,  northern  afteriattppi,  and  PUfUoBB  of  Ken-
tucky and  Tennessee  west  of  Tennessee  river.  He
ordered  a  movement  against  the  enemy  at  luka  to
capture  Price's  force  at  that  place,  and  a  battle  was
fought  on  19  and  20  Sept.  The  plan  promised  suc-
cess, but  the  faults  committed  by  the  officer  com-
manding one  wing  of  the  troops  engaged  permit-
ted the  enemy  to  escape.  The  National  loss  was
730,  that  of  the  Confederates  1,468.  Grant  strength-
ened the  position  around  Corinth,  and  remained
there  about  eight  weeks.  When  the  enemy  after-
ward attacked  it,  3  and  4  Oct.,  they  met  with  a  se-
vere repulse.  Gen.  William  S.  Hosecrans  was  in
immediate  command  of  the  National  troops.  On
the  5th  they  were  struck  while  in  retreat,  and
badly  beaten  in  the  battle  of  the  Hatchie.  The
entire  National  loss  was  2,359.  From  the  best  at-
tainable sources  of  information,  the  Confederates
lost  nearlv  twice  that  number.

After  tlhe  battle  of  Corinth.  Grant  proposed  to
Halleck,  in  the  latter  part  of  October,  a  movement
looking  to  the  capture  of  Yickshurg.  On  8  Nov.
he  left  Jackson.  Tenn..and  made  a  movement  with
30,000  men  against  Grand  Junction,  and  on  the
4th  he  had  seized  this  place  and  La  Grange.  The
force  opposing  him  was  about  equal  to  his  own.  On
the  lean  his  cavalry  occupied  Holly  Springs;  on
1  Dec.  he  advanced  against  the  enemy's  works  on
the  Tallahatchie,  which  were  hastily  evacuated, and

on  the 6th  reached  Oxford.  On  the  nth  he  ordered
Sherman  to  move  down  the  Mississippi  from  Mem-
phi-  to  attack  Yickshurg,  Grant's  column  to  co-
operate with  him  by  land.  On  60  Dec.  the  enemy
captured  Holly  Springs,  which  had  beta  made  a
secondary  base  of  supplies,  and  seized  a  large
amount  of  stores.  Col.  Murphy,  who  surrendered
the  |M.st  without  baring  taken  any  proper  measures

<>f  defence,  was  dJemimed  the  mrvioa.  The  diffi-
culties of  protecting  the  long  line  of  communica-
tion necessary  for  furnishing  supplies,  a-  well  as
Other  considerations,  induced  (irant  to  aliamlon
tlie  land  expedition,  and  take  command  in person

of  the  movement  down  the  Mierierippi  Sherman
had  reached  Milliken's  Iternl.  on  the  west  side  of
the  river,  twenty  miles  above  Vicksburg.  on  the


712


GRANT


GRANT


2  »th,  with  about  32,000  men.  He  crossed  the  riv-
er, eeoended  the  Yazoo  to  a  point  U'low  Haines's
Bluff,  landed  his  totem,  and  BMde  an  assault  upon

tin-  enemy*!  strongly  fortified  |M>sit ion  at  that  place
on  I li«'  99th,  but  ••■  repelled  with  a  loss  of  175
Ulled,  900  wounded,  and  743  missing.  The  enemy
reported  <>3  killed,  134  wounded,  and  10  miming.
Grant's  headquarters  were  established  at  MemphM
on  10  Jan.,  ana  preparations  were  made  for  a  concen-
trated movement  against  Vicksburg.  On  the  29th
he  arrived  at  Young's  Point,  opposite  the  mouth  of
the  Yazoo,  above  Vicksburg,  and  took  command
in  person  of  the  operations  against  that  city,  his
force  numbering  50,000  men.  Admiral  Porter's
co-operating  fleet  was  composed  of  gun-boats  of  all
nlemion  carrying  280  guns  and  800  men.  Three
plans  suggested  themselves  for  reaching  the  high
ground  behind  Vicksburg,  the  only  position  from
which  it  could  be  besieged :  First,  to  march  the
army  down  the  west  bank  of  the  river,  cross  over
below  Vicksburg,  and  co-operate  with  Gen.  Banks,
who  was  in  command  of  an  expedition  ascending
the  river  from  New  Orleans,  with  a  view  to  captur-
ing Port  Hudson  and  opening  up  a  line  for  sup-
plies from  below.  The  nigh  water  and  the  condi-
tion of  the  country  made  this  plan  impracticable
at  that  time.  Second,  to  construct  a  canal  across
the  peninsula  opposite  Vicksburg,  through  which
the  fleet  of  gun-boats  and  transports  could  pass,
and  which  could  be  held  open  as  a  line  of  com-
munication for  supplies.  This  plan  was  favored
at  Washington,  ami  was  put  into  execution  at  once;
but  the  high  water  broke  the  levees,  drowned  out
the  camps,  and  flooded  the  country,  and  after  two
months  of  laborious  effort  Grant  reported  it  im-
practicable. Third,  to  turn  the  Mississippi  from
its  course  by  opening  a  new  channel  via  Lake
Providence  and  through  various  bayous  to  Red
river.  A  force  was  set  to  work  to  develop  this
plan ;  but  the  way  was  tortuous  and  choked  with
timber,  and  by  March  it  was  found  impossible  to
open  a  practicable  channel.  In  the  mean  time  an
expedition  was  sent  to  the  east  side  of  the  river  to
open  a  route  via  \razoo  pass,  the  Tallahatchie,  the
i  alabusha,  and  the  Yazoo  rivers ;  but  insurmount-
able difficulties  were  encountered,  and  this  attempt
also  had  to  be  abandoned.  Grant,  having  thor-
oughly tested  all  the  safer  plans,  now  determined
to  try  a  bolder  and  more  hazardous  one,  which  he
had  long  had  in  contemplation,  but  which  the  high
water  had  precluded.  This  was  to  run  the  batter-
ies with  the  gun-boats  and  transports  loaded  with
supplies,  to  march  his  troops  down  the  west  side
of  the  river  from  Milliken's  Bend  to  the  vicinity  of
New  Carthage,  and  there  ferry  them  across  to  the
east  bank.  The  movement  of  the  troops  was  be-
gun on  29  March.  They  were  marched  to  New
Carthage  and  Hard  Times.  On  the  night  of  16
April  the  fleet  ran  the  batteries  under  a  severe  fire.
On  29  April  the  gun- boats  attacked  the  works  at
Grand  Gulf,  but  made  little  impression,  and  that
night  ran  the  batteries  to  a  point  below.  On  30
April  the  advance  of  the  army  was  ferried  across
to  Bruinsburg,  below  Grand  Gulf  and  30  miles
south  of  Vicksburg,  and  inarched  out  in  the  di-
rection of  Port  Gibson.  Everything  was  made
subordinate  to  the  celerity  of  the  movement.  The
men  had  no  supplies  except  such  as  they  carried
on  their  persons.  Grant  himself  crossed  the  river
with  no  personal  baggage,  and  without  even  a
horse;  but  obtained  one  raggedly  equipped  In  use
on  the  east  side.  The  advance  encountered  the
enemy,  under  (Jen.  Bowen,  numbering  between
7,000  and  8,000,  on  1  May,  near  Port  Gibson,
routed  him,  and  drove  him  in full  retreat  till


nightfall.  Grant's  loss  was  131  killed  and  719
wounded.  The  Confederates  reported  their  loss
at  448  killed  and  wounded,  and  384  mining  :  but
it  was  somewhat  larger,  as  Grant  captured  (>50
prisoners.  At  Port  Gibson  he  learned  of  the  suc-
cess of  Grierson,  whom  he  had  despatched  from
La  Grange,  17  April,  and  who  had  moved  south--
ward  with  1,000  cavalry,  torn  up  many  miles  of
railroad,  destroyed  large  amounts  of  supplies,  and
arrived,  with  but  slight  loss,  at  Baton  Rouge,
La..  2  May.  On  3  May,Grant  entered  Grand  Oulf,
which  had  been  evacuated.  He  was  now  winoBOQ
by  two  armies — one  commanded  by  Gen.  John  C.
Pemberton  at  Vicksburg,  numbering  about  52,000
men ;  the  other  by  Gen.  Joseph  L.  Johnston  at
Jackson,  50  miles  east  of  Vicksburg,  who  was  being
rapidly  re-enforced.  Gen.  Sherman  had  been  or-
dered to  make  a  demonstration  against  Haines's
Bluff,  to  compel  the  enemy  to  detach  troops  for  its
defence  and  withhold  them  from  Grants  front;
and  this  feint  was  successfully  executed,  30  April
and  1  May,  when  Sherman  received  orders  to  re-
tire and  join  the  main  army.  Grant  determined
to  move  with  celerity,  place  his  force  between  the
two  armies  of  the  enemy,  and  defeat  them  in  de-
tail before  they  could  unite  against  him.  He  cut.
loose  from  his  base,  and  ordered  that  the  three
days'  rations  issued  to  the  men  should  be  made  to
last  five  days.  Sherman's  command  reached  Grand
Gulf  on  the  6th.  On  the  12th  Grant's  advance,
near  Raymond,  encountered  the  enemy  approach-
ing from  Jackson,  and  defeated  and  drove  him
from  the  field  with  a  loss  of  100  killed,  305
wounded,  415  prisoners,  and  2  guns.  Grant's  loss
was  66  killed.  339  wounded,  and  37  missing.  He
pushed  on  to  Jackson,  and  captured  it  on  the  14th,
with  a  loss  of  42  killed,  and  251  wounded  and  miss-
ing. The  enemy  lost  845  in  killed,  wounded,  and
missing,  and  17  guns.  Grant  now  moved  rapidly
toward  Vicksburg,  and  attacked  Pemberton  in  a
strong  position  at  Champion  Hill.  After  a  hotly
contested  battle,  the  enemy  was  completely  routed,
with  a  loss  of  between  3,000  and  4,000  killed  and
wounded,  3,000  prisoners,  and  30  guns;  Grant's
loss  being  410  killed,  1,844  wounded,  and  187  miss-
ing. The  enemy  made  a  stand  at  Big  Black  river
bridge  on  the  17th,  holding  a  strongly  intrenched
position ;  but  by  a  vigorous  assault  the  place  was
carried,  and  the  enemy  was  driven  across  the  river
in  great  confusion,  with  the  loss  of  many  killed,
1,751  prisoners,  and  18  guns.  Grant's  loss  was  but
39  killed,  237  wounded,  and  3  missing.  On  the  18th
the  National  army  closed  up  against  the  outworks
of  Vicksburg,  driving  the  enemy  inside  his  fortifica-
tions. Sherman  took  possession  of  Haines's  Bluff,
a  base  for  supplies  was  established  at  Chickasaw
Landing,  and  on  the  21st  the  army  was  once  more
supplied  with  full  rations.  On  19  and  22  May  as-
saults were  made  upon  the  enemy's  lines,  but  only
a  few  outworks  were  carried,  and  on  the  23d  the
siege  was  regularly  begun.  By  30  June  there  were
220  guns  in  position,  all  light  field-pieces  except
six  32-pounders  and  a  battery  of  heavy  guns  sup-
plied by  the  navy.  Grant  now  had  71,000  men  to
conduct  the  siege  and  defend  his  position  against
Johnston's  army  threatening  him  in  the  rear.  The
operations  were  pressed  day  and  night ;  there  was
mining  and  countermining;  and  the  lines  were
pushed  closer  and  closer,  until  the  garrison  aban-
doned all  hope.  On  3  July.  Pemberton  asked  for
an  armistice,  and  proposed  the  appointment  of
commissioners  to  arrange  terms  of  capitulation.
Grant  replied  that  there  would  be  no  terms  but
unconditional  surrender;  and  this  was  made  on
the  4th  of  July. He  permitted  the  officers  and


GRANT


GRANT


713


men  to  be  paroled,  tin-  ..Hirers  to  retain  their  j >ri-
vete  baggage  ami -iilf-arm-.. an.)  each i mted

,ll( shoWcl  ' -kI.tu-

tii.ii  to  the  vanquished,  inputted  t ln-iii  willi  full
ration-,  and.  when  they  man  lied  out.  issued  an  <»r-

,iii;.  "  Instruct  ill.' nuadl  t<>  In-  orderly

an. I  ip'iiet  M  UmM  pHeOOfl  pass,  anil  U)  make  M
offensive  remarks."  The  surrender  included  81^800
prisoners  172  camion.  IHI.OOO  muskets,  ami  a  MTgC
am. unit  of  ammunition.  (irant's  total  lam  in  the
Vicksburg  campaign  was  n,n7;{;  (hat  of  the  enemy
nearly  (MUHM).  Port  Hudson  now  surrendered  !••
Hanks,  an.l  the  Mississippi  was  ..jk-ih-iI  fr< >ni  its
sourer  to  its  mouth,  (irant  was  made  a  major-
general  in  the  regular  army:  ami  OOOgnM,  WtMl
It assembled,  |  Missed  a. resolution  ordering  a  gold
medal  to  U>  presented  to  him  (see  illustration),  and
returning  thanks  to  him  and  his  army.

II.'  -..on  recommended  a  movement  apiinst  Mo-
bile, Imt  it  was  not  approved,  i  l<-  went  to  New
Orleans.  |0  Auur..  to  confer  with  Hanks,  and  while
there  was  severely  injured  by  a  fall  from  his  horse,
while  engaged  in  a  trial  of  s|>eed  with  the  senior
editor  of  this  work.  For  nearly  three  months  he
was  unable  to  walk  unaided,  but  on  It!  Boot,  set
out  for  Vicksburg,  being  carried  on  board  the
steamboat.  He  received  orders  from  Washington
on  the  27th  to  send  all  available  forces  to  the  vicin-
ity of  Chattanooga,  to  co-ojHTate  with  Kosecrans.
while  personally  superintending  the  carrying  out
of  this  order,  he  received  instructions,  10  Oct..  t<>
report  at  Cairo.  He  arrived  there  on  the  10th,  and
was  directed  to  proceed  to  Ijouisville.  At  Indian-
ajH>lis  he  was  met  by  Mr.  Stanton,  secretary  of
war,  who  accompanied  him  to  Louisville  and  de-
livered an  order  to  him  placing  him  in  command
of  the  military  division  of  the  Mississippi,  which
was  to  embrace  the  departments  and  armies  of  the
Tennessee,  the  Cuinl>erland,  and  the  Ohio.  He
at  once  went  to  Chattanooga,  arriving  on  the
23d,  and  took  command  then?  in  person.  On  25)
Oct.  the  battle  of  Wuuhatchie  was  fought,  and  a
much-needed  line  of  communication  for  supplies
was  opened  to  the  troops  in  and  around  Chatta-
nooga, besieged  by  Hragg's  army,  which  held  a
strongly  fortified  position.  Thomas  commanded
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  which  held  Chat-
tanooga; Sherman,  who  had  succeeded  Grant  in
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  was  or-
dered to  bring  all  his  available  troops  to  join
Thomas;  and  Hurnsidc.  who  was  in  Knoxville,  in
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  besieged  by
I>onj:-t  reefs  corps,  was  ordered  to  hold  his  position
at  all  hazards  till  Hragg  should  be  crushed  ami  a
force  could  be  sent  to  the  relief  of  Knoxville.
Grant,  having  concentrated  his  troops  near  Chatta-
nooga, made  an  assault  upon  the  enemy's  lines  on
!.  which  resulted  in  carrying  important  posi-
tions. The  attack  was  continued  on  the  24th  and
25th.  when  the  enemy's  ent  ire  line  was  capt  ured.  and
his  army  completely  routed  and  driven  out  of  Ten-
nessee. Grant's  forces  consisted  of  (WUMX)  men;
those  of  the  Confederates,  45.OO0.  The  enemy's
losses  were  reported  at  Ml  killed  and  1,180  wound-
ed, but  were  undoubtedly  greater.  There  were
eaptuied  <».442  men.  40  pieces  of  artillery,  and
7.<»<H)  -lands  <.f  small-arms.  Grant's  losses  were
To?  killed.  4.V2!»  wounded,  and  810  missing,  (in
the  SBtfa  a  force  was  de-patch,  d  t<>  Knoxville.  the
command  <>f  the  expedition  being  given  to  Sher-
man. On  the  89th  Lougstreetesssjilted  Knoxville
before  the  arrival  of  the  troop-  sent  for  its  relief,
but  was  repelled  by  Hurnsidc.  and  retreated.
Grant  visited  Knoxville  the  last  week  in  1
Iter,  and went from  there  to  Nashville, where  he


established  his  headquarters,  18  Jan.,  1864  He
now  Oldend  Sherman  to  inarch  a  force  from
Vicksburg  int..  the  interior  to  destroy  the  eiiemv's
communication-  and  supplies.  It  moved  on  8
Keh.,  went  a-  far  as  Meridian,  reaching  there  14
Feb., and, after  destroying railroads and great

quantities  of  ■npnliea,  returned  t<.  Viokebwrg,  The

grade  of  lieutenant-general  was  revived  b]
congress  in  February,  and  (irant  was  nominated
for  that  office  >.n  1  March,  and  confirmed  by  the
senate  on  the  2d.  He  left  Nashville  on  the  4th.  in
obodienoe  t<.  an  order  calling  him  t.>  Washington,
arrived  there  mi  the  Nth.  MM  received  his  commis-
sion from  the  president  01  the  8th,  He  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  all  the  armie-  <.n  the
18th  (Sherman  being  given  tl>«'  command  <>f  the
military  division  of  the  Mississippi  on  the  lnth),
ami  estahli-hcil  his  headquarters  with  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  at  Culpep|>er,  Vs.,  on  the  88th.

(irant  now  determined  to  concentrate  all  the
National  forces  into  several  distinct  armies,  which
should  move  simultaneously  against  the  opposing
Confederate  armies,  operate  vigorously  and  con-
tinuously, and  prevent  them  from  detaching  forces
to  strengthen  threatened  points,  or  for  the  pur-
pose of  making  raids.  He  announced  that  the
Confederate  ar-
mies would  be
the  only  ob-
jective pointi  in
the  coining  cam-
paigns. Sher-
man was  to  move
toward  Atlanta
against  John-
ston. Banks's
army,  after  it
could  be  with-
drawn from  the
lied  river  expe-
dition,  was  to
operate  against
Mobile.  Sigel
was  to  move
down  the  val-
ley of  Virginia  against  Hrcckcu  ridge  to  destroy  com-
munications anil  supplies,  and  prevent  raids  from
that  quarter.  Butler  was  to  ascend  the  James  river
and  threaten  Richmond.  The  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, re-enforced  by  Burnside's  troops  and  com-
manded by  Meade,  was  to  cover  Washington,  and
a— nine  the  offensive  against  the  Army  of  northern
Virginia,  commanded  by  Gen.  Robed  K.  Lee.  Or-
ders were  issued  for  a  general  movement  of  all  the
armies  in  the  field  on  4  May.  During  the  night  of
the  4th  and  5th  Grant  crossed  the  Kapidanaml  en-
countered Lee  in  the  Wilderness,  where  a  des|>erate
battle  was  fought  on  the  at h.  (it h.  and  7th.  Grant's
loss  was  2,2«1  killed,  8.785  wounded,  and  2.902
missing.  Lee's  losses  have  never  liecn  reported}
bttt.  M  he  was  generally  the  attacking  jwrty,  he
probably  lost  more,  lie  fell  back  on  the  7th,  and
on  that  day  and  the  next  took  up  a  strong  defen-
sive position  at  Spotsylvania,  (irant  moved  for-
ward on  the  DJgbJ  of  the  7th.  As  he  rode  through
the  troops,  the  men  greeted  him  as  their  new  com-
mander with  an  extraordinary  demonstration  in
recognition  <>f  the  victory,  shouting,  cheering,  and
kindling  bonflrca  by  the  road-side  m  he  passed.
The  8th  and  Hth van  -pent by both  armies  in

skirmishing  end  inamcuvring  f«>r  position. sheri-

dan's  cavalry  was  . I. -patched  OH  the  !»th  to  make
a  raid  in  rear  of  the  enemy  and  threaten  Kich-
uiond.  On  the  loth  there  was  heavy  fighting,  with
no  doohnvs  re-ults,  and  on  the  lith  skirmishing


714


GRANT


GRANT


■ad  reconnoitring. Ob  lha  morning  of  this  day

(i  rant  son  i  a  letter  to  Washington  containing  the
famous  MntNM  ft.  ••  I  piojxjse  to  fight  it  out  on  tliis
iino,  if  it  takes  all  summer."  On  the  12th  a  heavy
assault  was  made  on  Lee's  line,  near  the  centre,  in
which  he  lost  nearly  4,000  prisoners  and  M  guns.
Violent  storms  now  caused  a  cessation  in  the  light-
ing for  several  days. On  the  19th,  Ewell's  corps,

(,n \  army,  moved  around  Grant's  right  flank

ami  attacked,  hut  was  repelled  after  hard  fighting.
(J rant's  losses  from  the  8th  to  the  21st  of  May,
around  S|«)ttsylvania,  were  2,271  killed,  9,300
wounded,  and  1.970  missing.  The  estimate  of  the
enemv's  loss,  in  killed  and  wounded,  was  nearly  as
neat  as  that  of  the  National  army,  besides  about
4.000  prisoners  and  30  cannon  captured.  In  the
mean  time  Butler  had  occupied  Bermuda  Hundred.
below  Bichmond.  Sherman  had  reached  Dalton,
Ga.,  and  was  steadily  driving  Johnston's  army  to-
ward Atlanta.  But  Sigel  had  been  forced  to  re-
treat before  Breckinridge.  On  the  21st,  Grant
moved  by  the  left  flank  to  North  Anna  river,
where  he  again  encountered  Lee,  and  after  several
engagements  moved  again  by  the  left  from  that
position  on  the  27th  toward  Cold  Harbor.  Grant's
losses  between  the  20th  and  26th  were  186  killed,
792  wounded,  and  165  missing.  Lee's  losses  dur-
ing this  period  have  never  teen  fully  ascertained.
After  much  fighting  by  detached  portions  of  the
two  armies,  Grant  made  a  general  assault  upon
Lee's  heavily  intrenched  position  at  Cold  Harbor
on  3  June,  but  did  not  succeed  in  carrying  it,  be-
ing repelled  with  a  loss  of  about  7,000  in  killed,
wounded,  and  missing,  while  Lee's  loss  was  proba-
bly not  more  than  2,500.  The  campaign  had  now
lasted  thirty  days.  Grant  had  received  during
this  time  about  40,000  re-enforcements,  and  had
lost  39,259  men— 6,586  killed,  26,047  wounded,  and
6,626  missing.  Lee  had  received  about  30,000  re-
enforcements.  There  are  no  official  figures  as  to
his  exact  losses,  but  they  have  been  estimated  at
about  equal  to  his  re-enforcements.  Sherman  had
now  reached  Kenesaw,  within  thirty  miles  of  At-
lanta ;  and  on  the  7th  news  arrived  that  Hunter,
who  had  succeeded  Sigel,  had  gained  a  victory
and  had  seized  Staunton,  on  the  Virginia  Central
railroad.  Grant  made  preparations  for  transfer-
ring the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  the  south  side  of
James  river,  to  operate  against  Petersburg  and
Richmond  from  a  more  advantageous  position.
The  army  was  withdrawn  from  the  enemy's  front
on  the  night  of  12  June,  and  the  crossing  of  the
river  began  on  the  13th,  and  occupied  three  days.
A  force  had  also  been  sent  around  by  water,  by
York  and  James  rivers  to  City  Point,  to  move
against  Petersburg.  On  the  15th  the  advanced
troops  attacked  the  works  in  front  of  that  place ;
but,  night  coming  on,  the  successes  gained  were
not  followed  up  by  the  commanders,  and  the  next
morning  the  position  had  been  re-enforced  and
strengthened.  An  assault  was  made  on  the  after-
noon of  the  16th,  which  was  followed  up  on  the
•  17th  and  18th,  and  the  result  was  the  capture  of
important  outworks,  and  the  possession  of  a  line
closer  to  Petersburg.  Lee's  army  had  arrived,
and  again  confronted  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.
Grant  s  headquarters  had  been  established  at  City
Point.  On  22  and  23  June  he  made  a  movement
from  the  left  toward  the  Weldon  railroad,  and
heavy  fighting  took  place,  with  but  little  result,
except  to  render  Lee  s  use  of  that  line  of  commu-
nication more  precarious.  Sheridan  had  set  out
on  a  raid  from  Pamunkey  river,  7  June,  and,  after
defeating  the  enemy's  cavalry,  in  the  battle  of  Tre-
vilian  Station,  destroying  portions  of  the  Virginia


railroad,  and  inflicting  other  damage,  he  returned
to  White  lloiiM>.  on  Vork  river,  on  the  20th.
From  there  he  crossed  the  James  and  rejoined  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  A  cavalry  force  under
Gen.  James  II.  Wilson  had  also  been  sent  to  the
south  and  west  of  Petersburg,  which  deatrorsd
railroad  property,  and  for  a  time  seriously  inter-'
rupted  the  enemy's  communications  via  the  I>an-
ville  and  South-side  railroads.  Hunter,  in  the
valley  of  Virginia,  had  destroyed  the  stores  cap-
tured at  Staunton  and  Lexington,  and  moved  to
Lynchburg.  This  place  was  re-enforced,  and,  after
sharp  fighting,  Hunter  fell  back,  pursued  by  a
heavy  force,  to  Kanawha  river.  Early's  army
drove  the  National  troops  out  of  Martinslmrg,
crossed  the  upper  Potomac,  and  moved  upon  Ha-
gerstown  and  Frederick.  There  was  great  con-
sternation in  Washington,  and  Grant  was  harassed
by  many  anxieties.  On  11  July,  Early  advanced
against  the  fortifications  on  the  north  side  of
Washington ;  but  Grant  had  sent  the  6th  corps
there,  which  arrived  opportunely,  and  the  enemy
did  not  attack.  Sherman  had  outflanked  John-
ston at  Kenesaw,  crossed  the  Chattahoochee  on  17
July,  driven  the  enemy  into  his  works  around  At-
lanta, and  destroyed  a  portion  of  the  railroad  in
his  rear.  In  Burnside's  front,  before  Petersburg,  a
large  mine  had  been  constructed  beneath  the  ene-
my s  works.  Mary  of  Lee's  troops  had  been  de-
coyed to  the  north  side  of  the  James  by  feints
made  upon  the  lines  there.  The  mine  was  fired
at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  30  July.  A  defect-
ive fuse  caused  a  delay  in  the  explosion,  and  when
it  occurred  the  assault  ordered  was  badly  executed
by  the  officers  in  charge  of  it.  Confusion  arose,
the  place  was  re-enforced,  and  the  National  troops
had  to  be  withdrawn,  after  sustaining  a  heavy  loss.
Grant,  in  his  anxiety  to  correct  the  errors  of  his
subordinates,  dismounted  and  made  his  way  to  the
extreme  front,  giving  directions  in  person,  and  ex-
posing himself  to  a  most  destructive  fire.  He  went
to  Monocacy  5  Aug.,  had  Sheridan  meet  him  there
on  the  6th,  and  placed  him  in  command  of  all  the
forces  concentrated  in  Maryland,  with  directions
to  operate  against  Early's  command.  On  14  Aug.,
Hancock's  corps  was  sent  to  the  north  side  of  the
James,  and  made  a  demonstration  against  the  ene-
my at  Deep  Bottom,  to  develop  his  strength  and
prevent  him  from  detaching  troops  to  send  against
Sheridan.  This  resulted  in  the  capture  of  six
pieces  of  artillery  and  a  few  prisoners.  On  18
Aug.,  Warren's  corps  moved  out  and,  after  heavy
fighting,  seized  and  held  a  position  on  the  Weldon
railroad.  Fighting  continued  on  the  19th,  with
Warren's  troops  re-enforced  by  part  of  the  9th
corps.  Lee  attempted  to  recover  the  Weldon  road
by  an  assault  on  the  21st,  but  was  repelled.  On
the  23d  Ream's  Station  was  occupied  by  the  Na-
tional troops,  and  the  enemy  attacked  them  in  this
place  in  force.  Two  assaults  were  successfully
met,  but  the  place  was  finally  captured,  and  the
National  troops  were  compelled  to  fall  back.
Sherman's  series  of  brilliant  battles  and  manoeu-
vres around  Atlanta  had  forced  the  enemy  to
evacuate  that  place,  and  his  troops  entered  the
city  on  2  Sept.  Sheridan  attacked  Early's  army
on  19  Sept.,  and  in  the  battle  of  Winchester  oOBte
pletely  routed  him.  He  pursued  the  enemy  to
Fisher's  Hill,  and  on  the  22d  gained  another  signal
victory.  Grant  now  made  several  movements
against  Richmond  and  Petersburg,  intended  to
keep  Lee  from  detaching  troops,  to  extend  the
National  lines,  and  to  take  advantage  of  any  weak
spot  in  the  enemy's  front,  with  a  view  to  pemt  rate
it. On  29  Sept.",  Butler's  forces  were  ordered  to


GRANT


OB  \M'


71S


make  HI  advance  upon  t li<-  works  nt  Deep  Bottom.
K. .rt  Harrison,  tin-  strongest  work  north  of  the
.lain.  .ptured. with !.*> |UM ami several

huii'lrv<i  prinqam  On  the  with  the  enemy  made
tans  attempts  to  retain  it  by  assault,  but  wan

each  tinir  repelled  with  heavy  loss. On  the  same

Meade moved 0O( ami rarrie<l t\vi> redoubts

ami  a  line  of  rifle-pit-;  at  Peebles's  farm,  two  miles

■  ->f  the  u/eldon  railroad. On  l  Oct,  Meade's

left  was  attacked  ;  hut  it  successfully  rc|telled  the
assault,  ami  he  advanced  his  |me  on  the  2d.  But-
ler lost,  in  the  engagements  of  the  21*th  and  80th,
894 killed. L554 wounded, and :t24 missing.

da  lost,  from  80 Sept  to8  Oct.,  151  killed,  510

wounded,  ami  L848  missing  I  >n  1!»  Oct.,  Sheri-
dan's army  was  attacked  by  Farly  at  Cedar  Creek.
Sheridan,  who  wax  mi  his  return  from  Washing-
ton, rode  twenty  miles  from  Winchester,  turned  a
dcf.at  into  a  decisive  victory,  captured  24  guns.
1,000  prisoners,  and  300  wagons,  and  left  the  ene-
my a  complete  wreek.  <>n  27  Oct.,  Butler  was  or-
dered to  make  a  demonstration  against  the  enemy's
line  in  his  front,  and  had  MOM  fighting.  At  the
same  time,  Meade  moved  out  to  Hatcher's  run ;
hut  the  enemy  was  found  strongly  intrenched,  the
ground  very  difficult,  and  no  assault  was  attempt-
ed. In  the  afternoon  a  heavy  attack  was  made  by
the  enemy,  lmt  was  successfully  resisted.  That
night  the  National  forces  were  withdrawn  to  their
former  |>ositions.  Meade's  loss  was  148  killed,  851
wounded,  and  488  missing.  The  enemy's  casual-
ties were  greater,  as  he  lost  in  prisoners  alone
alxtut  1,800  men.  Hutler  lost  on  this  day  700  in
killed  and  wounded,  and  400  prisoners.

Sherman  destroyed  the  railroad  in  his  rear,  cut
loose  from  his  base,  and  set  out  from  Atlanta,  16
Nov.,  on  his  march  to  Savannah.  Gen.  John  I>.
Hood,  who  had  superseded  Johnston,  instead  of
following  Sherman,  turned  northward  and  moved
his  army  against  Thomas,  who  had  been  placed
in  command  of  the  troops  left  for  the  defence  of
Tennessee.  Thomas  concentrated  his  forces  in  the
vicinity  of  Nashville.  Bchofleid  was  at  Franklin,
twenty-five  miles  from  Nashville,  with  aUnit  20,000
imu.  Hood  attacked  him  on  30  Nov.,  but  after
a  hotly  contested  battle  was  repelled  with  heavy
loss.  Thomas,  with  his  entire  army,  attacked
Bond,  and  in  the  battle  of  Nashville,  15  and  16
Dec.,  completely  defeated  the  enemy,  capturing  53
guns  and  4.462  prisoners,  and  drove  him  south  of
Tennessee  river.  Sherman  reached  the  sea-coast
near  Savannah  on  14  Dec.,  after  dest  roving  abool
200  miles  of  railroad  and  flOO.OOO.OOO'  worth  of
property.  He  invented  Savannah,  and  forced  the
enemy  to  evacuate  it  on  the  night  of  20  Dec.
Grant  had  sent  Hutler  in  charge  of  an  expedition
against  Fort  Fisher,  at  the  mouth  of  Cape  Fear  river,
to  act  inconjunction  with  the  naval  fleet  under  Ad-
miral Porter.  He  sailed  from  Fort  Monroe,  14  Dee.,
landed  his  troops,  25  Dec.,  and  advanced  against  the
fort,  which  and  ln-en  vigorously  shelled  by  the  navy  ;
but,  while  the  assaulting  party  had  every  prospect
of  entering  the  work,  they  received  an  order  to  fall
Iwck  ami  re-ctnliark.  The  expedition  reached
Fort  Monroe  on  its  return  27  Dec.  Hutler  was  re-
lieved, and  Gen.  K.  O.  C.  Ord  was  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  Army  of  the  .lames,  (Jrnnt  fitted
out  another  expedition  against  Port  Fisher,  under
(nn.  Alfred  II.  Terry,  which  sailed  from  Fort  Mon-
roe on  0  Jan..  I860.  On  the  i:!th  the  navy  directed
a  heavy  fire  against  the  fort.  Terry  landed  his
troops,  intrenched  against  a  force  of  the  en
threatening  him  from  the  direction  of  Wilmington,
and  on  the  [5th  made  a  vigorous  assault,  captur-
ing the  fort  with  its  garrison  and l»i!»  heavy  guns.


and  a  large  ipiaut  ily  of  ammunition. It  was  at  first
thought  U-st  to  transfer  Sherman's  arm\
Virginia,  hut this  plan  was  abandoned,  and  on  27

he  was  ordered to  move  north  by  land,
annv  numbered  00.1100  men,  and  was  accompanied
b]  IB  guns  and  8JNX)  wagons. <  >n  7  Jan..  8cnofleld
was  directed to  bring  hi*  annv,  then  at Clifton,
Tenn..  to  the  sea-coast. It  reached  Weahbuj

and  Alexandria.  81  .bin.,  and  <>n  !»  Feb.  arrive.l  at
the  mouth  of  Pane  Fear  river,  with  instructions  to
o|M-rate  against  Wilmington  and  penetrate  the  in-
terior. He  entered  Wilmington  on  22  Feb.,  it  hav-
ing been  evejonated  by  the  enemy,  and  took  51
heavy  guns.  10  light  guns,  ami  noo  prieoaetn.  His
own  loss  in  these  operat  ions  was  about  800  m  killed
and  wounded.  He  moved  thence  to  OoMshOfO,
where  it  was  intended  he  should  form  a  junction
with  Sherman.  On  2  March.  Lee  addressed  a  letter
to  Grant,  suggesting  a  minimal  meeting  with  a
view  to  arranging  subjects  of  controversy  betUX  |  n
the  liclligerents  toaconvention  ;  but  (irant  replied
that  he  had  no  authority  to  accede  to  the  proposi-
tion ;  that  he  had  a  right  to  act  only  on  subjects
of  a  purely  military  character.

Sheridan  moved  down  the  valley  of  Virginia,
from  Winchester,  27  Feb.,  and  defeated  Early  at
Waynesboro,  2  March,  capturing  and  scattering
nearly  his  entire  command.  He  then  turned  east-
ward, destroyed  manv  miles  of  the  James  river
canal,  passed  around  the  north  side  of  Richmond,
and  tote  up  the  railroads,  arrived  at  White  House
on  the  19tn,  and  from  there  joined  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  Grant  had  been  anxious  for  some
time  lest  I  a*'  should  suddenly  abandon  his  works
and  fall  hack  to  unite  with  Johnston's  forces  in  an
attempt  to  crush  Sherman  and  force  (Jrant  to  pur-
sue Lee  to  a  point  that  would  compel  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  to  maintain  a  long  line  of  communi-
cations with  its  base,  as  there  would  be  nothing
left  in  Virginia  to  subsist  on  after  I-.ee  had  trav-
ersed it.  Sleepless  vigilance  was  enjoined  on  all
commanders,  with  orders  to  report  promptly  any
movement  looking  to  a  retreat.  Sherman  captured
Columbia  on  17  Feb.,  and  destroyed  large  arsenals,
railroad  establishments,  and  forty-three  cannon.
The  enemy  was  compelled  to  evacuate  Charleston.
On  8  March,  Sherman  struck  Cheraw.  and  seized  a
large  quantity  of  material  of  war,  including  25
guns  and  3,600  Iwrrels  of  powder.  At  Favette-
ville.  on  the  11th.  he  captured  the  finely  equipped
arsenal  and  twenty  guns.  On  the  10th  be  struck
the  enemy  at  AverysV>oro.  and  after  a  stubborn  fight
drove  him  from  his  position,  losing  554  men.  The
Confederates  reported  their  loss  at  500.  On  the
10th  Johnston's  army  attacked  a  portion  of  Sher-
man's forces  at  Henionville,  and  made  six  heavy
assaults,  which  were  all  successfully  met.  and  on
the  night  of  the  21st  the  eneinv  fell  liack.  The
National  loss  was  181  killed  and  1,455  wounded
and  missing:  that  of  the  Confederates  was  reported
at  223  killed.  1.4»>7  wounded,  653  missing,  but
Sherman  reports  his  captures  of  prisoners  at  1,621.
On  the  23d  Sherman  reached  (toldsboro,  where
Schoticld  had  arrived  two  days  before,  and  was
again  in  communication  with  the  sea-coast,  and
able  to  draw  supplies.  On  2<>  March.  (Jen.  (Jeorge
Stoncman  set  out  to  march  eastward  from  east
Tennessee,  toward  Lynchburg,  and  on  the  same
day  (Jen.  F.  U.  S.  Can  by  moved  against  Mobile.
(Jen.  POpe,  who  had  MOB led  Uosecrans  in  Mis-
souri, was  ordered  to  drive  Price  beyond  Bed  river.
Hancock  had  l>een  assigned  to  command  the  mid-
dle division  when  Sheridan  joined  the  Annv  of  the
Potomac,  and  the  troops  under  him  mar  Washing-
i  ton  were  held  in  readiness  to  move.


716


GRANT


GRANT


All  was  now  in  readiness  for  the  spring  campaign,
which  Grant Intended  should  be  the  last. Presi-
dent Lincoln,  between  whom  and  Grant  had  sprung
up  a  Strong personal  attachment,  visited  him  at
City  Point  on  89  March,  and  Sherman  came  there
on  the  27th. They,  with  Grant  and  Admiral  Por-
ter, held  an  informal  conference,  and  on  the  28th
Sherman  set  out  again  to  join  his  army. At  day-
light, on  80  March,  Lee  had  made  a  determined
assault  on  Grant's  right,  capturing  Fort  Steadman,
breaking  through  the  National  lines,  and  gaining
possession  of  several  batteries. In  a  few  hours  he
was  driven  back,  and  all  the  captured  positions
were  regained. liee  took  this  step  to  endeavor  to
force  the  withdrawal  of  troops  in  front  of  his  left,
and  enable  him  to  leave  his  intrenchments  and  re-
treat toward  Danville. Its  failure  prevented  the
attempt. The  country  roads  being  considered  suf-
ficiently dry,  Grant  had  issued  orders  for  a  general
advance  on  the  29th,  and  these  were  carried  out
at  the  appointed  time. Sheridan,  with  his  cavalry,
was  sent  in  advance to Dinwiddie  Court-House.
The  5th  corps  had  some  fighting  on  the  29th,  and
in  moving  forward  on  the  81st  was  attacked  and
driven  back  a  mile. Supported  by  a  part  of  the  2d
corps,  it  made  a  counter-attack,  drove  the  enemy
bacK  into  his  breastworks,  and  secured  an  advanced
position.  Sheridan  had  pushed  on  to  Five  Forks,  but
his  command  encountered  a  strong  force  of  infantry
and  cavalry,  and  after  heavv  fighting  all  day  he  fell
back  to  Dinwiddie  Court-House,  where  he  repelled
the  repeated  assaults  made  upon  him,  and  held  the
place. The  5th  corps  was  that  night  ordered  to  re-
port to  Sheridan. The  enemy,  on  the  morning  of  1
April,  fell  back  toward  Five  Forks,  closely  followed
bv  the  cavalry,  which  pressed  him  closely. In  the
afternoon  he  had  taken  up  a  strongly  intrenched
position  at  Five Forks,  on  Lee's  extreme  right.
The  5th  corps  having  joined  Sheridan,  he  made  a
combined  attack,  with  infantry  and  cavalry,  and
by  nightfall  had  gained  a  brilliant  victory,  captur-
ing the  Confederate  works,  6  guns,  and  nearly
6,000  prisoners. His  cavalry  pursued  the  broken
and  flying  enemy  for  six  miles  beyond  the  field  of
battle. That  night,  after  getting  the  full  details
of  Sheridan's  success,  Grant  determined  to  make  a
vigorous  assault  the  next  day,  with  all  his  troops,
upon  the  lines  around  Petersburg. It  began  at
daylight,  2  April ;  the  works  were  carried,  and  in
a  few  hours  Grant  was  closing  in  upon  the  inner
defences  of  the  city. Two  of  the  forts,  Gregg  and
Whitworth,  were  secured  in  the  afternoon. The
former  was  captured  by  assault, the  latter  was
evacuated; 12,000  prisoners  and  over  fifty  guns
were  already  in  Grant's  hands. Richmond  and
Petersburg  were  evacuated  that  night,  and  the
National  forces  entered  and  took  possession  on  the
morning  of  the  3d. Grant,  anticipating  this,  had
begun  a  movement  westward  during  the  night,  to
head  off  Lee  from  Danville,  and  a  vigorous  pursuit
by  the  whole  army  was  ordered. It  became  evi-
dent that  Lee  was  moving  toward  Amelia  Court-
House,  and  a  force  was  urged  forward  to  Jeters-
ville,  on  the  Danville  railroad,  to  get  between  him
and  Danville. Part  of  Sheridan's  cavalry  and  the
head  of  the  5th  corps  reached  there  on  the  after-
noon of  the  4th  and  intrenched. The  Army  of  the
Potomac  arrived  by  forced  marches  on  the  5th,
while  the  Army  of  the  James,  under  Ord,  pushed
on  toward Burkesville. An attack  was  ordered
upon  Lee  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  but  he  hail
left  Amelia  Court-House  during  the  night,  and
was  pushing  on  toward  Farmville  by  the  Deatons-
ville  road. He  was  closely  pursued,  and  on  the
afternoon  of  the  6th,  Sheridan,  with  his  cavalry


and  the  6th  corps,  attacked  him  at  Sailor's  Creek,
capturing  7  general  officers,  about  7,000  men.  and
14  guns.  The  2d  corps  had  kept  up  a  running
flghl  with  the  enemy  all  dav,  and  had  captured  4
gnns,  1.700  prisoners,  13  flags,  and  300  wagons.
Lee  was  continuing  his  retreat  through  Farmville,'
and  Grant  urged  troops  to  that  place  by  forced
marches  on  the  7th.  The  2d  corps  and  a  portion
of  the  cavalry  had  been  repelled  in  their  attacks
on  Lee,  north  of  the  Appomattox,  and  the  6th
corps  crossed  from  Farmville  on  the  evening  of  the
7th  to  re-enforce  them.  That  night  Grant  sent
a  note  from  Farmville  to  Lee,  calling  his  attention
to  the  hopelessness  of  further  resistance,  and  ask-
ing the  surrender  of  his  army.  He  received  a  re-
ply from  Lee  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  saying  he
was  not  entirely  of  Grant's  opinion  as  to  the  hope-
lessness of  further  resistance,  but  asking  what
terms  would  be  offered.  Grant,  who  was  still  at
Farmville,  immediately  replied,  saying  that,  as
peace  was  his  great  desire,  ne  would  insist  on  but
one  condition — that  the  men  and  officers  surren-
dered should  be  disqualified  from  taking  up  arms
again  until  properly  exchanged.  On  the  8th  Lee's
troops  were  in  full  retreat  on  the  north  side  of  the
Appomattox.  The  2d  and  6th  corps  followed  in
hot  pursuit  on  that  side,  while  Sheridan.  Ord,  and
the  5th  corps  were  pushed forward  with  all  speed


<-.-^i:„-..


on  the  south  side  to  head  off  Lee  from  Lynchburg.
Near  midnight  on  the  night  of  the  8th  Grant  re-
ceived another  note  from  Lee.  saying  he  had  not
intended  to  propose  the  surrender  of  his  army,  but
desired  to  know  whether  Grant's  proposals  would
lead  to  peace,  and  suggested  a  meeting  at  10  a.  m.
the  next  morning.  Grant  replied  that  such  a
meeting  could  lead  to  no  good,  as  he  had  no  au-
thority to  treat  on  the  subject  of  peace,  but  sug-
gested that  the  south's  laying  down  their  arms
would  hasten  the  event  and  save  thousands  of
lives  and  hundreds  of  millions  of  property.  Early
on  the  morning  of  9  April,  Lee's  advance  arrived
at  Appomattox  Court-House;  but  by  extraordinary
forced  marches.  Sheridan.  Ord,  and  Griffin  reached
that  place  at  the  same  time.  Lee  attacked  the
cavalry ;  but,  when  he  found  infantry  in  his  front,
he  sent  in  a  flag  of  truce,  and  forwarded  a  note  to
Grant,  asking  an  interview  in  accordance  with  the
offer  contained  in  Grant's  letter  of  the  day  before.
Grant  received  it  on  the  road  while  riding  toward
Appomattox  Court-House,  and  sent  a  reply  saying
he  would  move  forward  and  meet  Lee  at  any  plate
he  might  select.  They  met  in  the  McLean  house,
in  Appomattox  (see  accompanying  illustration),  on
the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  and  the  terms  of  sur-
render were  drawn  up  by  Grant  and  accepted  bg
Lee.  The  conference  lasted  about  three  hours.
The  men  and  officers  were  paroled  and  allowed  to


GH  W  T


GRANT


717


return  t<>  their  Iniiiii-s:  till  public  pro|tcrty  m  to

be  turned  over,  but  tin-  oxBoeri  were  allowed  to
hasp  iii<ir  -i-i«-;irni>.  ami  both  ofloan  and  nn  t«.

retain  their  private  horses  ami  liaggiige.  These
terms  MR  so  magnanimous,  ami  1 1 1 « -  treatment  of
Lee  ami  his  OBOm  10  OOOSldcratC,  that  the  tlT.it
was  to  indues  other  Confederates  to  seek  the  same
terms  ami  bring  the  rebellion  to  ■  speedy  close.

hi  riding  to  his  camp  after  the  surrender,  Grant

board  tin-  Bring  ol  salutes, lie  awl  at  once  to

suppress  them,  ami  said:  "The  war  bOWj  the
rebels  are  again  our  countrymen,  and  the  best  sign
of  rejoicing  after  the  victory  will  l»  to  abstain
from  all  demonstrations  in  the  field.*'  The  num-
ber paroled  was  881906. In  addition  to  these,  1'.'.-

bad  been  captured  during  the  campaign  tinea

March.  The  killed  were  estimated  at  5,000.
After  1>  April,  over  20.000  TJTggrTT  and  deserters
iH'sides  cAiue  in  and  surrendered.  The  National
losses  during  this  period  were  2,000  killed,  0,500
wounded,  and  9MO  missing.  Grant's  losses,  in-
cluding,' those  of  Butler's  army,  during  the  year
baginninj  with  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness,  were
i%068  killed.  49,686  wounded,  and  80,498  missing;
total,  88,790.  Xo  accurate  reports  of  the  Confed-
erate losses  can  be  obtained  :  but  Grant's  captures
in  battle  during  this  year  were  981618.

On  10  April.  Grant  "went  to  Washington  to  hasten
the  disbanding  of  the  armies,  stop  purchases  of
supplies,  and  save  expense  to  the  government.  Ib-
did  not  stop  to  visit  Richmond.  President  Lincoln
was  assassinated  on  the  14th,  and  Grant  would
probably  have  shared  the  same  fate  but  for  his  hav-
ing left  Washington  that  day.  On  18  April,  Sher-
man received  the  surrender  of  Johnston's  army,
but  on  terms  that  the  government  did  not  approve,
and  Grant  was  sent  to  North  Carolina  to  conduct
further  negotiations.  On  the  20th  Johnston  sur-
rendered to  Sherman  on  terms  similar  to  those
given  to  I>ee,  and  81,848  men  were  paroled.  Grant
remained  at  Raleigh  and  avoided  being  present  at
the  interview,  leaving  to  Sherman  the  full  credit
of  the  capture.  Canby's  force  appeared  before
Mobile  on  27  March,  the  principal  defensive  works
were  captured  on  9  April,  and  Mobile  was  evacu-
ated on  the  11th,  when  200  guns  and  4,000  prison-
ers were  captured,  but  about  9,000  of  the  garrison
escaped.  Wilson's  cavalrv  command  captured  Scl-
ma,  Ala.,  on  2  April,  and  Tuscaloosa  on  the  4th,  oc-
cupied Montgomery  on  the  14th,  and  took  West
Point  and  Columbus,  Ga.,  on  the  10th.  Macon
surrenderedon  the  21st.  Kirby  Smith  surrendered
his  command,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  on  the  20th.
There  was  then  not  an  armed  enemv  left  in  the
country,  and  the  rebellion  was  ended.  Grant  es-
tablished his  headquarters  in  Washington.  He  was
greeted  with  ovations  wherever  he  went,  honors
were  heaped  upon  him  in  every  part  of  the  land.
and  he  was  universally  hailed  as  the  country's  de-
liverer. In  June,  July,  and  August,  1H(m,  he  made  a
tour  through  the  northern  States  and  Canada,  In
November  he  was  welcomed  in  {few  York  by  a  de-
monstration that  exceeded  all  previous  efforts.  It
OOnaJetod  of  a  banquet  and  reception,  and  the
manifestations  of  the  people  in  their  greetings
knew  no  bounds,  Immediately  after  the  war,  Grant
sent  (Jen.  Sheridan  with  an  army  corps  to  the  Kio
Brando  river  to  observe  the  movements  of  the
French,  who  were  then  in  Mexico  supporting  the
Imperial  government  there  in  violation  of  the  Mon-
roe doctrine.  This  demonstration  was  the  chief
cause  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  French.  Maximil-
ian, being  left  without  assistance  from  a  Kuropean
power,  waa  IOOI)  driven  from  his  throne,  and  the
republic  of  Mexico  was  re-established.


The U.S.  court in  Virginia  had found indict

tin-nts  egainel  Gen.  Lao  and  other  officers  promi-
nent in  the  rebellion]  and  much  anxiety  was  mani-
fested b*f  them  on  this  account.  Two  months  after
the  war,  bss  applied  by  letter  to  Ik-  pftmlMfd  to

enjov  privileges  extended  to  those  included  in  a

proclamation  of  amnesty,  which  had  bOM  honed
by  the  president.  Grant  put  an  indorsement  on
the  letter,  which  began  as  follows:  "  Respectfully
forwarded  through  the  Moratory  Of  war  to  the
president,  with  tin-  earm-st  recommendation  that
the  application  of  Gen.  Kolx-rt  K.  LeS  for  amnesty
and  pardon  Im-  granted  him."  Hut  President  John-
son was  at  that  time  embittered  against  all  partici-
pants in  the  relndlion,  and  seamed  determined  to
nave  Ijee  and  others  punished  for  the  crime  of
treason.  Lee  afterward  made  a  strong  appeal  by
letter  to  Grant  for  protection.  Grant  put  along
and  emphatic  endorsement  upon  this  letter,  in
which  he  used  the  following  language:  "la  my
opinion,  the  o dicers  and  men  |taroicd  at  ftppomaf
to\  Court-House,  and  since  anon  the  same  terms
given  to  Lee,  can  not  Im-  tried  for  treason  so  long
as  they  preserve  the  terms  of  their  parole.  .  .  .  The
action  of  Judge  Underwood  in  Norfolk  has  already
had  an  injurious  effect,  and  I  would  ask  that  he
be  ordered  to  quash  all  indictments  found  against
paroled  prisoners  of  war,  and  to  desist  from  further
prosecution  of  them."  Grant  insisted  that  he  had
the  power  to  accord  the  terms  he  granted  at  A  |  >-
pomattox,  and  that  the  president  was  bound  to  re-
spect the  agreements  there  entered  into  unless  they
should  be  abrogated  by  the  prisoners  violating
their  paroles.  lie  went  so  far  as  to  declare  that  he
would  resign  his  commission  if  so  gross  a  breach
of  good  faith  should  be  perpetrated  by  the  execu-
tivc.  The  result  was  the  abandonment  of  the
prosecutions.  This  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  con-
tests between  Grant  and  President  Johnson,  which
finally  resulted  in  their  entire  estrangement.  In
December,  Grant  made  a  tour  of  inspect  ion  through
the  south.  His  report  upon  affairs  in  that  section
of  the  country  was  submitted  to  congress  by  the
president,  and  became  the  basis  of  important  re-
construction laws.  In  May,  1800,  he  wrote  a  letter
to  the  secretary  of  war,  which  was  submitted  t>>  con-
gress, and  became  the  basis  for  the  reorganization
of  the  army,  and  also  for  the  distribution  of  troops
through  the  south  during  the  process  of  reconstruc-
tion.  The  Fenians  were  now  giving  the  govern-
ment much  trouble,  and,  in  oonoequenoe  of  their
acts,  the  relations  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain  were  becoming  strained.  They  had
organized  a  raid  into  Canada,  to  take  place  during
'In-  summer;  but  Grant  visited  Buffalo  in  June,
took  effective  measures  to  stop  them,  and  prevent-
ed all  further  unlawful  acts  on  their  part.  Con-
gress had  passed  an  act  creating  the  grade  of  gen-
eral, a  higher  rank  than  had  before  existed  in  the
army,  to  be  conferred  on  Grant  as  a  reward  for  his
illustrious  services  in  the  field,  and  on  25  July,
1899,  he  received  his  commission.

In  the  autumn  of  1866,  President  Johnson  hav-
ing changed  his  policy  toward  the  south,  finding
that  Grant  refused  to  support  him  in  his  intentions
to  assume  powers  that  Grant  believed  were  vested
onlv  in  congress,  ordered  him  out  of  the  country,
with  directions  to  proceed  on  a  sj>ecial  mission  to
Mexico.  Grant  refused, saying  that  this  was  not  a
military  service  but  a  diplomatic  mission,  and  that
he  claimed  the  right  possessed  by  every  citizen  to
decline  a  civil  appointment.  An  effort  was  after-
ward made  to  send  him  west,  to  prevent  his  pres-
ence in  Washington,  but  it  WMSOOn  abandoned.
The  99th  congress,  fearing  the  result  of  this  action


718


GRANT


GRANT


on  the  part  of  the  president,  attached  a  clause  to
the  annv  appropriation  bill,  passed  00  4  March,
1867,  providing  thai  "all  orders  and  instructions
relating  t<»  military  operations  shall  be  issued
through  the  general  of  the  army,"  and  added  that
he  should  "  not  be  removed,  suspended,  or  relieved
from  command.  i»r  assigned  todttty  elsewhere  than
ni  the  beadquaiten  in  Washington,  except  at  his
own  request,  without  the  previous  approval  of  the
senate.  Tne  president  signed  the  hill,  with  a  pro-
test against  thi>  clause,  and  soon  obtained  an  opin-
ion from  his  attorney-general  that  it  was  unconsti-
tutional. The  president  then  undertook  to  send
this  opinion  to  the  district  commanders,  but,  find-
ing the  secretary  of  war  in  opposition,  he  issued  it
through  the  adjutant-generaPs  office.  Gen.  Sheri-
dan, then  at  New  Orleans,  in  command  of  the  fifth
military  district,  inquired  what  to  do,  and  Grant
replied  that  a  "  legal  opinion  was  not  entitled  to
the  force  of  an  order,"  and  "  to  enforce  his  own
construction  of  the  law  until  otherwise  ordered."
This  brought  on  a  crisis.  The  president  claimed
that  under  the  constitution  he  could  direct  the  dis-
trict commanders  to  issue  such  orders  as  he  dic-
tated, and  was  met  by  an  act  of  congress,  passed  in
July,  making  the  orders  of  the  district  command-
ers "  subject  to  the  disapproval  of  the  general  of
the  annv."  Thus  Grant  was  given  chief  control  of
affairs  relating  to  the  reconstruction  of  the  south-
ern states.  Tne  president  still  retained  the  power
of  removal,  and  on  the  adjournment  of  congress
he  removed  Sheridan  and  placed  Gen.  Hancock  in
command  of  the  fifth  military  district.  Some  of
Hancock's  orders  were  revoked  by  Grant,  which
caused  not  a  little  bitterness  of  feeling  between
these  officers,  and  provoked  opposition  from  the
Democratic  party.  Subsequently,  when  a  bill  was
cfore  congress  to  muster  Gen.  H*ancock  out  of  the
Service  for  his  acts  in  Louisiana,  Grant  opposed  it,
and  it  was  defeated.  Soon  afterward  he  recom-
mended Hancock  for  a  major-generalship  in  the
regular  army,  to  which  he  was  appointed.

The  "  ten ure-of -office  "  act  forbade  the  president
from  removing  a  cabinet  officer  without  the  con-
sent of  the  senate ;  but  President  Johnson  sus-
pended Sec.  Stanton,  and  appointed  Grant  secretary
of  war  ad  interim  on  12  Aug.,  1867.  Grant  pro-
tested against  this  action,  but  retained  the  office
until  14  Jan.,  1868,  when  the  senate  refused  to  con-
firm the  suspension  of  Stanton.  Grant  immediate-
ly notified  the  president,  who,  finding  that  the  gen-
eral of  the  army  would  not  retain  the  place  in
opposition  to  the  will  of  congress,  and  that  Sec.
Stanton  had  re-entered  upon  his  office,  ordered
Grant  verbally  to  disregard  Stanton's  orders.  Grant
declined  to  do  so  unless  he  received  instructions
in  writing.  This  led  to  an  acrimonious  correspond-
ence. The  president  claimed  that  Grant  had  prom-
ised to  sustain  him.  This  Grant  emphatically  de-
nied, and  in  a  long  letter  reviewing  his  action  said :
"  The  course  you  would  have  it  understood  I  agreed
to  pursue,  was  in  violation  of  law,  and  was  without
orders  from  you,  while  the  course  I  did  pursue,  and
which  I  never  doubted  you  understood,  was  in  ac-
cordance with  law.  .  .  .  And  now,  Mr.  President,
when  my  honor  as  a  soldier  and  integrity  as  a  man
have  been  so  violently  assailed,  pardon  me  for  say-
ing that  I  regard  this  whole  matter,  from  the  be-
ginning to  the  end,  as  an  attempt  to  involve  me  in
the  resistance  of  law  for  which  you  hesitate  to  as-
sume the  responsibility  in  orders."  On  21  Feb.  the
president  appointed  Lorenzo  Thomas  adjutant-gen-
eral of  the  army,  secretary  of  war,  and  ordered  him
to  take  possession  of  the  office.  On  24  Feb.  arti-
cles of  impeachment  were  passed  by  the  house  of


representatives.  Throughout  these  years  of  contest
between  the  executive  and  congress,  Grant's  posi-
tion became  very  delicate  and  embsrrassing.  He
was  compelled  to  execute  the  laws  of  congress  at
the  risk  of  appearing  insubordinate  to  his  official
chief,  but  his  course  was  commended  by  the  people,
his  popularity  increased,  and  when  the  Republican  •
convention  met  in  Chicago,  20  May,  1868,  he  was
unanimously  nominated  for  the  presidency  on  the
first  ballot.  In  his  letter  of  acceptance,  dated  nine
days  after,  he  made  use  of  the  famous  phrase,
"  Let  us  have  peace."  The  Democratic  party  nomi-
nated Horatio  Seymour,  of  New  York.  When  the
election  occurred,  Grant  carried  twenty-six  states
with  a  popular  vote  of  3,015,071,  while  Seymour
carried  eight  states  with  a  popular  vote  of  2,709,613.
It  was  claimed  that  the  state  of  New  York  was
really  carried  by  Grant,  but  fraudulently  counted
for  Seymour.  Out  of  the  294  electoral  votes  cast
for  president,  Grant  received  214  and  Seymour  80
— Mississippi,  Texas,  and  Virginia  not  voting.

Grant  possessed  in  a  striking  degree  the  essential
characteristics  of  a  successful  soldier.  His  self-re-
liance was  one  of  his  most  pronounced  traits,  and
enabled  him  at  critical  moments  to  decide  prompt-
ly the  most  important  questions  without  useless  de-
lay in  seeking  advice  from  others,  and  to  assume
the  gravest  responsibilities  without  asking  any  one
to  share  them.  He  had  a  fertility  of  resource  and
a  faculty  of  adapting  the  means  at  hand  to  the
accomplishment  of  his  purposes,  which  contrib-
uted no  small  share  to  his  success.  His  moral  and
physical  courage  were  equal  to  every  emergency
in  which  he  was  placed.  His  unassuming  manner,
purity  of  character,  and  absolute  loyalty  to  his  su-
periors and  to  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged,
inspired  loyalty  in  others  and  gained  him  the  de-
votion of  the  humblest  of  his  subordinates.  He
was  singularly  calm  and  patient  under  all  circum-
stances, was  never  unduly  elated  by  victory  or  de-
pressed by  defeat,  never  became  excited,  and  never
uttered  an  oath  or  imprecation.  His  habits  of
life  were  simple,  and  he  was  possessed  of  a  physical
constitution  that  enabled  him  to  endure  every  form
of  fatigue  and  privation  incident  to  military  ser-
vice in  the  field.  He  had  an  intuitive  knowledge  of
topography,  and  never  became  confused  as  to  lo-
cality in  directing  the  movements  of  large  bodies
of  men.  He  exhibited  a  rapidity  of  thought  and
action  on  the  field  that  enabled  him  to  move  troops
in  the  presence  of  an  enemy  with  a  promptness
that  has  rarely  been  equalled.  He  had.no  hobby  as
to  the  use  of  any  particular  arm  of  the  service.
He  naturally  placed  his  main  reliance  on  his  in-
fantry, but  made  a  more  vigorous  use  of  cavalry
than  any  of  the  generals  of  nis  day,  and  was  judi-
cious in  apportioning  the  amount  of  his  artillery
to  the  character  of  the  country  in  which  he  was
operating.  While  his  achievements  in  actual  battle
eclipse  by  their  brilliance  the  strategy  and  grand
tactics  employed  in  his  campaigns,  yet  the  extra-
ordinary combinations  effected  and  the  skill  and
boldness  exhibited  in  moving  large  armies  into  po-
sition entitle  him,  perhaps,  to  as  much  credit  as
the  qualities  he  displayea  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.
On  4  March,  1869,  Grant  was  inaugurated  the
eighteenth  president  of  the  United  States.

Gen.  Grant  had  never  taken  an  active  part  in
politics,  and  had  voted  for  a  presidential  candi-
date but  once.  In  1856,  although  his  early  asso-
ciations had  been  with  the  Whigs,  he  cast  his  vote
for  James  Buchanan,  the  Democratic  candidate;
but  this  was  on personal  rather  than political

f rounds,  as  he  believed  that  the  Republican  oaoe
idate  did  not  possess  the  requisite  qualifications


GRANT


719


f<>r  tin-  office.  Si  iiiiii  Ii  doajbi  existed  as  to  Ml
iMilitiial  proclivities  that  | •  r> •  1 1 1 i 1 1 •  - 1 1 1  Hcimx-rat*
im<l  made  overtures  to  linn  to  accept  a  nomina-
tion fri'iu  t lit- ir  party  only  I  few  months  In-fore
tin-  nominating  conventions  win-  hold,  lint  he
was  at  hfurt  in  thorough  accord  with  I  In-  prim-i-
.  pubUoan  party.  H<-  believed  in  a
natii>iial  banking  system,  a  tariff  that  would  fairly
protect  American  industries,  m  the  fostering  of
such  internal  Improvement!  a-  would  uiiili-  our
two  sealioards  ami  givt  tin- cast  t-rn  ami  western  sec-
tions of  the  country  mutual  support  ami  protection,
in  tin-  dignifying  Of  lalior.  ami  in  law-  that  would
secure  equal  justice  to  all  citizens  of  the  repuhlic,
regardless  of  race,  color,  or  previous  condition.

As  early  as  August,  lstut.  he  had  written  a  let-
ter to  Klihu  It.  waehburne,  inemU-r  of  congress,
in  which  he  mid  :  "  It  btOMM  patent  to  mv  mind
earlv  in  the  rebellion  that  the  north  and  south
could  never  live  at  peace  with  each  other  ex-
cel.t  M  one  nation,  and  that  without  slavery.  A-
anxious  as  I  am  to  see  peace  established,  I  would
not,  therefore,  to  willing  to  see  anv  settlement  un-
til this  question  is  forever  settled.'1  In  his  inaugu-
ral address  In-  declared  that  the  government  lxinds
should  be  paid  in  gold,  advocated  a  speedy  return
to  specie  payments,  and  made  many  important  rec-
ommendations in  reference  to  public  affairs.  Re-
garding the  good  faith  of  the  nation  he  said:  "To
protect  the  national  honor,  every  dollar  of  govern-
ment indebtedness  should  1m-  paid  in  gold,  unless
otherwise  expressly  stipulated  in  the  contract.  .  .  .
I. it  it  Ik-  understood  that  no  repudiator  of  one  far-
thing of  our  public  debt  will  In-  trusted  in  public
place.and  it  will  go  far  toward  strengthening  a  ered-
it  which  ought  to  be  the  best  in  the  world,  and  will
ultimately  enable  us  to  replace  the  debt  with  bonds
bearing  less  interest  than  we  now  pav."  Congn— -
acted  promptly  upon  his  recommendation,  and  on
18  March.  1N('»!>.  an  act  was  passed  entitled  "An
act  to  strengthen  the  public  credit."  its  language
gave  a  pledge  to  the  world  that  the  debts  of  tin-
country  would  be  paid  in  coin  unless  there  were
in  the  obligations  express  stipulations  to  the  con-
trary. Both  in  his  inaugural  address  and  in  his
first  annual  message  to  congress  he  took  strong
ground  in  favor  of  an  effort  to  "civilize  and  Chris-
tianize" the  Indians,  and  fit  them  ultimately  for
citizenship.  His  early  experience  among  these
people,  while  serving  on  the  frontier,  had  emi-
nently fitted  him  for  inaugurating  practical  meth-
ods for  improving  their  condition.  He  appointed
as  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs  the  chief  of  the
Six  Nations,  Gen.  Ely  S.  Parker,  a  highly  educated
Indian,  who  had  served  on  his  staff,  and  selected
as  menUMH  of  the  Ixiard  of  Indian  commissioners
gentlemen  named  by  the  various  religious  denomi-
nations throughout  the  country.  Although  such
men  were  imt  always  practical  in  their  views,  ami
many  obstacles  had  to  be  overcome  in  working  out
this  difficult  problem,  gnat  good  resulted  in  tin-
end;  public  attention  was  attracted  to  the  amelio-
ration of  the  condition  of  our  savage  tribes;  they
came  to  be  treated  more  like  wards  of  the  nation.
were  gathered  ■BOB  government  reservations.
where  they  could  to  more  i  .oiioinically  provided
for.  the  number  of  Indian  wars  was  reduced,  and
large  mmi  <>f  money  were  saved  to  the  government.

The  l .">t ti  amendment  to  the  constitution,  adopt-
16  Feb..  I860, guaranteed  the  tight  of  suffrage
without  regard  to  race,  color,  or  previous  condition
i  vitude.  It  was  ratified  by  the  requisite  three
fourths  of  the  slab's,  and  declared  in  force.  80
March,  ls?<».  The  adoption  of  this  amendment
had  been  recommended  by  President  Grant,  ami


had had hi-  |«>rt throughout,  ami it in

largely  dm-  to  hi*  efforts  that  it  i-  now  a  part  of
-i  it  ut  ion.  lb-  proclaimed  its  adopt  ion  by  the
•omewhal  unusual  course  of  sending  a  special  mes-
sage tocongrem,  in  which  he  mid  i  "  1  regard  it  as  a
measure  <r  grander  Importance  than  am  other  om

act  of  the  kind  fnun  tin-  foundation  of  the  gOTOO
mi  nt  to  the  present  day."  lb-  also  urged  in  this
mesaage  that  ooagreoi  should  encourage  popular
education,  in  order  that the  negro  might  become

bettor  fitted  tor  the  exereiae  of  the  privileges  con-

ferreil  upon  him  by  this  amendment.

In  the  summer  Of  INill  a  representative  from  San-
to Domingo  informed  the  president  that  the  govern-
inent  and  paopwof  that  republic  favored  annexa-
tion to  the  United  States.  The  president  sent  sev-
eral officers  of  the  government  to  investigate  the
condition  of  atTairs  there,  and  I  ecaine  so  clearly
impressed  with  the  advantages  that  would  result
from  the  acquisition  of  that  country  that  he  nego-
tiated a  treaty  of  annexation,  and  submitted  it  to
the  senate  at  the  next  meeting  of  congress.  In
May.  1*70,  he  urged  favorable  action  on  the  part
of  that  body  in  a  message  in  which  he  set  forth  the


reasons  that  had  governed  him,  and  again  called
attention  to  it  in  his  second  annual  message.  He
claimed,  among  other  things,  that  its  admission
into  the  Union  as  a  territory  would  open  up  a
large  trade  between  the  two  lands,  furnish  desira-
ble harbors  for  naval  stations,  and  a  place  of  refuge
for  negroes  in  the  south  who  found  them-
persecuted  in  their  old  homes;  would  favor  the
abolition  of  slavery  in  the  West  Indies,  would  be
in  harmony  with  the  Monroe  doctrine,  and  would
redound  to  the  great  benefit  of  both  countries
and  to  civilization,  and  that  there  was  danger,  if
we  failed  to  receive  it.  that  it  would  be  taken  by
some  European  power,  and  add  another  to  the  list
of  islands  off  our  coast  controlled  by  European
powers,  and  likely  to  give  us  trouble  in  case  we  be-
came engaged  in  war.  The  measure  was  debated
for  a  long  time,  but  the  senate  did  not  act  favor-
ably upon  it.  In  1871  a  commission  of  distin-
guishea  citizens  was  sent  to  investigate  and  report
upon  all  matters  relating  to  Santo  Domingo  and
the  proposed  treaty.  They  visited  that  count  rv,
and  matte  an  exhaustive  report,  which  was  highly
favorable  to  the  plan  of  annexation  ;  but  the  treaty
was  constitutionally  rejected,  having  failed  to  re-
ceive the  necessary  two-third  vote,  and  was  aerez
brought  up  again.  The  president  declared  that  he
had  no  policy  to  enforce  against  the  will  of  the
people.  He  referred  to  the  subject  in  his  last  an-
nual message  to  congress,  and  reviewed  the  grounds
of  his  action,  not  in  order  to  renew  the  project,
but,  as  he  expressed  it.  "to  vindicate  my  previous
action  in  regard  to  it."  Many  outrages  had  been
committed  in  the  south  against  the  frecdmen,  and
congress  spent  much  time  in  considering  measures
for  the  suppression  of  these  crimes.  On  HI  May,
1*70,  a  bill  was  {Missed,  called  the  Enforcement  act,

which  empowered  the  president  to  protest  the

freedmeii  in  their  newly  acquired  rights,  and  pun-
ish the  iM-rjM'trators  of  the  outrages.  Several  sup-
plements to  this  were  subsequently  enacted,  and  a
most  om-rous  and  emoting  duty  was  imposed  up-
on the  executive  in  enforcing  their  provisions.

The  reconstruction  of  the  states  recently  in  re-
bellion  now  progressed  rapidly  under  the  14th
amendment,  which  guaranteed  equal  civil  rights
ko  all  citizens,  and  in  .Inly,  1*70,  all  the  states
had  ratified  this  amendment  and  Ik-cii  readmit-
ted to  the  I'nion.  The  votes  of  Arkansas  and
Louisiana  were  not  reo-ivi-d  by  OOngNM  in  the
piv-ideiitial  election  of  INTO;  but  this  was  on  ao-


720


BRANT


GRANT


count  of  fraud  and  illegal  practices  at  the  polls.
In  the  president's  annual  message  to  concn^s
D.c.inUr.  1809,  ho  recommended  the  passage  of
an  art  authorizing  the  funding  of  the  public  debt
at  a  lower  rate  of  interest.  This  was  followed  by
the  passing  of  an  act,  approved  14  July.  1910,
which  authorized  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  to
js*,ie  bond*  to  the  amount  of  $200,000,000.  l>earing
Interest  at  the  rate  of  5  per  cent.,  $300,000,000  at
the  rate  of  U  percent.,  and  $1,000,000,000  at  the
rate  of  4  per  cent.  Under  this  act,  and  subse-
quent amendment*  thereto,  the  national  debt  has
been  refunded  from  time  to  time,  until  the  average
rate  of  actual  interest  does  not  exceed  3|  per  cent.


In  1870  President  Grant  sent  special  messages  to
congress  urging  upon  that  body  the  necessity  of
building  up  our  merchant  marine,  and  the  adopt-
ing of  methods  for  increasing  our  foreign  com-
merce, and  relating  to  our  relations  with  Spain,
which  had  become  strained  in  consequence  of  the
action  of  Spanish  officials  in  Cuba.  In  August  of
this  year,  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  war  be-
tween France  and  Germany,  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion of  neutrality  as  to  both  of  those  nations,  and
defined  the  duties  of  Americans  toward  the  bel-
ligerents. Be  directed  the  U.  S.  minister  to  France,
Elihu  B.  Washburne,  to  remain  at  his  post  in  Paris,
and  extend  the  protection  of  the  American  flag  to
peoples  of  all  nationalities  who  were  without  the
protection  of  their  own  flag — an  act  that  saved
much  suffering  and  loss  to  individuals.

In  his  annual  message  in  1870,  the  president  took
strong  ground  in  favor  of  civil  service  reform,  say-
ing :  "  I  would  have  it  govern,  not  the  tenure,  but
the  manner  of  making  all  appointments,"  and  "  The
present  system  does  not  secure  the  best  men,  and
not  even  fit  men,  for  public  place."  This  subject
gave  rise  to  a  spirited  controversy  in  congress,
many  declaring  the  principle  to  be  wholly  un-
American,  and  calculated  to  build  up  a  favored
class,  who  would  be  in  great  measure  independent
of  their  executive  chiefs,  etc.  But  on  3  March,
1871,  an  act  was  passed  authorizing  the  president
to  appoint  a  civil  service  commission,  and  to  pre-
scribe rules  and  regulations  governing  the  appoint-
ments of  civil  officers.  He  appointed  seven  gen-
tlemen on  this  commission,  selecting  those  who
had  been  most  prominent  in  advocating  the  meas-
ure, and  transmitted  their  report  to  congress,  with
a  special  message  urging  favorable  action.  The
plan  recommended,  which  provided  for  competi-
tive examinations,  was  approved,  and  was  put  into
operation  1  Jan.,  1872.  An  appropriation  was  pro-
cured for  the  expenses  of  the  commission  and  the
carrying  out  of  the  plan,  but  congress  gave  little
countenance  to  the  measure.  Up  to  1874  the  presi-
dent continued  to  urge  that  body  to  give  legisla-
tive sanction  to  the  rules^and  methods  proposed,
and  declared  that  it  was  impossible  to  maintain
the  system  without  the  "  positive  support  of  con-
gress." He  finally  notified  congress  that  if  it  ad-


journed without  action  he  would  regard  it  as  a  dis-
approval of  the  system,  and  would  abandon  it  ;  but
he  continued  it  until  its  expenses  were  no  longer
provided  for.  The  agitation  of  the  question  had
been  productive  of  much  good.  The  seeds  thus
sown  had  taken  deep  root  in  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple, and  bore  good  fruit  in  after  years.  In  March,'
1871,  the  disorders  in  the  southern  states,  growing
out  of  conflicts  between  the  whites  and  the  blacks,
had  assumed  such  proportions  that  the  president
sent  a  special  message  to  congress  requesting
"  such  legislation  as  shall  effectually  secure  life,
liberty,  and  property,  and  the  enforcement  of  law
in  all  parts  of  the  United  States."  On  20  April
congress  passed  an  act  that  authorized  the  presi-
dent to  suspend,  under  certain  defined  circum-
stances, the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  any  district,
and  to  use  the  army  and  navy  in  suppressing  insur-
rections. He  issued  a  proclamation.  4  May,  order-
ing all  unlawful  armed  bands  to  disperse,  and,
after  expressing  his  reluctance  to  use  the  extraor-
dinary power  conferred  upon  him,  said  he  would
"  not  hesitate  to  exhaust  the  power  thus  vested  in
the  executive,  whenever  and  wherever  it  shall  be-
come necessary  to  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  secur-
ing to  all  citizens  of  the  United  States  the  peace-
ful enjoyment  of  the  rights  guaranteed  to  them  by
the  constitution  and  the  laws."  As  this  did  not
produce  the  desired  effect,  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion of  warning,  12  Oct.,  and  on  the  17th  sus-
pended the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  parts  of  North
and  South  Carolina,  He  followed  this  by  vigorous
prosecutions,  which  resulted  in  sending  a  number
of  prominent  offenders  to  prison,  and  the  outrages
soon  ceased.  The  most  important  measure  of  for-
eign policy  during  President  Grant's  administra-
tion was  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  of  8  Mav,

1871,  known  as  the  treaty  of  Washington.  Early
in  his  administration  the  president  had  begun  ne-
gotiations looking  to  the  settlement  of  the  claims
made  by  the  United  States  against  Great  Britain,
arising  from  the  depredations  upon  American  ves-
sels and  commerce  by  Confederate  cruisers  that
had  been  fitted  out  or  obtained  supplies  in  British
ports,  and  the  questions  growing  out  of  the  Cana-
dian fishery  disputes  and  the  location  of  our  north-
ern boundary-line  at  its  junction  with  the  Pacific
ocean,  which  left  the  jurisdiction  of  the  island  of
San  Juan  in  controversy.  Neither  of  the  two  last-
mentioned  questions  had  been  settled  by  the  treaty
of  peace  of  1783,  or  any  subsequent  treaties.  The
fishery  question  was  referred  to  arbitration  bv  three
commissioners,  one  to  be  chosen  by  the  United
States,  one  by  Great  Britain,  and  the  third  by  the
other  two,  provided  they  should  make  a  choice
within  a  stated  time,  otherwise  the  selection  to  be
made  by  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  The  two  com-
missioners having  failed  to  agree,  the  third  was
named  by  the  Austrian  emperor.  The  award  was
unsatisfactory  to  the  United  States,  the  decision  of
the  commission  was  severely  criticised,  and  the  dis-
pute has  from  time  to  time  been  reopened  to  the
detriment  of  both  countries.  The  San  Juan  ques-
tion was  referred  to  the  emperor  of  Germany  as
arbitrator,  with  sole  power.  His  award  fully  sus-
tained the  claim  of  the  United  States.  A  high
joint  commission  had  assembled  at  Washington,
composed  of  American  and  English  statesmen.
which  formulated  the  treaty  of  Washington,  and
by  its  terms  the  claims  against  Great  Britain  grow-
ing out  of  the  operations  of  the  Confederate  cruis-
ers, commonly  known  as  the  "Alabama  claims,"
were  referred  to  a  court  of  arbitration,  which  held
its  session  at  Geneva,  Switzerland. In  September,

1872,  it  awarded  the  United  States  the  sum  of  $15,-


QR  \NT


OR  WT


7-JI


000,000,  which  wu  subsequently  paid  by  the  Hrit-
ivornmcnt War  had  tit  one  time  seemed  im-
minent. 00 account of the bitterness fl'lt against

Great  Britain  in  consequence  of  her  unfriendly
eon*  during  oar  eiril  war:  but  tin-  president  waa
a  man  who  had  seen  »o  much  "f  the  evils  ol  war
that  ho  Ixrftine  a  confirmed  Uliever  in  pacific
meem-—  m  long  as  there  whs  boot  through  nab
means.  In  his  inaugural  address  lie  said :  "  In  re-
gard to  foreign  policy,  I  would  deal  with  nation*
as  equitable  law  requires  individuals  to  deal  with
other.  ...  1  would  res|H«<-t  the  right*  of  all
nations,  demanding  equal  respect  (or  our  own.  If
other-  depart  from  this  rule  in  their  dealings  with
us,  we  may  bt  OOfBDlQod  to  follow  t  li«*ir  precedent."

The  Adoption  of  the  treaty  was  it  signal  triumph
for  those  who  advocated  the  settlement  of  interna-
tional  disputes  by  peaceful  methods.  The  adop-
tion of  the  nlai  contained  in  the  treaty  for  the
■OTiaiiraant  of  neutral  nations  was  of  far  more
imp>rtan<c  than  the  money  award.  These  rules
were  to  govern  the  action  of  the  two  contracting
parties,  and  they  agree<l  to  bring  them  to  the  no-
tice of  other  nations, and  invite  them  to  follow  the
precedent thus  established. The  rules  stipulated

that  a  neutral  shall  not  permit  a  belligerent  t<»
fit  out,  arm,  or  equip  in  its  ports  any  vessel  that  it
has  reasonable  ground  to  Udicvc  is  intended  to
cruise  or  carry  on  war  against  a  nation  with  which
it  is  at  peace,  and  that  neither  of  the  contracting
parties  nail  |>ermit  a  belligerent  to  make  use  of  its
ports  or  waters  as  a  base  of  operations  again-t  the
other.  The  two  nations  also  agreed  to  use  due  dili-
gence to  prevent  any  infraction  of  than  rules.

On  22  May,  187*2,  the  amnesty  bill  was  passed
be  congress,  restoring  their  civil  rights  to  all  but
•host  :5o0  persons  in  the  south  who  had  held  con-
spicuous positions  under  the  Confederate  govern-
ment. President  Grant's  first  administration  had
been  vigorous  and  progressive.  Ini|M>rtant  reforms
had  been  inaugurated,  and  measures  of  vital  mo-
ment to  the  nation,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  had
been  carried  to  a  successful  conclusion  in  the  face
of  opposition  from  some  of  the  most  prominent
men  of  his  own  political  party. Not  a  few  Re-

Kublieans  U'camo  estranged,  feeling  that  they  were
fing  ignored  by  the  executive,  and  formed  them-
■etaej  into  an  organization  under  the  name  of
"  Lilieral  Republicans."  This  oppositiou  resulted
in  the  holding  of  a  convention  in  Cincinnati,  and
the  nomination  of  Horace  Greeley  as  its  candidate
for  the  presidency,  which  nomination  was  after-
ward adopted  by  the  Democratic  party.  The  Re-
publican convention  met  in  Philadelphia,  ft  June,
1S72,  renominated  President  Grant,  and  adopted
a  platform  approving  the  principles  advocated  by
him  in  his  previous  administration.  When  the
election  took  place,  he  carried  31  states,  with  a
|H>pular  vote  of  ::.V.i?.h7o,  the  largest  that  had
ever  Ihtii  given  for  any  president,  while  Greeley
carried  (>  Mates  with  a  popular  vote  of  2,834,079.
Grant  received  28<i  electoral  votes  against  »><;  that
would  have  been  cast  for  Mr.  (ireelev  if  he  bad
lived.  The  14  ratted  Arkansas  ami  Louisiana
were  not  counted,  because  of  fraud  and  illegality
in  the  election.  The  canvass  had  ben  one  of  the
most  aggressive  and  exciting  in  the  historv  of  the
country,  and  abounded  in  (lersonal  attacks  upon
the  candidates.  Gen.  Grant,  in  his  inaugural  ad-
drees  on  4  March,  1*?:>.  said,  in  alluding  to  the  per-
sonal  abOM  that  had  lx-on  aimed  at  him:  "  To-day
.  that  I  can  disregard  it.  in  view  of  vour  re*
dict,  which  I  gratefully  accept  U  my  vindication."
second  term  was  a  continuation  of  the  policy
that  had  characterized  his  first.  His  foreign  i
if. — 16


potfej  was  *teadfa»t,  dignified,  ami  ju<t,  always
exhibiting  a  conscientious  regard  for  the righta

of  foreign  nations,  and  at  the  same  time  main-
taining the  right*  of  our  own.  He  instructed  the
ministers  to  China  and  Japan  to  deal  with  thon
powers  as  "we  would  wish  a  strong  nation  to  deal
m  ith  us  if  we  were  weak."  During  the  insurrection
in  the  island  of  Cuba,  which  had  lasted  for  several

years,  ■  number  of  American  citizens  hail  ban  ar-
rested by  the  Spanish  authorities,  under  the  pre-
tence that  they  had  U-en  furnishing  aid  to  the  insur-
gents, and  American  vessels  plying  in  <  'uban  waters
had  at  times  lieeti  subjected  to  much  inconvenience.
Then  matters  culminated  in  the  seizure  bv  Spain,
without  justification,  of  an  American  vessel  named
the  ••  Virginius."  The  excitement  created  in  the
I'nited  States  by  this  outrage  was  intense,  and
manv  statesmen  were  clamorous  for  war.  Hut  the
president  lielieved  that  pacific  measures  would  ac-
complish a  more  satisfactory  result,  and.  by  acting
with  promptness  ami  firmness,  he  soon  wrung
from  Spain  ample  apology  ami  full  reparation.

Political  troubles  were  still  rife  in  certain  states
of  the  south.  The  result  of  the  election  in  LouJaV
ana  in  1H72  was  in  dispute,  and  armed  violence
was  threatened  in  that  state.  Karly  in  1K73  the
president  called  the  attention  of  congress  to  the  in-
adequacy of  the  laws  applying  to  such  cases,  say-
ing that  he  had  recognized  the  officers  installed  by
the  decision  of  the  rcturiiing-ltoard  as  representing
the  de  facto  government,  and  added :  '*  I  am  cx-
treinely  anxious  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  limine
interference  in  state  affairs,  and  if  congress  differs
from  me  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done,  I  respect-
fully urge  its  immediate  decision  to  that  effect."
Congress,  however,  took  no  action,  and  left  with

tl xecittiye  the  sole  responsibility  of  dealing  with

this  delicate  question.  The  next  year  the  trouble
was  renewed,  and  the  fierce  contest' that  was  waged


between  the  Republicans  under  Kellogg,  and  the
Democrats  under  McKmry,  their  respective  can-
didates for  the  governorship,  resulted  in  armed
hostilities.  Kellogg,  the  ilr  tur/o  governor,  called
upon  the  Federal  authority  for  protection,  and
Ccii.  Kmory  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  with  U.  S.
troops,  and  the  outbreak  was  for  a  time  suppressed.
Hut  difficulties  arose  again,  and  the  president  sent
(Jen.  Sheridan  to  Louisiana  to  repOtt  upon  the
situation  of  atTairs.  and.  if  necessary,  to  take  com-
mand of  the  troops  and  adopt  vigorous  measures
to  preserve  the  peace.  (Jen.  Sheridan  U-caiuc  con-
vinced that  his  duty  was  to  sustain  the  government
organized  by  Kellogg,  and.  on the  demand  of  the

raranof^  bt  ejected  tomeof  M oBnery'c  adherents

from  the  state  capitol.  The  president  submitted
the  whole  history  of  the  case  to  congress,  asking
for  legislation  defining  his  duties  in  the  emergency.
(Jetting  no  legislation  M  the  subject,  he  continued
his  recognition  of  the  government,  of  which  Kel-


722


GRANT


GRANT


logg  «H  tin-  bead,  until  the  election  of  a  new  gor-
troor;  but  there  was  afterward  no  serious  trouble

in  Louisiana.  Difficulties  of  tli»'  MOM  nature  MOM
in  ArkmMJ  and  Tim,  which  were  almost  as  per-
plexing  to  the  executive;  but  thes-  attracted  less
attention  before  the  public.  Difficulties  of  a  some-
what similar  kiml  were  encountered  also  in  IflMJI
sippi.  but  the  presiilent  in  this  case  avoided  inter-
ference on  the  part  of  the  general  government.

hi  April,  1874.  congress  passed  what  was  known
as  the  "Inflation  bill."  which  increased  the  paper
currency  of  the  country,  and  was  contrary  to  the
financial  principles  that' the  president  had  always
entertained  and  advocated  in  his  state  papers.
Manv  of  his  warmest  political  supporters  had  ap-
proval the  measure,  and  unusual  efforts  were  made
to  convince  him  that  it  was  wise  financially  and
expedient  politically.  The  president  gave  much
thought  and  study  to  the  question,  and  at  one  time
wrote  out  the  draft  of  a  message  in  which  he  set
forth  all  the  arguments  that  could  be  made  in  its
favor,  in  order  that  he  might  fully  weigh  them ;
but,  on  reading  it  over,  he  became  convinced  that
the  reasons  advanced  were  not  satisfactory,  and
that  the  measure  would  in  the  end  be  injurious  to
the  true  business  interests  of  the  country,  and  de-
lay the  resumption  of  specie  payment.  He  there-
fore returned  the  bill  to  congress,  with  his  veto,  22
April.  The  arguments  contained  in  his  message
were  unanswerable,  the  bill  was  not  passed  over  his
veto,  and  his  course  was  sustained  by  the  whole
country.  Perhaps  no  act  of  his  administration  was
more  highly  approved  by  the  people  at  large,  and  the
result  amply  proved  the  wisdom  of  the  firmness  he
exhibited  at  this  crisis.  About  two  months  after
this,  in  a  conversation  at  the  executive  mansion
witli  Senator  Roscoe  Conkling.  of  New  York,  and
Senator  John  P.  Jones,  of  Nevada,  the  president  en-
tered at  length  upon  his  views  concerning  the  duty
of  the  government  to  take  steps  looking  to  the  re-
turn to  specie  payment.  His  earnestness  on  this  sub-
ject, and  the  advantages  of  the  methods  proposed,
so  impressed  the  senators  that  they  asked  him  to
commit  his  views  to  writing.  He  complied  with
this  request  by  writing  a  letter  addressed  to  Sena-
tor Jones,  dated  4  June,  1874,  in  which  he  began
by  saying:  "I  believe  it  a  high  and  plain  duty  to
return  to  a  specie  basis  at  the  earliest  practical  day,
not  only  in  compliance  with  legislative  and  party
pledges,  but  as  a  step  indispensable  to  national  last-
ing prosperity."  Then  followed  his  views  at  length.
This  letter  was  made  public,  and  attracted  much
attention,  and  in  January,  1875,  the  "  Resumption
act "  was  passed,  which,  to  a  large  extent,  embodied
the  views  that  had  been  suggested  by  the  presi-
dent. There  were  doubts  in  the  minds  of  many  as
to  the  ability  of  the  government  to  carry  it  into
effect;  but  it  proved  entirely  successful,  and  the
country  was  finally  relieved  from  the  stigma  of
circulating  an  irredeemable  paper  currency.

During  1875  the  president  had  reason  to  sus-
pect that  frauds  were  being  practised  by  govern-
ment officials  in  certain  states  in  collecting  the
revenue  derived  from  the  manufacture  of  whiskey.
He  at  once  took  active  measures  for  their  detec-
tion, and  the  vigorous  pursuit  and  punishment  of
the  offenders.  He  issued  a  stringent  order  for
their  prosecution,  closing  with  the  famous  words,
"  Let  no  guilty  man  escape."  Many  indictments
soon  followed,  the  ringleaders  were  sent  to  the
penitentiary,  and  an  honest  collection  of  the
revenue  was  secured.  Some  of  the  revenue  offi-
cials were  men  of  much  political  influence,  and
had  powerful  friends.  The  year  for  nominating  a
president  was  at  hand,  and  the  excitement  ran


hiirh.  F'riends  of  the  convicted,  political  enemies
and  rivals  for  the  succession  in  his  own  party,  re-
sorted to  the  most  desperate  means  to  break  the
president's  power  and  diminish  his  popularity.
The  grossest  misrepresentations  were  practised,
first  in  trying  to  bring  into  question  the  hum  sty
of  his  purpose  in  the  prosecution  of  offenders,  and*
afterward  in  endeavoring  to  rob  him  of  the  credit
of  his  labors  after  they  had  purified  the  revenue-
service. But  these  efforts  signally  failed.

In  September,  1875,  Gen.  Grant,  while  attend-
ing an  army  reunion  in  Iowa,  offered  three  reso-
lutions on  the  subject  of  education,  and  made  a
speech  in  which  he  used  this  language :  "  Let
us  labor  for  the  security  of  free  thought,  free
speech,  free  press,  pure  morals,  unfettered  re-
ligious sentiments,  and  equal  rights  and  privileges
for  all  men,  irrespective  of  nationality,  color,  or
religion  ;  encourage  free  schools ;  resolve  that  not
one  dollar  appropriated  to  them  shall  go  to  the
support  of  any  sectarian  school ;  resolve  that
neither  state  nor  nation  shall  support  any  institu-
tion save  those  where  every  child  may  get  a  com-
mon-school education,  unmixed  with  any  atheist  ic,
pagan,  or  sectarian  teaching ;  leave  the  matter  of
religious  teaching  to  the  family  altar,  and  keep
church  and  state  forever  separate."  This  was
published  broadcast,  and  was  received  with  marked
favor  by  the  press  and  people.

In  1876  Samuel  J.  Tilden,  of  New  York,  was
nominated  for  the  presidency  by  the  Democrats,
and  Gen.  Rutherford  B.  Hayes,  of  Ohio,  by  the
Republicans.  When  the  election  was  held  in  No-
vember, the  result  was  in  dispute,  and  a  bitter
contest  was  likely  to  follow  in  determining  which
was  the  legally  elected  candidate.  After  an  ex-
citing debate  in  congress,  a  bill  was  passed  provid-
ing for  an  electoral  commission,  to  whose  decision
the  question  was  to  be  referred.  It  decided  in
favor  of  Gen.  Hayes,  and  he  was  inaugurated  on
4  March,  1877.  During  all  this  time  the  political
passions  of  the  people  were  raised  to  fever-heat,
serious  threats  of  violence  were  made,  and  the
business  interests  of  the  country  were  greatly  dis-
turbed. President  Grant  took  no  active  part  in
the  determination  of  the  question,  but  devoted
himself  to  measures  to  preserve  the  peace.  There
were  many  changes  in  the  cabinet  during  Grant's
two  administrations.  The  following  is  a  list  of  its
members,  giving  the  order  in  which  they  served :
Secretaries  of  state,  Elihu  B.  Washburne,  of  Illi-
nois ;  Hamilton  Fish,  of  New  York.  Secretaries  of
the  treasury,  Alexander  T.  Stewart,  of  New  York
(appointed,  but  not  confirmed,  on  account  of  the
discovery  of  an  old  law  rendering  him  ineligible
because  of  his  being  engaged  in  the  business  of  an
importing  merchant);  George  S.  Boutwell,  of
Massachusetts;  William  M.  Richardson,  of  Mas-
sachusetts; Benjamin  H.  Bristow,  of  Kentucky;
Lot  M.  Morrill,  of  Maine.  Secretaries  of  war,
Gen.  John  M.  Schofield,  U.  S.  army;  John  A.
Rawlins,  of  Illinois;  William  W.  Belknap,  of
Iowa ;  Alonzo  Taft,  of  Ohio ;  J.  Donald  Cameron,
of  Pennsylvania.  Secretaries  of  the  navy,  Adolph
E.  Borie,  of  Pennsylvania;  George  M.  Robeson,  of
New  Jersey.  Postmasters-General,  John  A.  J.
Creswell,  of  Maryland;  Marshall  Jewell,  of  Con-
necticut ;  James  A.  Tvner,  of  Indiana.  Atb
General,  Ebenezer  It.  Hoar,  of  Massachusetts;
Amos  T.  Akerman,  of  Georgia;  George  H.  Will-
iams, of  Oregon;  Edwards  Pierrepont,  of  New
York ;  Alonzo  Taft,  of  Ohio.  Secretaries  of  the
interior.  Gen.  Jacob  D.  Cox,  of  Ohio:  Columbus
Delano,  of  Ohio;  Zachariah  Chandler,  of  Michi-
gan. (See  articles  on  each  of  these  cabinet  offl-


QH  \M


GRANT


718


HuriiiL'  President  Swart  admmfatrations
i  been  reduced  over  ^:{(m).(khi,»hmi,  ths
national  debt  orer  1480.000,000.  t !■•-  interest  on
the  debt  fr-.m  1160,000,000  to  j? Hm».(Mm».<mk» :  the
balance  "f  trade  had  changed  from  ft  130,000,000
again*!  this  country  In  1190.000,000  ill it*  fa\-.r:

instruction  "f  the  sou t hern  states  hiul  Iwen
oompleted;  the  flr^t  trantmitimintal  railroad  had
bans  fmiebed;  all  threatening  foreign  complications
had  been  aatfcrfeotorily  settled;  and  all  exciting
national  ipiest  ions  seemed  t<>  have  Ut-o  determined
and  renotad  from  the  arena  of  political  mutest*.
San,  < ; rant,  while  |>n->i< It-nt .  exhibited  the  hum
executive  ability  at  m  the  army,  Insetting  upon  a

C roper  division  of  labor  among  the  different
ranchat  of  the  gorarnroent,  laavug  the  head  of
aach  depart TiHtni  great  freedom  of  action,  and
holding  him  toe  strict  accountability  fnr  the  con-
duct n  the  affair* of  bieoAoa.  He  decided  with
great  pfomptnani  all  caseations  referred  to  him,
and  suggested  many  nwaavNi  tor  Improving  the
government  service,  bnl  l«-f t  tin-  carrying  out  of
aataQt to the  projier  chiefs. While |M>sitive  in


his  views,  and  tenacious  of  his  opinion*  when  they

had  one*  bean  fanned  after  due  reflection,  he

tjataned  patiently  to  suggestion*  and  arguments,
and  had  DO  pride  of  opinion  M  to  changing  his
mind,  if  convincing  reasons  were  pnasnted  to
him. He was  generally  a  patient listener  while

others  presented  their  view*,  and  seldom  gave  his

opinions  until  they  wen'  thoroughly  matured;
then  be  talked  freely  and  with  gnat  force  and
effect.  He  was  one  of  the  most  accessible  of  all
the  preatdenta Be  reserved  no  hours  that  he

could  call  his  own,  hut  was  ready  to  see  all  classes
>t  people  at  all  times,  whether  tiny  were  high  in

{mviiiuM  or  fmni  the  ranks  of  the  plain  people,
lis  patience  was  one  of  the  most  characteristic
traits  of  his  character,  and  his  treatment  of  those
who  came  in  contact  with  him  was  frank  and  cur-
dial  to  the  highest  degree.  His  devotion  t<i  his
friends  was  proverbial,  and  hi-  loyalty  U)  nthers
commanded  loyalty  from them,  and  accounted,  in

freat  measure,  for  the  warmth  and  devotion  if
is  followers.  Wherever  he  placed  trust  he  n-
posed  rare  confidence,  until  it  was  shaken  l>y
actual  proofs  of  lietrayal. This  characteristic  of


hi*  nature  |«1  him  at times  to  !*• imi>o*cd upon
hv  thoaa  who wire not worthy of the faith he
placed in them; but persons that onc<
confidence  never  regained  it.

After  retiring from the presidency. 4

1877.  Gen.  Grani  decided  to  visit  the  eountii

the  Old  World,  and  OH  17  May  he  Bailed  from  Phila-
delphia for  I.iver|HMil  on the  steamer  "  Indiana,"

eaaompanied  by  his  wife  and  one  nan, Hwdepartur*

was  the  occasion for  a  memorable  demonstration

on  the  Delaware* DaatingeJahad  men  from  all

parts  of  the  country  had  assembled  to  hid  him
good-by,  and  accompanied  him  down  the  rfvat,
A  fleet  of  naval  and  commercial  vessels  and  river
limits,  decorated  with  lirilliant  hanners,  OOttl
his  steamer,  crowds  lined  the  shores  greeting  him
with  cheers,  baOi  rang,  whistles  sounded  from
mills  and  factories,  and  innumerable  flags  sa-
luted as  he  [Missed.  On  his  arrival  in  Liverpool,
28  May,  he  received  the  first  of  a  series  of  ovations
in  foreign  lands  scarcely  less  cordial  and  demon-
strative than  those  which  had  l»ecn  accorded  him
in  his  own  country.  The  river  Mersey  was  cov-
ered with  vessels  displaying  the  flags  of  all  na-
tions, and  all  vied  with  each  other  in  their  demon-
strations of  welcome.  He  visited  the  places  of
greatest  interest  in  Great  Britain,  and  was  accord-
ed the  freedom  of  her  chief  cities,  which  means  the
granting  of  citizenship.  He  received  a  greater
number  of  such  honors  than  had  ever  bean  be-
stowed even  upon  the  most  illustrious  English-
man. In  London  he  was  received  by  the  aneefl
and  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  afterward  visited
her  majestv  at  Windsor  Castle.  While  he  was  en-
tertained in  a  princely  manner  by  royalty,  the
most  enthusiastic  grcciings  came  from  the  masses
of  the  people,  who  everywhere  turned  out  to  wel-
come him.  His  replies  to  the  numerous  addresses
of  welcome  were  marked  bv  exceeding  good  taste
and  were  read  with  much  favor  by  his  own  coun-
tryman, Upon  leaving  England  he  visited  the
continent,  and  the  greetings  there  from  crowned
heads  and  common  people  were  repetitions  of  the
receptions  he  bad  met  ever  since  he  landed  in  Eu-
rope. The  United  States  man-of-war  "Vandalia"
had  been  put  at  his  disposal,  and  on  board  that
vessel  he  made  a  cruise  in  the  Mediterranean,  vis-
iting Italy.  Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land.  He  sailed
from  Marseilles  for  India, 88  .Ian.,  1N75».  arrived  at
Bombay,  12  Feb.,  and  from  there  visited  Calcutta
and  many  other  places  of  interest.  His  journey
through  the  country  called  forth  a  series  of  dem-
onstrations which  resembled  the  greetings  to  an
emperor  passing  through  his  own  realms.  He
sailed  in  the  latter  part  of  March  for  Burmah,  and
afterward  visited  the  Malacca  peninsula.  Siam,
Cochin  China,  and  Hong-Kong,  arriving  at  the
latter  place  on  80  April.  He  made  a  tour  into  the
interior  of  China,  and  was  everywhere  received
with  honors  greater  than  had  ever  been  bestowed
upon  a  foreigner.  At  Pekin,  Prince  Kung  re-
quested him  to  act  as  sole  arbitrator  in  the  settle-
ment of  the  dispute  between  that  country  and
•la pan  concerning  the  Loo  Choo  islands.  His
plans  prevented  him  from  entering  upon  the  duties
Of  arbitrator,  bnl  he  studied  theooastion*  involved
ami  gave  his  advice  <>n  the  subject,  and  the  mat-
ters in  dispute  were  afterward  settled  without  war.
On  21  June  he  reached  Xangasaki,  where  he  was
received  by  the  imperial  officials  and  became  the
guest  of  the  mikado.  The  attention  shown  him
while  in  Japan  exceeded  in  some  of  its  features
that  which  he  had  received  in  anv  of  the  other
countries  included  in  his  tour.  The  entertain-
ments prepared  in  his  honor  were  memorable  in


784


GRANT


GRANT


tin-  hi.-torv  <>f  that  empire.  I!«'  sailed  from  Yoko-
hama,:* Sent.,  and  reached  San  Pmndaoo  on  the
20th.  Be  DM  not  visited  the  Pacific  coast  since
he  had  served  there  as  a  lieutenant  of  infantry.
Preparation!  bad  been  made  for  a  reception  that
should  surpass  any  ever  accorded  to  ■  public  man
in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  the  demonstration
in  the  B«rbor  of  San  Francisco  on  his  arrival
formed  a  (>ageant  equal  to  anything  of  the  kind
leen  In  modern  times.  On  liis  journey  east  he
was  tendered  banquets  and  public  receptions,  and
greeted  with  every  manifestation  of  welcome  in  the
different  cities  at  which  he  stopped.  Early  in
1880,  he  travelled  through  some  of  the  southern
states  and  visited  Cuba  and  Mexico.  In  the  lat-
ter country  he  was  hailed  as  its  staunchest  and
most  pronounced  friend  in  the  days  of  its  struggle
against  foreign  usurpation,  and  the  people  testified
their  gratitude  by  extending  to  him  every  possi-
ble act  of  personal  and  official  courtesy.  On  his
return  he  took  his  family  to  his  old  home  in  Gale-
na, ill.  A  popular  movement  had  begun  looking
to  his  renomination  that  year  for  the  presidency,
and  overtures  were  made  to  him  to  draw  him  into
an  active  canvass  for  the  purpose  of  accomplish-
ing this  result:  but  he  declined
to  take  any  part  in  the  move-
ment, and  preferred  that  the
nomination  should  either  come
to  him  unsolicited  or  not  at  all.
When  the  Republican  conven-
tion met  in  Chicago  in  June,
1880,  his  name  was  presented,


In  May,  1884,  the  firm  without  waning  suspended.
It  \va<  found  that  two  of  the  partners  bad  been
practising  a  series  of  unblushing  frauds,  and  had
robbed  the  general  and  his  family  of  all  th<
sessed,  and  left  them  hopelessly  bankrupt.  Until
this  time  he  had  refused  all  solicitations  to  write
the  history  of  his  military  career  for  publication,
intending  to  leave  it  to  the  official  records  and  the
historians  of  the  war.  Almost  his  only  contribu-
tion to  literature  was  an  article  entitled  "An  l'n-
deserved  Stigma,"  in  the  "  North  American  Re-
view "  for  December,  1882,  which  he  wrote  as  an
act  of  justice  to  Gen.  Pits-John  Porter,  whose  case
he  had  personally  investigated.  But  now  he  was
approached  by  the  conductors  of  the  " Century"
magazine  with  an  invitation  to  write  a  series  of
articles  on  his  principal  campaigns,  which  he  ac-
cepted, for  the  purpose  of  earning  money,  of  which
he  was  then  greatly  in  need,  and  he  accordingly
produced  four  articles  for  that  periodical.  Find-
ing this  a  congenial  occupation,  and  receiving
handsome  offers  from  several  publishers,  he  set
himself  to  the  task  of  preparing  two  volumes  of

Eersonal  memoirs,  in  which  he  told  the  story  of
is  life  down  to  the  close  of  the  war,  and  proved
himself  a  natural  and  charming
writer,  and  a  valuable  contribu-
tor to  history.  The  contract
for  the  publication  of  the  book
was  made  on  27  Feb.,  1885,
and  the  work  appeared  about  a
year  afterward.  The  sales  were
enormous,  having  reached  up


*^ --'-JZA


and  for  thirty-six  ballots  he  received  a  vote  that  only
varied  between  302  and  313.  Many  of  his  warm-
est admirers  were  influenced  against  his  nomina-
tion by  a  traditional  sentiment  against  a  third
presidential  term,  and  after  a  long  and  exciting
session  the  delegates  to  the  convention  compro-
mised by  nominating  Gen.  James  A.  Garfield.
Gen.  Grant  devoted  himself  loyally  during  this
political  canvass  to  the  success  of  the  party  that
had  so  often  honored  him,  and  contributed  largely
by  his  efforts  to  the  election  of  the  candidate.

In  August,  1881.  Gen.  Grant  bought  a  house  in
New  York,  where  he  afterward  spent  his  winters,
while  his  summers  were  passed  at  his  cottage  at
Long  Branch.  On  Christmas  eve,  1883.  he  slipped
and  fell  upon  the  icy  sidewalk  in  front  of  his  house,
and  received  an  injury  to  his  hip,  which  proved  so
severe  that  he  never  afterward  walked  without  the
aid  of  a  crutch.  Finding  himself  unable  with  his
income  to  support  his  family  properly,  he  had  be-
come a  partner  in  a  banking-house  in  which  one  of
his  sons  and  others  were  interested,  bearing  the
name  of  Grant  and  Ward,  and  invested  all  his  avail-
able capital  in  the  business.  lie  took  no  part  in  the
management,  and  the  affairs  of  the  firm  were  left
almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  junior  partner.


to  this  time  312,000  sets.  The  amount  that  Mrs.
Grant  has  already  (June,  1887)  received  as  her
share  of  the  profits  is  $394,459.53,  paid  in  two
checks,  of  $200,000  and  $150,000,  and  several  small-
er amounts,  the  largest  sum  ever  received  by  an
author  or  his  representatives  from  the  sale  of  any
single  work.  It  is  expected  by  the  publishers  that
the  amount  of  half  a  million  of  dollars  will  be  ulti-
mately paid  to  the  general's  family.  In  the  sum-
mer of  1884  Gen.  Grant  complained  of  a  soreness
in  the  throat  and  roof  of  the  mouth.  In  August
he  consulted  a  physician,  and  a  short  time  after-
ward the  disease  was  pronounced  to  be  cancer  at
the  root  of  the  tongue.  The  sympathies  of  the
entire  nation  were  now  aroused,  messages  of  hope
and  compassion  poured  in  from  every  quarter,  and
on  4  March,  1885,  congress  passed  a  bill  creating
him  a  general  on  the  retired  list,  thus  restoring  him
to  his  former  rank  in  the  army.  He  knew  that  his
disease  would  soon  prove  fatal.  He  now  bent  all  his
energies  to  the  completing  of  his  "Memoirs,"  in  or-
der that  the  money  realized  from  the  sale  might
provide  for  his  family.  He  summoned  all  his  will
power  to  this  task,  and  nothing  in  his  career  was
more  heroic  than  the  literary  Tabor  he  now  per-
formed. Hovering  between  life  aryl  death,  suffer


GRANT


OKASSK  TILLY


790


in*:  almost  oonst  ant  a^ony.  and  speechlem  fr< 'in  'li-

tirough  his  daily  task,  and  laid

nlv  fimr  day-  before  ln>  death. At

tins  time  the  last  portrait  am  made  of  tin-  great

■oldier,  which  appear-  on  pap-  Till

<»n  Hi  June,  1886,  he  was  remored  to  the  Joseph
\V.  Dn  10I  cottage  on  Mount  McGregor,  near  Sara-
toga, N.  Y.,  when  hi  passed  the  remaining  Ave
weeks  of  his  li f»-. (8es  illustration  on  page  721.)

Tli» ttagu  was  offered  by  its  owner  »»  a  gift  to

tin-  l'.  S.  government.  As  it  MM  not  IQBjnlajd,  Mr.
the  cottage  and  its  contents  in  the
condition  they  were  in  ul  the  time  of  the  gem
death, and  will  continue  to  do  so.  On  Thursday.  2-i
July,  at  eight  o'clock  In  the  morning.  Gran!  [Missed
away,  surrounded  by  liis  family.  The  remains  were
taken  to  New  York,  escorted  bv  a  detachment  of
I  S.  troops  and  a  body  of  the  Grand  army  of  the
republic  composed  of  veterans  of  the  war.  A  pul>-
lic  funeral  was  held  in  that  citv  on  Saturday,  8
Au;'.,  which  was  the  most  magnificent  spectacle  of
the  kind  ever  witnessed  in  this  country.  The  body
was  deposited  in  a  temporary  tomb  in  Riverside
park,  overlooking  the  Hudson  river,  where  it  is
proposed  to  erect  an  imposing  monument,  for
which  alK.ut  $12.r>,(XM>  have  already  (June,  18*7)  been
suh-criU'd.  In  Chicago  a  bronze  equestrian  statue
of  the  general,  executed  by  Kehisso,  will  soon  be
■acted  near  the  centre  of  Lincoln  park,  overlook-
ing Lake  Michigan.  The  illustration  on  page  72:1
i-  a  representation  of  the  statue,  and  on  the  fol-
lowing page  is  a  view  of  the  eastern  facade  of  the
structure,  designed  by  Whitehouse,  which  is  sur-
mounted by  the  statue.  The  large  collection  of
swords,  gold-headed  canes,  medals,  rare  coins,  and
other  articles  that  had  been  presented  to  (Jen.
Grant  passed  into  the  possession  of  William  II.
Vandcrbilt  as  security  in  a  financial  transaction
shortly  before  the  general's  death.  After  that
event  Mr.  Yanderbilt  returned  the  articles  to  Mrs.
Grant,  by  whom  they  were  given  to  the  United
States  government,  and  the  entire  collection  is  now
in  the  National  museum  at  Washington.  Among
the  many  portraits  of  the  great  soldier,  perhaps
the  best  are  those  painted  bv  Healy  for  the  Union
league  club  about  1865,  and  another  executed  in
Paris  in  1877,  now  in  the  possession  of  the  family,
those?  painted  in  1882  by  Le  Clear  for  the  White
House  at  Washington  and  the  Calumet  club  of.
Chicago,  and  one  executed  by  Ulke  for  the  U.  S.
war  department,  where  is  also  to  be  seen  a  fine
marble  bust,  executed  in  1872-'3,  by  Hiram  Pow-
er-. Baa  "Military  Historv  of  Ulvsses  S.  Grant,
from  April.  1861. to  April.  1865,"by  Adam  Badcau
<:{  vols..  New  York,  1867-81 );  '•  Life  and  Public  Ser-
vices of  Gen.  U.S.  Grant,"  by  James  Grant  Wilson
(1868);  revised  and  enlarged  edition  (1886);  "The
Ancestry  of  General  Grant  and  their  Contempora-
ries," by  Ivlward  C  Marshall  (1H<>!»):  "Around  the
World  with  General  Grant,"  by  John  Kussell  Young

(1XH0);  and  "Personal  Memoirs  of  l\  S.  Grant. "
written  by  himself  <2  vols.,  lH85-'6);  also  various
biographies  ami  numerous  addresses,  among  them
one  bv  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  delivered  in  Bo-ton.

Oct-  is*.",.— His  wife.  Julia  Dent,  b.  in  St.
Louis.  Mo..  '26  Jan..  IH'26.  is  the  daughter  of  Fred-
erick and  Kllen  Wretishall  Hcnt.  Her  father  was
the  ion  <>f  (apt.  George  Dent,  who  led  the  forlorn
hope  at  Port  Montgomery,  when  it  was  stormed
bj  Mad  Anthony  Wayne.  On  her  mother's  ride
she  was  descended  from  John  Wren-hall,  who
came  from  England  to  this  country  to  escape  re-
ligious intolerance,  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.
At  the  aga  of  ten  years  she  was  nnt  to  Mi--  M<»-

l'i Uianling-  school, where -he remained  for


^O^^c^^-


nfajjM  years. Skim  after  her  return  home  she  met
Lieut.  (Jrant.  then  of  the  4th infantry,  Rationed

at  Jefferson  barrnekaej  St.  Louis, and  in  the  apring
ol  1844  baoai Bgngad  to  him. Their  marriage,

daterad  i»-  the  war  with  Maiioo,  t'M)k  plant

Aug.. 1H4N. The

first  four  years  of
her  married  life
were  spent  at  De-
troit.  Mich.,  and
kett'e  Har-
bor, N.  Y..  where
('apt.  (irant  \\a-
stationed.  lnl*V2
Mrs.  Grant  re-
turned to  her  fa-
ther's home  in  St.
Louis,  her  health
not  being  suffi-
ciently strong  to
accompany  her
husband  to  Cal-
ifornia, whither
his  command  had
been  ordered.
Two  years  later  he  resigned  from  the  army  and
joined  his  family  in  St.  Lords,  During  the  civil
war  Mrs.  Grant  passed  much  of  the  time  with  (Jen.
(irant,  or  near  the  scene  of  action,  he  sending  for
her  whenever  opportunity  pendttod.  She  was
with  him  at  City  Point  in  the  winter  of  1864-'5,
and  accompanied  him  to  Washington  when  he  re-
turned with  his  victorious  army.  She  saw  her  hus-
band twice  inaugurated  president  of  the  United
States,  and  was  his  companion  in  his  journey
around  the  world.  She  herself  has  said :  "  Haying
learned  a  lesson  from  her  predecessor,  Penelope,
she  accompanied  her  Ulysses  in  his  wanderings
around  the  world."  After  Gen.  Grant's  death  a
bill  was  passed  by  congress  giving  his  widow  a
pension  of  $5,000  a  year.  She  is  the  fourth  to
whom  such  a  pension  has  been  granted,  the  others
being  Mrs.  Tyler,  Mrs.  Polk,  and  Mrs.  Garfield
Four  children  were  born  to  her — three  sons,  Fred-
erick Dent,  Ulysses,  Jr.,  and  Jesse,  and  one  daugh-
ter, Nellie,  who,  in  1874,  married  Algernon  Sartoris,
and  went  to  reside  with  him  in  England.  Mrs.
Grant  resides  in  New  York  city,  surrounded  by
her  children  and  grandchildren. — Their  eldest  son,
Frederick  Dent,  b.  in  St.  Louie,  Mo..  :so  May,
1850,  accompanied  his  father  during  the  civil  war,
and  was  in  five  battles  before  he  was  thirteen  years
of  age.  In  1867  he  entered  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, where  he  was  graduated  in  1871  and  assigned
to  the  4th  cavalry.  During  the  summer  of  1871
he  was  employed  on  the  Union  Pacific  and  Colo-
rado Central  railroads  as  an  engineer.  Ijite  in
1*71  he  visited  Kurope  with  Gen.  Sherman,  and  in
1872  was  detailed  to  command  the  escort  to  the
partv  that  was  making  the  preliminary  survey  for
the  Southern  Pacific  railroad.  In  1H7:1  he  was  as-
signed to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Sherman  as  lieutenant-
colonel,  in  which  capacity  he  served  eight  years,
accompanying  nearly  every  expedition  against  the
Indians.  He  was  with  his  father  in  1N79  in  the
oriental  part  of  the  journey  round  the  world,  and
in  1881  resigned  his  commission.  Daring  his  fa-
ther's illness.  Col.  Grant  remained  constantly  with
him  and  assisted  somewhat  in  the  preparation  of
the  "  Personal  Memoirs."  Since  (Jen.  (Jrant's  death
his  son  has  had  the  care  of  his  mother  and  her
estate,  residing  with  her.

GRASSK-TILLY,  Francois  Joseph  Panl.
count  de,  b.  in  Yalette,  Province.  France,  in  1728;
d.  in  Paris,  11  Jan.,  1788. He  entered  the  navy  at


796


GBASSE-TILLY


GRATIOT


the  age  of  I'l.v.n.  While  lieutenant  of  a  frigate
he  was  captured  by  a  British  ship  in  174'J.  and
confined  In  Bnghmn  until  ha  was  exchanged.  He
Hired  under  La  Galissonicre  during  the  Seven

war,  and  assisted in  taking  Minorca. He

w.i-  engaged  under  D*Aehe*  in  three  actions  with

POOOOke  in  the  Kast  Imlies,  and  toward  the  end  c,f
r  wa-  made  captain.  In  1779  lie  was  given
the  command  c.f  a  squadron,  and.  joining  the  fleet
of  Count  d'Kstaing  in  Martinique,  assisted,  0  July,
177'.».  in  the  engagement  off  Grenada  with  Byron.
Later  he  assumed  command  of  the  first  division  of
I>'Kstaing*s  fleet,  and  in  1780  joined  Count  de
(iuichen,  who  had  superseded  D'Kstaing  in  com-
mand. He  participated  in  the  engagements  with
Rodney  in  the  channel  of  Dominique,  17  April  and
ir>  and'  l!>  Mar,  17S0.  At  the  beginning  of  i7si  lie
was  appointed  to  command  a  French  fleet  to  assist
the  Americans  against  the  British,  and,  although
much  younger  than  Count  de  Barras,  he  was  made
superior  in  command,  with  the  title  of  lieutenant-

feneral. On  28  April,  1781,  he  defeated  Admirals
[cod  and  Drake  off  Port  Royal,  Martinique,  and

on  2  June  H>si>tfd
in  the  capture  of
Tobago.  When
Cornwallis  was
fortifying  York-
town,  and  Wash-
ington was  uncer-
tain what  course
to  pursue,  the
intelligence  was
despatched  from
Count  de  Barras
that  Grasse  would
sail  from  Cap
Francois,  W.  I„
on  13  April,  for
the  mouth  of  the
Chesapeake,  with
twenty-nine sail

v" - y? y  and  3,000  troops

•^f/Tr^kJtttrfTTgpi)  under the Mar-

quis St.  Simon.
Grasse  blockaded
York  and  James
rivers  and  debarked  his  men,  to  cut  off  Cornwal-
lis's  retreat.  The  first  encounter  resulted  in  a  vic-
tory for  the  French.  On  17  Sept..  Washington  vis-
ited Grasse  on  his  flag-ship  "  La  Ville  de  Paris,"  off
Capo  Henry,  to  make  arrangements  with  regard  to
the  attack  upon  Cornwallis  at  Yorktown.  During
this  engagement  the  American  troops  were  sta-
tioned on  the  right  wing,  the  French  on  the  left,
and  Grasse  remained  in  Lynn  Haven  bay  to  prevent
naval  assistance  from  reaching  Cornwallis.  When
Washington  announced  the  victory,  congress  voted
honors  to  him,  to  Rochambeau,  and  to  Grasse,  with
especial  thanks  to  the  French  troops,  as  "victory
had  twined  double  garlands  around  the  banners  of
France  and  America."  At  the  close  of  the  Virginia
campaign  Grasse  embarked  for  the  West  Indies,
receiving  two  horses  as  a  token  of  personal  esteem
from  Washington.  On  his  arrival  he  established
the  naval  power  of  France,  recaptured  and  restored
St.  Kustatius  to  the  United  Provinces,  and  took  St.
Christopher  Nevis  and  Montserrat. On  19  Feb.,

1781,  Rodney,  who  had  been  carefully  watching  his
movements,  appeared  at  Barbadoes  with  re-enforce-
ments. In  order  to  cope  with  him,  Grasse  decided
to  unite  with  the  Spanish  squadron,  and  on  8  April,

1782,  he  sailed  for  Hispaniola.  An  engagement
took  place  on  9  April  at  St.  Domingue,  and  three
days  later  Rodney,  by  skilful  movements,  drew  the


ifyrPSJu


French  into  a  broad  expanse  of  water-  between
several  small  Wanda.  Having  the  advantage  of
ships  in  good  repair  and  finely  disciplined  men.  as

well  as  advantage  In  numbers, he  began  the  attack.

Although  the  French  handled  their  guns  well  at  a
distance,  they  needed  presence* of  mind  for  a  close
engagement,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  day  the  •
battle  was  concluded  by  a  ship-to-ship  encounter,
and  the"  Ville  de  Paris"  foundered.  Grasse  losj
the  favor  of  the  king  after  this  defeat,  and  lived
unhappilv  until  his  death,  six  years  later.  Wash-
ington, alluding  to  the  death  of  Grasse  in  a  letter
to  Rochambeau,  writes:  "His  frailties  should  now
be  buried  in  the  grave  with  him,  while  his  name
will  be  long  deservedly  dear  to  this  country  on  ac-
count of  his  successful  career  in  the  glorious  cam-
paign of  1781."

URASSI,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Verona,  Italy,
1  Oct.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Italy,  12  Dec.,  1849.  He  entered
the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1799,  and  in  1810  was  sent  to
Maryland  as  superior  of  Jesuit  missions.  He  was
recalled  to  Italy  in  1817,  and  afterward  held  sev-
eral important  offices  in  the  order.  He  was  rector
of  the  College  of  the  propaganda,  and  at  the  time
of  his  death  assistant  of  Italy.  He  wrote  on  his
return  to  Italy  "Notizie  varie  sullo  Stato  presents
della  Repubblica  degli  Stati  Uniti  dell'  America
Settentrionale  scritte  al  principio  del  1818  "  (Rome,
1818;  Turin,  1822).

GRATACAP,  Louis  Pope,  naturalist,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1850.  He  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1869
and  at  the  Columbia  school  of  mines  in  1876.  Sub-
sequently he  received  the  appointment  of  assistant
curator  in  paleontology  and  mineralogy  in  the
American  museum  of  natural  history  in  New  York,
where  the  arrangement  of  the  specimens  in  the
present  building  was  largely  conducted  under  his
supervision.  Mr.  Gratacap  has  also  held  the  office
of  chemist  to  the  .Metropolitan  gaslight  company
in  New  York  for  many  years.  He  has  been  a  large
contributor  to  scientific  journals,  and,  besides  bo-
tanical notes  in  the  "  Bulletin  of  the  Torrey  Botan-
ical Club,"  has  published  a  series  of  papers  on
"  The  Ice  Age  "  in  the  "  Popular  Science  Monthly  "
for  1878,  a  series  on  "  Gas  and  Gas-Making  "  in
the  "  Scientific  American  Supplement "  (1880),  and
a  valuable  series  on  archaeology  in  the  "  American
Antiquarian"  (1883-'4).  Mr.  6ratacap  is  also  the
author  of  "  Philosophy  of  Ritualism,  or  Apologia
pro  Ritu  "  (New  York,  1887).

GRATIOT,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Missouri  in
1788;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  18  May,  1855.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1806,
and  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  engineers.
He  was  appointed  captain  in  1808,  and  served  with
distinction  in  the  war  with  Great  Britain  as  chief
engineer  of  Harrison's  army  in  1813— '14,  when
he  was  brevetted  colonel.  He  was  engaged  in
the  defence  of  Fort  Meigs  in  1813.  and  in  the
attack  on  Fort  Mackinac  in  1814.  In  1815  he
was  appointed  major  of  engineers,  and  superin-
tended the  fortifications  on  the  Delaware  river,
and  subsequently  those  in  Hampton  Roads.  Va.
He  became  lieutenant-colonel  in  1819,  and  colonel
and  principal  engineer  in  charge  of  the  engineer
bureau  of  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1828.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general.  24  May,  1828,  and  ap-
pointed to  be  inspector  of  West  Point,  which  otlice
ne  held  until  6  Dec,  1838,  when  he  was  dismissed
by  the  president  for  having  failed  to  pay  into  the
treasury  certain  balances  of  money  placed  in  his
hands  for  public  purposes.  After  holding  a  clerk-
ship in  the  land-office  in  Washington,  D.  C,  from
1840  till  1855,  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  died


OB  \TT.\N


<■  i:\VES


787


in  d  t.  on  St.

river,  Mich.,  and  tin-  Tillages  of  Gratiot,  in

Michigan  an. I  \\  :-'  ■•  •Ii-ill.  Ml  named  ill  hishoimr.

UH  \  I  I  \  V I  h u  I  ..II.  r, riiah  author,

b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  17M;  a,  In  London,  I
land.  4  July.  1884 II*-  studied  bra  in  Dublin,  but
toon renounced this  profession,  and  obtained  a

commission in the  army. He  thru  married  ami

■titled  in  I'nui.r. but  vent  to  Belgium  In  1816 and

resided  principally  in  Brussels,  devoting  himoalf
|0  literature. Having  taken  an  active  part  in  sup-

porting  the  pretention!  "f  King  Leopold  to  tti

throne  of  Belgium,  he  was.  at  that BKXMUttMi

eial  request,  appointed  in  1880  British  consul  at
Boston,  lie  held  this  oilier  until  1858,  when  be
accepted  an  ofllee  in  the  queen's  household.  His
works  iiu  hide  a  jwunphlct  on  the  "  Boundary  QjMt>
tion  between  Ureal  Britain  and  the  I'nited  S'ates"
(1848);  "Civilized  America,"  a  splenetic  attack  <>n
American  society  and  institutions  (2  vol-.,  London.
1800);  -The  Woman  of  Color":  ami  ••  England
and  the  Disrupted  States  of  A rica  "  (1861).

(■BAT,  Misruel  (graouw),  Perurian  naval  ..ni-
cer, 1..  in  I'iura  in  June,  18:54;  d.  at  sea, 8 Oct..  1879.
He  shipped  on  board  a  merchant  vessel  at  the  age
of  ten  years,  and.  after  spending  a  short  time  at
the  naval  school  oi  (  allao,  became,  in  1852.  a  mid-
shipman in  the  Peruvian  navy.  He  joined  in  the
revolt  of  1856  against  the  government  of  Cast  ilia.
and,  on  its  suppression  in  is.>i,  returned  to  the
merchant  service.  He  re-entered  the  navy  in  1800,
wa9  given  command  of  the  "  Lersundi,"  and  in
1865,  when  the  war  with  Spain  began,  had  reached
tin-  rank  of  captain.  He  took  a  distinguished  part
in  the  combat  of  Abtao  in  October,  and  on  2  May,
1860,  participated  in  the  defence  of  ( 'allao  against
the  Spanish  bombardment,  in  command  of  the
monitor  "  Maneo  CajMic."  He  afterward  took  com-
mand of  the  turret-ship  "  Huascar."  In  1875  he
was  a  deputy  to  congress,  and  a  supporter  of  the
government  of  Manuel  Pardo.  He  was  appointed
director  of  the  naval  academy,  and  when  the  war
against  Chili  began,  5  April,  18?!),  held  the  rank  of
rear-admiral,  lie  at  once  joined  t  he  fleet,  and  took
command  of  his  old  ship,  the  •■  Huascar,"  and  of
the  small  Peruvian  fleet.  On  21  May  he  attacked
two  small  Chilian  vessels  off  Iquique  with  the
" Huascar"  and  "  Independencia,"  and  sank  one  of
them,  hut  the  "Independencia"  was  disabled  by
the  other.  As  this  loss  left  the  Peruvian  float  still
more  inferior  to  the  Chilian  than  In-fore,  Grau  re-
ceived orders  to  avoid  an  engagement  with  the
Chilian  iron-clads,  and,  owing  to  his  superiority  in
speed,  made  a  successful  cruise  along  the  coast,
seriously  harassing  the  enemv.  At  daybreak  of
23  July,  the  "  Huascar  "ami  ••  Union  "  captured  off
Antofagastathe  powerful  Chilian  transport-st earner
"  Hiinac,"  with  a  cavalry  regiment  of  300  on  board.
His  successful  depredations  on  the  coast  caused
the  Chilian  government  to  strain  every  nerve  for
tin-  capture  of  the  "Huascar."  On  8  Oct.,  in
thick,  foggy  weather,  while  the  Peruvian  vessels
were  cruising  near Antofagasta,  Grau was  sur-

grised  and  forced  to  a  combat  by  the  Chilian  fleet.
Tdering  the  "Union"  to  |>art  company,  and  try
by  her  tupofior  speed  to  escape,  he  resolved  to  light
his  way  through  the  enemy.  Half  an  hour  after
the  In-ginning  of  the  contest,  n  shell  from  the
"Cochrane"  burst  inside  the  "Huasear's"  tower,
killing  the  admiral  and  his  signal-officer.  Shortly
afterward  the  other  division  of  the  Chilian  fleet
came  up,  and,  after  an  hour  and  a  half  of  fighting,
the  flag  <>f  the  ••  1 1  uaeoar "  was  lowered,  <>4  men
out  ..f  [ojfl  being  killed.  After  the  war.  the  Peru-
rian nail.. ii  erected  a  monument  to  (Iran  in  Lima.


81  \\  i  i  . i  I,.!,  han  it.  c. ble

b. in St. Antoine, Him.  re Chamblv. Uueliee, 12

Oct, 1888. He  wa  I  at  St.  Hraointne

and  Montreal  colleges,  and  has  botfl  a  pn>fcsj»or  of

rhetoric  ami  philooophy. He  hefunt  pariah  n
of  Bedford  in 1873.  of'  St.  Hyacinth.-  in  Jkmo.  h,„1
canon  <>f  that  place  in  the  same  year. In  1881
\\;i-  conse.  nit ii|  first  bishop  of  Nicolet

6RA  VK>.  Thomas,  naval  ofBoar,  b.  in  Hatcliffe,
England,  8  June,  1006 ;  d.  in  <  luuieatown,  Mass..  R
.July.  10.'>:{.  From  1881  till  1088  be  was  master  of
Pal  ships  sailing  between  Kngland  and  this
cumtry.  <»n  ?  OoL,  1080.  be  was  admitted  to  th<-
church  in  ( 'harlestown  w it h  his  wife  ( 'at  herine  <  '<>>  t-
more.  In  1043  he  was  master  of  "The  Tryal,"
which  was  the  first  ship  ever  built  in  Boston.  As
a  reward  for  his  capture  of  a, Hutch  privateer  in
the  English  Channel,  during  Cromwell's  protector-
ate, he  was  appointed  t<>  command  a  ship-of-war
and  made  a  rear-admiral.  He  was  presented  with
a  silver  cup  bv  the  owners  of  his  ship.

QBlTEfiLWUlinm  Jordan,  lawyer,!.,  in  New-
castle, Ky.,  in  1805;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  27  Sept.,
1H48.  He  received  an  academic  education,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  lie  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  houoo  of  lepreoentalirct  in  1884,
and  served  in congress  fr<.m  lS5."i  till  1841,  having
Ik-cii  chosen  as  a  Whig.  During  his  term  of  office
he  fought  a  duel  with  rifles,  on  'J  I  Feb.,  1838,  at
Bladensburg,  Md..  mar  Washington,  with  Jona-
than Cilley,  a  representative  from  Maine,  in  which
the  latter  was  killed.  He  was  re-elected  to  the
legislature  of  Kentucky  in  1843,  representing  .Jeffer-
son countv. In  1869  be  was  a  presidential  elector.

GRAVES,  /»  Ingllus  Calvin,  educator,  b.  in
Chester,  Vt.,  in  18HI.  After  attending  various
academies  he  went  to  Ohio,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-
one  opened  a  school  in  Ashtabula.  He  was  soon
elected  principal  of  Kingsville  academy,  in  the
same  state,  where  he  remained  until  1850.  In  this
year  he  was  called  to  take  charge  of  the  Marv
Sharpe  female  college,  Winchester,  Tenn..  which
was  founded  with  theaunof  making  its  curriculum
substantially  that  of  Brown  University. —  His  wife,
Adelia  Cleopatra,  author,  b,  in  Kingsville.  Aeh-
tabula  co.,  Ohio,  17  March,  1821,  is  the  daughter
of  Dr.  D.  M.Spencer,  whose  brother,  P.  B,  BpenOBK
was  the  originator  of  the  Spcnccrian  system  of
penmanship.  She  was  educated  at  the  Jefferson
and  Kingsville  academies,  and  after  her  graduation
in  1841  became  teacher  of  Latin  and  English  com-
position in  the  latter  institution,  where  she  re-
mained until  1847.  In  1841  she  married  Mr.
Graves,  and  after  his  removal  to  Mary  Sharjw  col-
lege served  there  as  matron  and  professor  of
rhetoric  until  1881,  and  since  that  date  has  l>een
secretary  ami  treasurer.  For  man y  years  she  has
liecn  an'invalid.  In  lK5(>-'!t  she  edited  the  "S.uth-
em  Child's  Book."  In  1860  she  wrote  children's
stories  for  the  Baptist  Sunday-school  union  under
the  pen-name  of  "Aunt  Alice."  These  include  a
"Life  of  Columbus,"  two  volumes  of  ••  I'oeiiis  for
Children."  and  she  also  wrote  "  The  New  T.
incut  Catechism  of  (Questions  and  Answers  in
Rhyme  "  under  her  own  signature.  Her  other  pub-
lications are  "Jeplithah's  Daughter."  an  illustrated
drama for the use of schools  (Memphis, 18

usaval.  or  the  Artsol  KninaiiMn  '  (Memphis.
l^i'.'.h;  and  "Woman  in  Sacred  Song  (B.'ston.
L888).--ZwingUueOalrin'i  brother,  James  Kohin-
soii,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chester,  Vt.,  10  April.  1880,
boOBUM)  a  teacher  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  first  in
Vermont  and  sul>sequently  in  Kentucky,  whither
he  rem  prod  on  account  of  impaired  health.  While
teaching he pursued the studies of a college


188


GRAVIER


GRAY


gOUXM  without  anv  H»i-tanee.  I"  Kentucky  he
\n;i-  ordained  to  tin-  Baptist  ministry.  In  1845
he  opened  an  academy  in  Nashville,  Tenn..  and  in
tin-  BUM  v»ar  beoUM  pastor  of  the  M  Baptist
ehurch  in  iliat  city.  Iii  the  following  fear  he  was
iiui.lr  editor  of  thr  "  Tennessee  Baptist."  In
1648  be  originated  the  " South wattera  Publishing
Bouse,"  Nashville.  Tenn.  He  has  been  widely
known  as  a  vigorous  oontiovereialist,  particularly
in  support  of  the  Baptist  high  church  views  that
have  received  the  name  of  "Old  Landmarkism."
His  published  works  are  "  The  Great  Iron  Wheel  "
(Nashville.  Tenn.,  1H54);  "The  Little  Iron  Wheel"
(ls.Vii ;  "The  Intermediate  State  "(Memphis,  1668);
"Old  Landmarkism  (1H7N);  -  The  Intercommunion
of  Churches"  (1879);  "The  Redemptive  Work  of
Christ"  (1883);  "The  New  Great  Iron  Wheel"
(1884);  "Denominational  Sermons"  (1885);  and
••  The  Parables  and  Prophecies  of  Christ  "  (1887).

GRAVIER,  Jacques,  missionary,  b.  in  France  ;
d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1708.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  was  sent  as  a  missionary
to  Canada,  but  it  is  uncertain  at  what  time.  He
was  stationed  at  Sillery  in  the  autumn  of  1684  and
the  ensuing  spring,  but  must  have  gone  west  soon
afterward,  as  he  was  on  the  Illinois  mission  in
1688,  and  succeeded  Allouez  about  1690  as  superior.
He  was  appointed  vicar-general  by  Bishop  de  Saint
Vallier  in  the  following  year.  He  has  left  a  jour-
nal of  his  mission  extending  from  20  March,  1693,
to  15  Feb.,  1694.  He  built  a  chapel  outside  the
French  fort  for  the  convenience  of  the  Miami
Indians  on  St.  Joseph's  river,  among  whom  he
labored  with  great  success.  He  also  visited  the
Peorias,  but  without  result.  His  chief  success  was
with  the  Kaskaskias,  whose  chief  he  converted,  and
of  whom  he  baptized  206  in  less  than  eight  months.
He  also  planned  missions  to  the  Cahokia  and  Tama-
rois  bands  of  indians,  which  he  subsequently  car-
ried out,  as  well  as  to  the  Osages  and  Missouris,
who  sent  ambassadors  to  him.  In  1696  he  went  to
Montreal,  but  soon  returned  and  devoted  himself
to  the  more  distant  missions.  In  1705  some  of  the
Illinois,  instigated  by  their  medicine-men,  attacked
him,  and  he  was  severely  wounded.  The  mission-
ary proceeded  to  Paris  for  treatment,  but  obtained
little  relief.  He  then  went  to  Louisiana,  and  landed
at  Isle  Massacre,  12  Feb.,  1708.  His  wound,  aggra-
vated by  his  long  voyage,  proved  fatal  soon  after-
ward. Father  Gravier  was  the  first  to  analyze  the
Illinois  language,  and  compile  its  grammar,  which
subsequent  missionaries  brought  to  perfection.

GRAY,  Alfred  G.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Norfolk,
Va.,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1876.
He  went  to  sea  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and  became
a  captain  when  twenty-seven.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant  in  the  Texan  service  in  1843,  when  he
commanded  the  sloop-of-war  "  Austin  "  in  the  en-
gagement off  Campeachy  with  the  Mexican  war
steamships  "  Re<;enerador,"  "  Guadalupe,"  and
"  Montezuma."  During  the  civil  war  he  was  for
three  years  captain  of  the  army  transport  "Mc-
CJellan  "  and  other  vessels.  In  1865  he  entered  the
service  of  the  Pacific  mail  steamship  company,  by
whom  he  was  made  commodore  in  1874.

GRAY,  Alonzo,  educator,  b.  in  Townsend,  Vt.,
21  Feb.,  1808;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  March,
I860.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1834,  and
at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1838.  Mean-
while he  had  become  professor  of  natural  science
in  Phillips  Andover  academy,  where  he  remained
until  1K4:5.  after  which,  in  1844-'5,  he  was  professor
of  chemistry  in  Marietta  college.  In  1845  he  be-
came a  teacher  in  the  Brooklyn  heights  female
academy,  and  six  years  later  founded  the  Brooklyn


yh~*J)


"V-  Co


T


heights  female  seminary,  of  which  he  was  princi-
pal until  his  death.  He  published  "  Elements  of
Chemistry"  (Andover,  1841;  40th  ecL,  Now  York,
1808);  M Elements  of  Scientific  and  Practical  Agri-
culture" (Andover,  1842);  "Elements  of  Natural
Philosophy"  (New  York,  1851);  and,  with  Charles
B.  Adams,  "  Elements  of  Geology"  (1852).

GRAY,  Asa,  botanist,  b.  in  Paris,  Oneida  co.,
N.  Y.,  18  Nov.,  1810;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mem,  80
Jan.,  1888.  He  received  his  early  education  in  the
Fairfield  academy,  after  which  he  began  the  study
of  medicine  with  Dr.  John  F.  Trowbridge  in
Bridgewater,  N.  Y..  and  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  the  western  dis-
trict of  New  York  in  1831.  He  soon  left  his  prac-
tice and  began  the  study  of  botany  with  Dr.  John
Torrey.  In  1834  he  was  appointed  botanist  to  the
U.  S.  exploring
expedition  sent
out  under  the
command  of
Cant.  Charles
Wilkes,  but,  in
consequence  of
the  delay  of
that  enterprise,
resigned  the
post  in  1837.
He  was  elected
professor  of  bot-
any in  the  new
University  of
Michigan,  but
he  declined  this
chair,  and  ac-
cepted in  1842
the  Fisher  pro-
fessorship of  natural  history  at  Harvard,  continu-
ing there  till  1873,  when  he  retired  from  the  active
duties  of  his  office,  but  retained  charge  of  the  her-
barium. Prof.  Gray's  scientific  work  began  at  a
time  when  the  old  artificial  systems  of  botany  were

fiving  way  to  the  natural  system,  and,  with  Dr.
ohn  Torrey,  he  was  among  the  first  to  attempt
the  classification  of  species  on  the  natural  basis  of
affinity.  His  first  paper,  presented  to  the  New
York  lyceum  of  natural  history  in  December,  1834,
bears  the  title  "  A  Notice  of  Some  New,  Rare,  or
Otherwise  Interesting  Plants  from  the  Northern
and  Western  Portions  of  the  State  of  New  York."
Four  years  later,  under  the  joint  authorship  of
John  Torrey  and  Asa  Grav,  the  first  part  of  the
"  Flora  of  North  America  "  appeared.  This  work
was  continued  in  numbers  that  were  published
from  time  to  time  until  the  Composites  were  fin-
ished, when  the  accumulation  of  fresh  material
had  so  increased  that  to  complete  the  undertak-
ing would  require  an  appendix  greater  than  the
"Flora"  itself.  In  other  ways,  however,  this
classification  was  still  carried  on.  The  valuable
acquisitions  of  the  U.  S.  government  expeditions
were  referred  to  these  botanists,  and  their  results
are  to  be  found  in  numerous  memoirs  published  in
the  government reports,  and  as  separate  mono-

fraphs.  The  most  important  of  these  are  "  Plantae
lindheimerianaV'  an  account  of  plants  collected
in  western  Texas  by  Ferdinand  Lindheimer  (Bos-
ton, 1845-'50) ;  "Plantae  Fendlerianae  Novi  Mexi-
canae,"  a  description  of  plants  collected  in  New
Mexico  by  August  Fendler  (1849);  "Plants?
Wrightianje  Texano-Neo-Mexicanae,"  describing
the  extensive  collections  made  by  Charles  Wright
(Washington,  1852-'3) ;  "  Plantae  Thurberiana?  "
(Boston,  1854);  and  "Genera  Florae  America?
Boreali-Orientalis  Illustrata  "  (New  York,  1848-'50).


<;i;\y


1.1:  ay


no


PMt < Jmy's herbarium. immUring BOH than
< m mi  ipMilMDa,  ami  his  library  of  'J.'.'OO  Im>Ijiih-

cal  works,  van  presented  t<>  Harvard  <>n  kin  com-
pletion, in  1*«>4.  of  a  tin-proof  building  f«»r  their
ptioo. II'-  received  the  degree  of  a.  M.  from

Harvard  in  L844)  and  of  LI*  D.  f r< >m  llaiiiiltnii  in
'.  ami  delivered  time  courses  of  lectures  in
tin-  Lowell  Institute,  In  IH?-t  In-  received  tin-  ip>
|M»int iiK-nt  of  regent  <>f  the  Smitheonleji  institu-
tion. Mooeeding  Louis  Agassis,  in  that  office. For

ti-n  \..ir-.  Eron  ls,">o  till  1878,  In-  was  president  of
thf  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  ami  in
j  was  president  of  tin-  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  .science,  dettverfag  his  retiring
address  at  the  Dnbaqne  meeting.  Prof.  Cray  was
one  of  tho  original  ineinliers  of  tin-  National  tjfudfl
1 1 1 v  of  sciences,  and  afterward  passed  to  tin-  grade
of  honorary  m—bewhlp.  Besides  his  connections
with  societies  in  this  country,  he  was  either  cor-
responding or  honorary  member  of  the  Linncan
society  and  thfl  Royal  society  in  London. and  of
thf  academies  of  sciences  in  Berlin,  Munich,  Paris,
St.  Petersburg,  Stockholm,  and  I'psala.  Prof,
(tray  was  a  very  large  contributor  to  periodical
literature,  and  his  separate  papers  include  nearly
x'ihi  titles.  For  many  years  he  was  one  of  the
editors  of  the  ••  American  .Journal  of  Science,'*  and
his  ••  Botanical  Contributions"  were  long  pub-
lished in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Acad-
emy of  Sciences  and  Arts."  He  also  wrote  bio-
graphical sketches  of  many  who  have  achieved
eminence  in  science,  and  of  these  the  more  im-
portant American  subjects  have  been  Jacob  Bige-
low.  QeorgC  Engelniann.  .Joseph  Henry.  Thomas
P.  James.  .John  A.  l.owell.  William  B.  Sullivant.
John  Torrcy,  and  JefTeries  Wymaii.  His  literary
works  are  "A  Free  Kxamination  of  Darwin's
Treatise  on  the  Origin  of  Species,  and  of  its
American  Reviewers  (Cambridge,  18<>1);  "Dar-
winia:  Essays  and  Reviews  pertaining  to  Darwin-
ism "(New  York,  1876);  and  "  Natural  Science  and
Religion  "  (1HH0).  Prof.  Gray's  series  of  text-bookl
are  used  extensively  throughout  the  United  States,
and  have  passed  through  manv  e<litions.  They  in-
clude ••  Elements  of  Botany  (1836),  republished
Botanical  Text-Book  "  (1853),  and  now  called
"Structural  and  Svstematic  Botany"  (New  York.
1858):  "Manual  of  the  Botany  of  the  Northern
United  States"  (Cambridge,  1848;  5th  ed.,  New
York,  1867);  "  Lessons  in  Botany  and  Vegetable
Physiology"  (New  York,  1857)*;  "Botany  for
Young  People  and  Common  Schools,"  comprising
"  How  Plants  Grow"  (1858)  and  "  How  Plants  Be-
have" (1872);  "Field,  Forest,  and  Garden  Bot-
any" (186H).  which,  with  the  "Lessons  in  Botany."
have  bam  boon]  together  under  the  title  "  School-
and  Field- Book  of  Botany"  (1875);  "Structural
Botany  or  Organography  on  the  Basis  of  Morphol-
ogy" (1879),  being  the  first  volume  of  the  series
called  "('ray's  Botanical  Text-Book";  "Botany of
the  I'nited  States  Pacific  Exploring  Expedition "
(Washington,  1854);  and  "Synoptical  Flora  of
North  America"  (New  York.  181

GRAY.  David,  journalist,  b.  in  Edinburgh,
Scotland.  !»  Nov..  l*:{ii;  ,1.  |jg  Binghamton.  N.  Y..
is  March.  1888.  He  came  to  the  I'nited  States  in
1849,  ami  was  among  the  settlers  of  Marquette
iv.  Wis.  Thence  he  went  to  Buffalo.  N.  Y..
in  1K56,  and  three  years  later  entered  the  service
of  the  "Courier"  M  |  reporter.  In  1H(m-'8  he
travelled  ami  studied  in  Europe  and  the  aaaa  !.'•
taming  t<»  Buffalo  the  latter  year,  he  became  man-
aging editor  of  the  "Courier,"  and  in  1N7(»  its  edi-
tor-in-chief. In  1888,  owing  to  impaired  health.
he  left journalism,  and for  two year-,  with his


family,  lived  abroad. In 1**0  he  wai»  tppoll
treasurer  and  if  the  l*>ard  of  0OUimftt>

r>  of  the  N.  w  York  state  reservation  at  Ni-
agara. He  was  mortally  injured  in  a  railway  acci-
dent. His  writings,  proas  and  poetry,  have  been
collected  in  two  volume-.  (Buffalo,  1KH*).

».l  ar HarkneHs,  cWgyman, b.  in

Bridport,  Yt..  88  Nov.,  1818.  Hi  was  graduated
at  Waterviiie  college  (m>w  Colby  oniversity)  in
1M38,  and  was  ordained  as  pastor  of  the  Baptist
church  in  Frsopott,  Me.,  in  1H39.  After  hiving
ministered  in  various  places  he  was  called  in  1868
to  the  I  Street  Baptist  church  in  Washington,
D.  C.  After  the  beginning-  <»f  the  :H»th  congress
he  was  aleoted  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  and
continued  in  that  office  four  years.  He  was  one  of
the  four  clergymen  who  officiated  at  the  funeral
services  of  President  Lincoln  in  Washington.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  in  1864  by
the  University  of  Rochester.

OKAY.  Klislia.  inventor,  b.  in  Baroesville,  Ohio,
I  Aug..  1885,  He  was  apprenticed  at  an  early  age
to  a  blacksmith,  and  afterward  to  a  carpenter  and
boat-builder.  On  the  completion  of  his  time  he
entered  Olx-rlin  college,  where  he  devoted  spesjsj
attention  to  physical  science,  meanwhile  supporting
himself  by  working  at  his  trade.  As  a  student,  he
constructed  the  pieces  of  apparatus  Mad  in  the
class-room  experimentation.  In  October,  1867.  he
obtained  his  first  patent  for  telegraphic  apparatus,
and  since  then  has  received  nearly  fifty  more,  most
of  which  relate  to  the  telephone.  The  remainder
have  reference  to  the  telegraphic  repeater,  tele-
graphic switch,  annunciator,  and  type-printing
telegraph.  He  found  when  one  end  of  a  secondary
coil  was  connected  with  the  zinc  lining  of  a  bath-
tul).  dry  at  the  time,  that  when  he  held  the  other
end  of  the  coil  in  his  left  hand,  and  touched  the
lining  of  the  tub  with  his  right  hand,  it  would  glide
along  the  side  for  a  short  distance  in  making  con-
tact, giving  rise  to  a  sound  that  had  the  same
fiitch  and  quality  as  that  of  the  vibrating  contact-
ireaker.  This  discovery  led  to  the  invention  of
his  speaking  telephone,  for  winch  he  filed  s|iccifica-
tions  on  14  Feb.,  1876.  Its  peculiarity  is  that  it
reproduces  articulate  speech  by  varying  the  resist-
ance of  a  battery  current.  In  November,  1H74,  he
filed  a  caveat,  and  in  January.  1*77.  received  a
patent  for  a  multiplex  telegraph.  His  system  is
"based  upon  the  ability  to  transmit  a  number  of
tones  simultaneously  over  the  same  wire,  and  ana-
lyze them  at  the  receiving;  end.  S>  that  each  tone
will  be  audible  on  a  particular  instrument  which
i-  inned  to  it,  but  on  no  other."  He  transmitted
four  messages  at  the  same  tiuieon  one  wire  between
New  Y'ork  and  Boston  in  August.  1H75,  and  a  year
later  he  succeeded  in  sending  eight  messages  in  the
BUM  way  between  New  York  and  Philadelphia.
In  1S74  he  visited  Europe-  in  order  to  perfect  him-
self in  the  study  of  acoustics.  From  1869  till
1*73  he  was  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  tele-
graphic apparatus  in  Chicago  and  Cleveland,  and
since  has  held  the  office  of  electrician  to  the  West-
ern electric  manufacturing  coinpanv.  He  has  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  Sc..  and  lias  published
••  Bxpariaaanta]  Beeearehea  la  Electro-Harmonic
Telegraphy  and  Telephony  "  (Nov  York.  16

(.KAY.  George,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  PlL,860oL,
1786;  d.  in  "Whitby  Hall."  near  Philadelphia,  in
1800.  lb- was  fifth  of  the  name  in  lineal  descent
from  George  Cray,  a  wealthy  gentleman  of  Bar-
ImkIocs.  He  took  an  active  interest  in  the  affairs
of  the  oolonv,  and  served  in  the  assembly  as  dele-
gate from  Philadelphia  from  1 77*2  until  1778,  when
he  resigned  to  take  his  place  as  mambeftOf  the  com-


i.i;  u


miltco  ««f  safety.  In  1777  Im<  was  transferred  feO
the  board  ol  war,  "f  which  li<<  eventually  lieeame
chairman,  and  on  which  he  serred  until  the  close
.if  the  Involution.  Il<'  was  the  Mtthorol  the  fa-
sjow  "  Treason  Resolution*  "  1 1  ii« t  won'  reported  U)

the  asseinhly l»j tin1  eommitti f  which  he  was

chairman.  After  ll»''  K<-v .»lut i»ni  he  again  repre-
sented Philadelphia  in  the  assembly,  of  which  ha
was  ohoaea  sneaitsr, In  1799  -'t»o  be  tm  taembef

of  tlic  ( tonstilUtioual  convention  of  Pennsylvania.
(,i;  \\.  (icorgc,  senator.  I>.  in  New  Castle,  |),-|.,

i  m  i\.  1840. Em  wm  puutid  hi Prlaooton  in

nd,  after  studying  law  at Harvard,  was  ad-
mitted t.<  tin-  l»ar  in  1969, He  tlrst  ojiened  an  olllco

in  Net  Castle,  bul  in  1878  removed  to  Wilmington
on  beingappointed  attornev-gencral  of  Delaware,
which  oTBob  ln«  tilled  until  Sarah,  1885.  Ht  wm  •
delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  conventions  ol
is;i».  1880,  and  1884,  and  wm  eleoted  to  tin-  l'.  s.
senate  to  till  the  Taoanoy  caused  by  the  appoint1
iiu-iit  of  Thomas  I-'.  Bayard  as  secretary  ol  state.
Hi-  took  In*  si-at  on  i!>  March,  1885, and  in  January,
1887,  wm  re-elected  for  a  full  term.

QRAY.  George  Edward,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Verona,  N.  Y„  19  Sept,  1818.  He  received  his
early  education  in  the  public  schools,  and  studied
oivil  engineering  under  Peletiah  Rawson.  In  1858
In-  wm  appointed  chief  engineer  of  t  ln»  New  fork

Central  railroad,  and  held  the  office  till  1885,  when

lu<  resigned  and  was  appointed  consulting  engineer
of  the  Central  Pacific  railroad.  Ho  remained  con-
neotod  with  this  road  until  1871,  when  hi-  wm  ap-
pointed child'  engineer  of  the  Southern Paoifla

railroad  of  California,  bul  resigned  when  that  road
was  leased  to  the  Southern  Pacific  company  in
1888  Mr.  Gray  has  also  been  chief  engineer  of
the  Southern  Pacific  railroad  of  Arizona,  of  the
Southern  Pacific  railroad  of  New  .Mexico,  and  di-
rected the  location  and  construction  of  the  Gal  VM-
ton.  Harrisburg,  and  San  Antonio  railroad  troiu
Kl  Paso  to  San  Antonio,  Texas.  He  is  a  life  mem-
ber of  the  British  institute  of  civil  engineers,  a
member  of  the  American  society  of  oivil  engineers.
and  a  life  member  of  the  California  academy  of
sen-nee-.,  and  president  of  its  hoard  ol  directors.
Mr.  Gray  has  been  appointed  (1SS7J  one  of  the
trustees  of  the  university  in  California  founded  by
Leland  Stanford  in  memory  of  his  son.

till  AY,  («conre  labrlskte,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  1 1  July,  is:ts ;  d.  in  Sharon  Springs,
N.  Y„  :•  Aug.,  1889,  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Sew  York  in  1858.  From  lNo!)  till  18<U
he  studied  for  the  ministry  at  the  Alexandria  semi-
nary, lie  was  ordered  deacon  by  Bishop  Horatio
Potter.  »''.)  April,  IStt'J,  and  ordained  priest  Ivy  tho
Same  bishop  on  88  Jan.,  IStUI.  After  holding  pas-
torates in  Vernon,  N.  .1.,  Kinderhook,  N.  Y..  and
Bergen  Point,  N.  J.,  he  wm  appointed,  in  1878,  dean
of  the  Protestant  Efoisoopal  theologioa]  school  in
Cambridge,  Mass,  The  university  of  New  York
gave  hira  the  degree  of  D,  l>.  in  1878. He  published

"The  Children's  Crusade  in  the  Thirteenth  Cent-
ury "'  (Boston,  1879);  "Recognition  in  the  World
to  Come"  (New  York,  is;.*)):  and  "  Husband  and

Wife,  or  the  Theory  of  Marriage"  (Boston,  1NN5).
—His  brother,  Albert  Zahriskie.  clergy  man,  l>.
in  New  York  <-itv.  |  March,  IS»0;  d.  in  Chicago,
111..  19  l"VI>..  1888  He  was  graduated  at  the  Cni-
versitv  of  New  York  in  IStKl,  mid  at  the  (icu-
eral  theological  seminary  of  the  Protectant  Fpis-
eopal  church  in  1884  During  the  civil  war  In-
served  as  chaplain  of  the  4th  Massachusetts  ea\-
alrv.  After  holding  variou->  pastorate*,  he  was
elected  warden  of  Uacine  college.  Wis.,  in  1888.  and
he  wa-  associated  with  the  work  of  church  reform


and  reunion  in  Kuro|>e  undertaken  l>\  the  Prot-
ectant  BpisOOpal  church,  and  was  a  delegate  |0  the

general  oonTention  in  1888. His  publications  are

"The  Land  and  the  Life,  or  Sketches  and  Studies

m  Palestin.  "  |  \.  w  Vork,  1876);  "MexiooM  it
(1878);  "  Winds  of  the  Ci  »);  and  "Jesus

Only,  ami  other  Sacred  Bongs"  (186

t.lkVY.  Ilcnn Paten,  artist  b.  in  v
city,  'j:<  June,  1819;  <l.  there.  19  N-.n..  1877. Eh

entered  the  studio  of  Daniel  Huntington  in  II
and  in  the  following  vear  went  to  Kurope  forstady,
In  1848  he  returned  to  Nen  York  and  executed
several  genre  and  historical  painting*.  lie  made
a  second  trip  to  Kurope  in  1848,  where  he  produced
several  of  hi-  most  characteristic  works,  including
"Cupid  bagging  his  Arrows,"  "  PTOMIpJDS  and
llacchus,"  niul  "Teaching  a  Child  to  Pi.i\."  II,-
then  established  himself  in  New  York,  and  was
elected,  iii  ISti'l,  president  of  the  National  academy,
which  place  he  held  until  1871,  when  In-  w.-nt  to
Florence,  and  remained  there  till  1874.  Cla-sual
suhjects  were  liis  favorites,  and  he  was  fond  of
studying  the  old  Venetian  ma-ters,  especially  Ti-
tian. During  the  latter  years  of  his  life  he  devoted
his  time  to  the  painting  of  portraits,  of  which  he
left  more  than  950.  Anions  lijs  works  an-  "Wages
of  War":  "  11  agar  and  the  Angel";  "Cleopatra";
14  Charity  * ;  "St.  Christopher";  "I  Fiorc  di
Fiesolc '  ;  "Portia  and  Hassanio";  "Genevieve";
"The  Model  from  f  adore  " :  "The  Immortality  Of
the  Sad":  "The  Hirth  of  OttT  Flag":  "(ireek
Lovers M;  "Twilight  Musings";  "  Nonnandv  Cirl":
an  illustration  of  livings  "  Pride  of  the  Village";
and  the  "  Apide  of  Discord."  for  which  he  was  OOflB*
mended  by  the  judges  at  the  Centennial  exhihition

in  Philadelphia  (1878).

6BAT,  EMM  Pusev.  governor  of  Indiana,  li.  in
Chester  county.  Pa..  18  Oct,  1898. In  1889  he  was

clerk  in  a  drv-goods  store  in  New  Madison,  Ohio,
ami  afterward  beoaxne  its  proprietor.  In  ISftS  he
removed  to  Dnkm  City,  IncL,  where  he  engaged  in
business  for  three  years.  At  this  time  he  began  to
practise  law.  which  M  had  studied  at  an  early  age.
lie  served  ill  the  civil  war  M  colonel  of  the  tth
Indiana  cavalry,  but  was  oompaDed  to  retire,  owing
to  feeble  health.  Subsequentl]  be  recruited  the
147th  Indiana  infantry.  He  was  at  tlrst  a  Whig,
ami  then  a  Kepuhlioan,  hut  since  1871  has  acted
with  the  Democratk  party.  In  1898  he  was  ele«-tcd
to  the  state  senate,  and  served  four  years, lie  was

a  delegate  to  the  Libera]  BepobUou  convention  in

1879,  and  was  eleoted  lieutenant-governor  on  the
Democratic  ticket  in  ISTti  and  governor  in  1SS4.

<«KAY,  .liimcs.  clergvinan.  b.  in  Irclaml.  '^o
Dec.  1770;  d.  ill  (iettyshurg.  Pa.,  ',><>  S-pt„  1894
lie  was  graduated  at  the  Iniversity  of  tilasgow
in 17!>:t. studied theology, and was licensed to

preach  by  the  presbytery  oi  Honaghan.  He  came
to  the  Hnitad  states  in  1797, and, after  laboring  hi
Washington,  N.  Y„  until lS0:t,  he  Uvaine  pastor

of  an  Associate  Pcfornieil  church  in  Philadelphia,
He  was  active  in  establishing  the  theological  semi-
nary of  that  denomination  in  New  York  citv,  as-
sisted in  the  organization  of  the  Philadelphia  Bible

society  in  1S0S,  and  was  for  some  time  its  corre-
sponding secretary.  In  connect  ion  with  l>r.  S.  It.
Wylie  he  opened  at  this  time  a  classical  academy,
but  retired  after  several  years  and  went  to  Italli-
nioii-.  Mil.,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  the  st  inly
of  special suhjects  in theology. For  one vear  he

edited  the  "Theological  Review."  lie  published
"Mediatorial  Reign  of  the  Son  of  (hwl";  "Disser-
tation on  the  Priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Mel-
chiaedeo,  together  with  the  Life  of  Christ  "  (Haj

town.  Md..  1850);  and  sermons.


OKAY


781


GRAY.  Jobs.  soldier,  b. in Fairfai
.1..  B  Jm...  I  , lliram.l

I*h At  the  age  of  .11  teen  be  entered
.i-tii»l  army,  end  srr
r«  war. lie  removed  »*  s

state,  mmI  remained  •  death.

•  few  years  orertoua  to  that  event  congress  had
granted  him  $500  par  Minuro. II*  was  reputed  to

UM  Im4  sur  rnerican  eswtnlui

In  i. ..'■  fa  Im  •  -  M Data  11  (Men  v.  rfc,  1888>
I.IC\i.  Joba  Hamilton,  Canadian  rtilwniM,
'•eorge's,  Bermuda,  in  |hu. Ha  was  ad-
d  to  the  Canadian  bar  in  1887.  entered  parlia-
mctit in  IK.V).  Isgcame  a  member  of  the  eier-.
oooik  i in  i-.l.end  premier-
MM. In  1h.'»7  lie  we*  umpire  between  Great  Brit-
ain sud  the  United  States  tinder  the  tree'
Washington,  and  wee  royal  cotnmiaejonar  on  tba
ten*  eMtioa  iii Priam  Kdsanl  Island.

He  wee  arbitrator  far  the  Dominion  in  1867,  waa
ai-l-.mt-.l  puisne  judge  of  the  aupretna  court  of
British  Columbia  in  1872,  and  waa  a  member  of
1  MiadiMi  Chineee  i  mm  ig  ret  ion  commission  in
L He  is  the  author  ^ration,"  a  his-

tory (1871),  ami  lecture*  ami  addressee.

GRAY.  John  Perdue,  ptfelalM,  b.  in  Half,
moon.  Centra  <  <>..  Pa.,  H  Aug..  1825:  d.  in  I'tice,
S.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1XWJ.  He  wea  graduated  M  DfaeV
ineon  in  1K45,  ami  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1H48.  In
be  waa  appointed  third  aaawtant  physician  to  the
it  state  lunatic  asvlum  in  It  tea,  and  in
1858  became  acting  superintendent.  When  the
Michigan  state  asylum  wu  projected  in  thai  rear,
be  waa  ejected  its  medical  superintendent,  and  de-
signed the  plans  for
the  new  institute  at
Kalamazoo.  In  1*54
be  resigned  ami  be-


expert  on  insanity  ware  frequently  employed  in  tba

courts,  and  be  waa  regarded  a*  good  authority  on
all  medical  questions  relating  to  life-insurauce.
His  management  of  the  rfc  state  asylum

pre  that  institution  a  wide  reputation.  Hb>  in-
fluence waa  fait  in  tba  state  legislation  on  tba  sub-
ject of  insanity,  and  his  papers  and  reports


'  of  the
Ut  ica  asylum,  where
he  Mient  the  rest  of
hi.  1Mb,  He  did
much  to  better  the  |
'on-iition  of  the  fa.
sane  in  this  country,
to  improve  modes,
of  treatment,  end
to  bring  the  poor
insane  within  reach
of  the  hospital*.  Dk
Gray  introduced  in-
to the  asvlum*  of
this  countrv  the  mi-
aroscopiceJ.t,.
the  brain.  He  wee  appointed  fieavwltlnf  manager
•tale  asylum  for  insane  criminals  at  Auburn
la  1888.  and  acted  as  commissioner  and  adviser  in
establishing  other  asylums  fa  the  state.  He  served
m  president  of  the  State  medical  society,  and  in
1870  of  the  psychological  section  of  the  Interna-
tional medical  congress  in  Philadelphia,  where  ha
read  a  paper  on  ■  Mental  Hygiene,"  He  waa  made
professor  of  psychological  medicine  and  jurispru-
dence in  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college

the  Albany  medical  college  fn  1878,  and
bald  these  offices  until  1888. II  £  services  as  an


ship  end  a  sloop  under  sail

lumbia and Washington,  commanded


to  science. In  addition  to
his  mrrkm  In  tba  asylum,  ha  ed  mny

Cars  the  M  American  J  ounisi  of  baa
took  charge  in  i  lads'  great  interest  hi

ell  public  charities,  and  waa  active  in  tba  estab-
liehment  of  orphan  aeylume,  hospitals,  and  all  eo-
ciatias  for  the  relief  of  tit*  destitute.  On  In  H«
1882,  ha  waa  shot  by  Henry  Keaasfaaw.  a  laaa
snd  never  fully  recovered  from  the  effects  of  tha
'.ray  was  a  member  of  numerous
medical  eocietiee  both  here  and  abroad.  Hamilton
gave  him  tba  degree  of  Id,.  \>  fa  1874  W-  deliv-
ered  many  add  asses,  in*  mkide  in  In-

senilv"  (1887): "Thoughts  on  the  Causation  of
Inaai
stract  of  the  Isiwn  -  *an-

lleredity"  (1*84/; and  ~ln«.
and  Some  of  iu  Preveuteble  Cause*  "( 1  *hV  Theaa
lectures  will  shortly  be  published  by  hi.  widow.

GRA  v.  Robert,  afcsvfanr,  b.  in  Tiverton.  I
fa  1755 ;  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  <  ..  in  1  ■OaV

manded  the  sloop  ■  Washington."  which  was  fitted
out  with  the  ship  ~  fJolumTxa."  by  merciianu  of
Boston,  for  the  purpose  of  trading  with  the  natives
on  the  northwest  coast. The  vessels  sailed  on  80

.  1787,  Mid  carried  with  them  med*.
tnbution  among  the  Indians,  bearing  on  one  sidea
with  the  word-

by  Joba
Kendrick,"  ami  on  the  reverse, "  fittcl  out  at  Boatoa,
N.  AaWsiaij  for  the  I'a/'ifb:  ocean  l/y."  encinding
the  names  of  the  sii  proprietors.  He  returns:
1790  in  the  " Columbia"  by  way  of  Cfastoa,  China,
and  was  the  first  man  to  carry  the  American  flag
around  the  globe.  I^ater  be  made  a  second  voyage,
and  uti  11  May.  1781,  discovered  the  mouth  of  a
great  river  Ut  which  be  gave  the  name  *  Columlna,"
after  his  own  veaaaL  aabaaquently  be  commamied
trading  vessels  from  Ronton  until  his  death.

GRAY,  Holomoa  H..  faraaaor,  b.  fa  Baad
ham,  Me.,  in  1*20.  He  be/sme  a  carpenter,  and
a  maker  of  door*,  sashes,  and  blinds,  and  pereeiv-
'  hat  these  could  be  made  mora  easily  by  tba
sj.pl Ration  of  improved  machinery  devised  Gray
and  Wood's  planing  machine.  He  disposed  of  his
interest  to  his  partner  in  I88T,  end  turned  his  M-
tention  to  the  manufa/ture  of  paper  collar*,
which  he  took  out  eigtit  distinct  patents.  He  waa
tin-  fafaatOT  of  the  "molded  c/dlsr."

t.KAY.  William,  BilllhlBl  b.  in  Lynn.  Maaau,
27  June,  17»;  d.  fa  Baafaa,  Mass.,  4  Nov..  1825.
He  was  of  humble  parentage  ami  was  apprenticed
to  merchants  in  Salem.  He  afterward  began  busi-
ness for  himself,  ami  amassed  a  fortune,  having  at
one  time  more  than  sixty  so,  uere-rigged  ships  on  tha
ocean.  He  was  a  iJetnocrat,  and  sympathized  with
Jefferson  during  the  emlsirgo.  notwithstanding  tha
pecuniary  injury  to  bis  business  and  its  unpopu-
larity in  New  England.  He  removed  to  Boston,
became  a  state  senator,  and  in  1*10  waa  ejected
lieutetiaot-governor.— Ili»  srafa  Elizabeth  <  bla-
maa.  b.  in  Ksaex  county,  Maes.,  fa  May.  1788;
d.  in  Roston.  24  Sept..  1828.  married  Mr.  Gray  fa
1782.  Although  the  wife  of  the  richest  man  fa
aaaitta,  aad  probably  fa  New  England,  aha
si  her  domestic  affairs  personally.  A  por-
tion of  her  tune  waa  devoted  to  the  poor,  who  were
tha  constant  recipients  of  bar  benefactions. — Their
eon,  Praaefa  Calley.  lawyer,  b.  fa  Balsas.  Mass..  18
Sept..  1780;  d.  fa  Boston. 28  Dec.  1888,  was  gradu-
al Harvard  in  1*08.  He  studied  law  with
William  Prescott,  but  did  not  practise  his  pro-
saaaon.  He  was  private  secretary  to  John  (putney
Adams  while  the  Utter  waa  minister  to  ffBBefe.BBd
served  frequently  fa  tha


789


(i  KAY  DON


(iKAYSON


He  whs  president  i>f  the  Boston  itiwoaia,  and  a
f.-llnw  ..f  Harvard  in  182<>-':{(>.  In  1H41  t lie  degree
of  LiL.  I».  was  conferred  OB  him  by  Harvard.  He
left  ■  collection  <»f  8,000  rare  engravings,  with
f  16,000  for  keeping  it  in  order  and  publishing  a
catalogue.  He  also  left  $50,000  for  the  establish-
ment and  maintenance  of  a  museum  of  compara-
tive zoology.  The  Keslowal  of  these  l>equests  was
left  to  the  option  of  his  nephew,  William,  and  the
latter  presented  them  to  Harvard  in  1858,  and
also  contributed  $25,000  for  the  purchase  of  books
for  the  college  library.  The  sum  for  the  establish-
ment of  a  museum  was  supplemented  by  legislative
appropriation  and  private  subscription,  and  a  build-
ing erected,  which  was  dedicated  in  November,  1859,
and  placed  in  charge  of  Prof.  Louis  Agassiz.  Mr.
P.  C.  Gray  published  numerous  orations  and  ad-
dresses, and  a  work  on  "  Prison  Discipline  "  (Bos-
ton, 1847).  He  discovered  a  manuscript  copy  of
the  Massachusetts  "Body  of  Liberties"  of  1041,
which  was  published  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the
State  historical  society  (3d  series,  vol.  viii.).  Gray's
Hall,  one  of  the  buildings  of  Harvard,  was  named
for  these  benefactors  of  the  college. — Another  son,
John  (  hipinan,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salem.  Mass.,  29
Dec.,  1793;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  3  March,  1881,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1811.  He  never
practised  law,  but  took  an  active  interest  and  part
in  public  affairs,  serving  many  years  in  the  com-
mon council  of  Boston,  and  in  each  branch  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature,  and  in  the  governor's
council.  He  delivered  an  oration  for  the  Phi
Beta  Kappa  society  in  1821,  and  address  before
the  Massachusetts  horticultural  society,  and  a
number  of  addresses  before  the  city  authorities. —
Horace,  grandson  of  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  1828,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1845,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1849.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1851.  In  1854  he  was  ap-
pointed reporter  of  the  Massachusetts  supreme
court,  and  served  for  seven  years.  On  23  Aug.,
1864,  he  became  associate  justice  of  the  court,  which
office  he  held  till  he  was  appointed  its  chief  justice
on  5  Sept.,  1873.  In  1882  he  was  made  associate
justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  which  office  he
now  fills  (1887).

GRAYDON,  Alexander,  author,  b.  in  Bristol,
Pa.,  10  April,  1752;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  May,
1818.  He  was  the  son  of  Col.  Alexander  Graydon
of  the  Provincial  army  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was
educated  in  Philadelphia,  and  lived  with  his  moth-
er, at  whose  residence  he  met  some  of  the  nota-
ble people  of  the  time.  Mr.  Graydon  acquired  a
knowledge  of  law,  but  in  1775  received  the  ap-
pointment of  captain  from  congress,  and  raised
recruits  for  the  army.  He  served  in  the  battle  of
Long  Island,  and  was  taken  prisoner  in  the  subse-
quent action  on  Harlem  heights.  For  a  time  he
was  confined  in  New  York  and  then  in  Flatbush,
but  afterward  was  released  on  parole.  He  then
passed  through  the  American  camp  in  Morristown,
and  then  went  to  Reading,  Pa.  He  was  exchanged
in  1778,  but  did  not  again  join  the  army.  He
received  the  appointment  of  prothonotary  of
Dauphin  county,  Pa.,  and,  settling  in  Harrisburg,
held  that  office  until  a  change  of  administration
caused  his  removal  in  1799.  Subsequently,  until
18 KJ.  when  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  he  resided
near  Harrisburg.  Mr.  Graydon  was  a  contributor
to  literary  and  political  journals,  and,  under  the
title  of  ••  Notes  of  a  Desultory  Reader,"  furnished  in
1813-'14  a  series  of  papers  to  the  Philadelphia
"Portfolio,"  which  included  comment  on  the  clas-
sics, and  English  and  French  literature.  He  pub-
lished "  Memoirs  of  a  Life,  chiefly  passed  in  Penn-


sylvania, within  the  I^ast  Sixty  Years:  with  Occa-
sional Keinarks  upon  the  General  Occurrences,
Character,  and  Spirit  of  that  Eventful  Period"
(Harrisburg,  1811;  re-printed  in  London:  Edin-
burgh, 1888;  Philadelphia.  1840).— His  brother,
William,  lawyer,  b.  near  Bristol,  Pa,,  4  Sept.,
1759  ;  d.  in  Harrisburg.  Pa.,  13  Oct..  1840.  He  was
educated  in  Philadelphia,  and  studied  law  there.
On  the  organization  of  the  county  of  Dauphin,  he
settled  in  Harrisburg,  and  began  the  practice  of  his
profession,  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1786.  He
was  commissioned  the  first  notary  public  in  Sep-
tember,  1791,  and  was  a  leader  in  the  borough
during  the  "  Mill-dam  troubles  "of  1794-'5.  For
many  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  town-council,
becoming  its  president,  and  subsequently  was  one
of  the  burgesses.  He  published  a  "  Digest  of  the
Laws  of  the  United  States  "  (Harrisburg  and  Lon-
don, 1803);  "Appendix"  (1813):  -Justice  and
Constable's  Assistant"  (Philadelphia,  1820);  and
"  Forms  of  Conveyancing  and  of  Practice  in  the
Various  Courts  and  Public  Offices  "  (1845).

GRAYSON,  John  Breckenridge,  soldier,  b.
in  Kentucky  in  1807;  d.  in  Florida  in  1862.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1826,  serving  in  the  artillery-school  for  practice  !tt
Fortress  Monroe  till  4  June,  1828,  and  was  then
on  topographical  duty  till  29  March,  1832.  He
was  on  duty  in  various  forts  and  garrisons  until
1835,  became  1st  lieutenant,  30  April,  1834,  served
in  the  Seminole  war  in  1835-'6,  and  on  commissary
duty  at  New  Orleans  in  1836-'47.  He  was  pro-
moted to  a  captaincy,  11  Dec,  1838,  and  served  in
the  Mexican  war  in  1847-'8,  as  chief  of  commissa-
riat of  the  army  under  Gen.  Scott.  He  was  at  Vera
Cruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  Churubusco.  where  he  was  bre-
vetted  major,  Molino  del  Rey.  Chapultepec,  where
he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  at  the  as-
sault and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  was  assigned  to
commissary  duty  at  Detroit,  Mich.,  was  promoted
major,  21  Oct.,  1852,  and  made  chief  of  the  com-
missariat of  the  department  of  New  Mexico  till
1861.  He  resigned  his  commission  on  1  July,  1861,
and  joined  the  Confederate  army.

GRAYSON,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Prince
William  countv,  Va.;  d.  in  Dumfries,  Md.,  12
March,  1790.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Oxford,  England,  and  studied  law  at  the  Tem-
ple in  London.  He  then  returned  to  the  colonies,
settled  in  Dumfries,  Md.,  and  entered  on  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession.  He  was  appointed  aide-de-
camp to  Washington,  24  Aug.,  1776,  became  colo-
nel of  a  Virginia  regiment  on  1  Jan.  following,  and
distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth
in  1778.  He  was  a  commissioner  on  the  board  of
war  in  1780-'l ;  a  commissioner  to  treat  with  Sir
William  Howe  respecting  prisoners  while  the  army
was  at  Valley  Forge :  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  in  1784-'7 ;  a  member  of  the  Virginia  con-
vention of  1788  on  the  adoption  of  the  Federal  con-
stitution, and  was  one  of  the  minority  who  opposed
the  ratification.  He  was  one  of  the  senators  from
Virginia  to  the  1st  congress,  taking  his  seat  on  21
May,  1789,  and  serving  until  his  death.

GRAYSON,  William,  statesman,  b.  In  Mary-
land in  1786;  d.  in  Queen  Anne  county,  Md..  9
July,  1868.  He  was  a  planter  in  his  native  state.
at  an  early  period  identified  himself  with  the  Demo-
cratic party,  and  became  one  of  its  leaders,  lb
served  with  distinction  for  several  years  in  both
houses  of  the  general  assembly  in  Maryland,  and
took  an  active  part  in  the  struggle  to  obtain  a  new
and  more  liberal  constitution  for  the  state,  which
began  in  1836,  and  successfully  terminated  in  1838.


<.K  \


i'.I.K


788


Gratitude  to  Mr.  QnjtM  induced  Ml  constituents
ti>  nominate  linn  f.>r  governor,  and  he  in

Bf  from  1KW  t<>  1841, <»n the  expiration  of
hi-  term  of  MTtVm  In-  retired  in  private  life.

BBAY80N,  William  John.  iW—nn.  »».  in
Beauf«»rt.  S.  ('.. 10  N-v.. 1798;  d.  in Newberry.  4

graduated  at  the  College  of  Che
ton  iii  1806,  anil  bred  to  tin'  law. Entering  upon

it-  practice  nt  Beaufort,  he  Ih<  nine  a  commi-Mom-r
■  lit  y  of  South  ( 'arolina,  a  nieiiiUr  of  the  -late
legislature  in  lHi:t.  anil  a  senator  in  1681.  Be  op-
posed the  taritT  act  in  lKfl,  but  was  not  disposed
to  push  the  collision  to  the  extreme  of  cirif  war.
He  eerred  In  oongreei  from  2  Dec.  1888,  till  n
March.  1887,  and  in  1841  \\a-  appointed  collector

of  cii-toin-  at  Cliarle-ton.  In  lM4ii  he  retired  to
hi- plantation.  During  the  secession  agitation  of
1  In-  published  a  M  Letter  to  Gov.  Seabrook."
deprecating  ili-union,  ami  pointing  out  the  evils
that  would  follow  it.  He  died  of  an  illness  fol- i
lowing  on  I  paralytic  stroke.  He  was  a  fre<|innt
Contributor  to  the  "Southern  Hcvicw."  and  al-<>
published  "The  Hireling  and  slave."  a  j>oein
(Charleston.  S.  ('..  1884);  "(hicora  and  other
Poems"  (laW);  "The  Country."  a  poem  (1858);
ft  narrative  poem  entitled  "Marion  (I860);  and.
"The  Life  of  James  Lewis  Petigru"  (New  York.
18661

GKEATHOISE.  Liioien.  soldier,  h.  in  Carlins-
ville,  III.,  in  1S4.S :  d.  near  Atlanta,  Ga.,  21  .Line.
18<>4.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Illinois  Wc.-lcvan
university,  and  studied  law.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  volunteered  as  a  private,  and,  after
passing  through  every  intermediate  grade,  was
commissioned  colonel  of  the  48th  Illinois.  His
regiment  bore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  move-
ments of  tin-  Armv  of  the  Tennessee,

UK  EATON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Koxburv,  Mass.,
10  March.  1741:  d.  there,  16  Dec.,  1783.  Before
the  war  he  was  an  inn-keeper  and  officer  of  militia
in  Uoxhury.  On  12  July,  1775,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  24th  regiment,  and  in  October  fol-
lowing colonel  of  the  86th,  and  afterward  colonel
of  the  3d  Massachusetts,  on  the  continental  estab-
lishment. During  the  siege  of  Boston  he  led  an
expedition  which  destroyed  the  buildings  on  Long
Island  in  Boston  harbor.  On  15  April.  1776,  he
was  ordered  to  Canada,  in  December  joined  Wash-
ington in  New  Jersey,  and  was  afterward  trans-
ferred to  Heath's  division  at  We-t  Point.  Congress
made  him  a  brigadier-general,  7  Jan.,  1783.

UKEATOKEX.  Henry  Wellington,  musician,
b.  in  Burton-on-Trent,  England,  in  1816;  d.  in
Charleston.  S.  ('.,  in  Septemlier,  1868.  He  received
a  thorough  musical  education  from  his  father,  who
was  for  many  vears  organist  of  Westminster  Al>-
Ih'v,  and  conductor  of  the  London  "concerts  of  an-
cient music."  He  came  to  this  country  in  ls:{«.».
tattled  in  New  York  city  as  a  teacher  of  music  and
organist  of  Calvary  church,  and  frequently  sang  in
concerts  and  oratorios.  For  some  years  he  wa.-  or-
ganist and  conductor  of  the  choir  at  St.  Paul's
flhapei.  Ureatorex  did  much  to  advance  the  stand-
ard of  sacred  music  in  the  days  when  country  sin^'-
ing-schi>ol  teacher-  im|M>sed  their  trivial  inclodii-
and  the  convivial  measures  of  foreign  composers  on
the  text-  of  our  hymn-books,  lie  published  a
lection  of  Psalm  and  Hvinn  Tunc-.  Chants,
Anthems,  and  .Sentence-"  (f  lost  on,  1851).  —  His
wife.  Eliza,  arti-t.  I>.  in  Manor  Hamilton.  Ireland.
89  Dec.,  1818,  was  the  daughter  of  Kcv.  .lame-  Cal-
Pratt,  and  came  to  New  York  in  1840,  where  in
1849  she  married  Mr.  Qrcatorex.  Subsequently  -he
studied  art  with  William  H.  Withcrspoon' and
James Hart in New  York,  with Kmile  l^imhiuct


iri-,  and  also  at  the Pmakothek  in Munich.

Daring  i*?!»  the  •todied  etching  with  c.  Henri

-he  visited  England,  andepent

1861  "2  in  Pan-.  She  wits  al-o  abroad  in  l^i"
vi-iting  Nuninlicrg  and  Ober-Ammergau,  (i
many,  and  various  parts  of  Italy.  In  1NJ8  she  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  acadcmy.be-
ing  the  first  woman  who  received  that  recognition,
and  -In-  is  also  tin-  only  woman  who  i-  a  mem-
ber of  the  Arti-t-' fund  loeiotyof  New  York.  Mrs.
•••rex  has  acquired  reputation  by  her  nea>
and-ink  sketches,  many  of  which  have  ap|iearcd  in
book-form,  notably  "The  Homes  of  Olier-Amuier-
gau"  (Munich.  1878);  "Summer  Etchings  in  Colo-
rado :  "Etching-  in  Nun-m-
l-erg"  (1875);  and  "  <  >ld  New  York  bom  the  Bat-
tery to  the  Bloomingdale "  (1N7<>).  the  text  of
which  was  prepared  by  her  si-ter.  Mr-.  Matilda
P.  Desjiard.  Eighteen  of  the  sketches  illustrative
of  New  York  were  exhibited  at  the  Centennial
exhibition  in  Philadelphia  in  1876.  Her  large
|  Mii-drawing  of  "  Durer's  House  in  Nureml>erg"
is  in  the  Yatican.  Koine.  Among  her  paintings  are
"Bloomingdale"  (18(18);  "Chateau  of  Madame
OlifTe"  (1869);  "  Bloomingdale  Church,"  painted
mi  a  panel  taken  from  the  North  Dutch  church.
Pulton  st net;  "St.  Paul's  Church"  and  "The
North  Dutch  Church."  each  minted  on  panels
taken  from  these  churches  (1876);  "Normandv"
(1H82);  and  "The  Home  of  Louis  Philippe  in
Bloomingdale,  N.  Y."  (1884).  — Their  daughter,
Kathleen  Honora,  artist,  b.  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  10
Sept..  1851,  has  studied  art  in  New  York,  Koine.
and  Munich.  She  has  devoted  herself  to  decora-
tive work  and  book  illustration,  but  latterly  has
won  success  as  a  painter,  obtaining  honorable  men-
tion for  her  work  in  the  Paris  salon  of  1886.  Many
of  her  paintings  have  been  flower-pieces,  and  -he
has  exhibited  "  The  Last  Bit  of  Autumn  "  (187.*>) :
"Goethe's  Fountain,  Frankfort"  (1876);  panels
with  "Thistles"  and  "  Corn  "  (1877);  and  "Holly-
hocks" (1868). —  Another  daughter,  Elizabeth
Eleanor,  artist,  b.  in  New  York.  26  May.  1854,
has  studied  art  in  the  National  academy  of  del
and  at  the  Art  students'  league  in  New  York,  in
Paris  with  Carolus  Duran,  in  Munich,  and  in
Italy.  Like  her  sister,  she  has  decorated  china,  and
illustrated  books,  but  now  gives  her  chief  attention
to  painting.  She  has  exhibited  at  the  National
aeadem v  "  The  Bat  h  "  (18841  and  "  ( 'olor  that  Burns
as  if  no'Frost  could  Tame  "  (1885).

UKEBLE,  John  Trout,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia. 11)  Jan..  1834;  killed  in  the  battle  of  Big
Met  del.  Ya..  10  June,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1854,  assigned  to  the
2d  artillery,  and  stationed  at  Newport,  K.  I.  In
September  of  that  year  he  was  made  2d  lieutenant
and  sent  to  Tampa.  Fla.,  where  he  served  in  the
Indian  troubles  for  two  years.  He  was  compelled,
in  con-ciMieiice  of  a  severe  fever,  to  return  home
on  sick  leave,  but  in  the  I n-gi lining  of  1856  re-
sumed his  duties,  acting  jwirt  of  the  time  as  quar-
termaster and  commissary  till  December,  1856,
w  hen  he  was  appointed  acting  assistant  professor
of  geography,  history,  and  ethic-  in  the  military
academy,  where  he  remained  till  24  Sept.,  1-
He  was  promoted  1-t  lieutenant  00  :5  March,  1857,
detailed  for  active  duty  at  Fort  Monroe  in  March,
1861,  and  rendered  efficient  service  in  preventing
it-  -ei/.ure.  <  »n  M  May.  1861,  he  was  sent  to  New-
port News  m  master  of  ordnance.  -u|>cnntended
the  fortifications  of  that  point,  and  trained  the
volunteers  to  artillery  practice.  When  the  disas-
trous expedition  to  Kig  Bethel  was  planned,  he  was
une\|Ht  tcdlv  detailed  to  accomjmny  it  with  two


784


GREELEY


GREELEY


guns,  though  in  his  own  judgment  it  VM  ill-ad-
rfatd  end  would  probably  prori  fatal  t«>  Urn.

Wli.'ii  the  National  troops  were  repelled,  by  his
admirable  llHIHjnmWl  "f  the  trims  he  protected
tli.  in  from  pursuit  and  destruction.  Just  at  the
cIom-  of  the  action,  when  he  had  given  the  orders
t..  withdraw  his  puns  from  the  field,  he  was  struck
bv  a  rifle-tall  oa  the  right  temple  and  instantly
killed.  For  his  bravery  in  the  two  days'  action  he
was  hrevetted  captain,  major,  and  lieutenant-colo-
nel, on  the  dav  of  his  death.

QBBELB1,  Horace,  journalist,  b.  in  Amherst,
N.  H.,  3  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  In  Pleasantville,  near  New
York  city,  29  Nov.,  1872.  His  birthplace  is  shown
in  the  accompanying  engraving.  On  both  sides
his  ancestors  were  of  Scotch-Irish  origin,  but  had
been  settled  in  New  England  for  some  generations.
His  father,  Zaccheus  Greeley,  was  a  small  farm-
er, always  poor,  and,  by  the  time  Horace  was  ten
years  old,  a  bankrupt  and  a  fugitive  from  the
state,  to  escape  arrest  for  debt.  Horace  was  the
third  child,  four  followed  him,  and  when  the  lit-
tle homestead  of  fifty  acres  of  stony  land  at  Am-
herst was  lost  and  his  father  became  a  day-la-
borer at  West  Haven,  Vt.,  the  united  exertions
of  all  that  were  able  to  work  brought  the  fam-
ily only  a  hard  and  bare  subsistence.  Horace
had  been  a  precocious  child,  feeble,  and  not  fond
of  sports,  but  with  a  strong  bent  to  books.  He
could  read  before  he  could  talk  plainly,  when  he
was  not  yet  three  years  old,  and  he  was  soon  after
the  acknowledged  chief  in  the  frequent  contests  of
the  village  spelling-match.  He  received  only  a
common-school  education,  and  after  his  sixth  year
had  schooling  only  in  winter,  laboring  at  other
times  in  the  field  with  his  father  and  brothers.
When  six  years  old  he  declared  he  would  be  a
printer,  and  at  eleven  he  tried  to  be  apprenticed  in
the  village  office.  He  was  rejected  then  on  account
of  his  youth,  but  tried  again,  three  years  later,  at
East  Pouitney,  Vt,  in  the  office  of  the  "  Northern
Spectator,"  and  was  accepted  as  an  apprentice  for
"-"five  years,  to  be  boarded  and  lodged,  and,  after  six
iAtmths,  to  be  paid  at  the  rate  of  $40  a  year.  He
learned  the  business  rapidly,  became  an  accurate
compositor,  gained  the  warm  regard  of  his  em-
ployer and  of  the  whole  village,  showed  a  special
aptitude  for  politics  and  political  statistics,  rose  to
be  the  neighborhood  oracle  on  disputed  points,
took  a  leading  part  in  the  village  debating-society,
and  was  intrusted  with  a  portion  of  the  editorial
work  on  the  paper.  Meantime  he  spent  next  to
nothing,  dressed  in  the  cheapest  way,  went  with-
out a  coat  in  summer  and  without  an  overcoat  in
winter,  was  laughed  at  as  "  gawky  "  and  "  stingy,"
and  sent  almost  every  cent  of  his  forty  dollars  a
year  to  his  father.  At  last,  in  June,  1830,  the  pa-
per was  suspended,  and  young  Greeley,  then  in  nis
twentieth  year,  was  released  from  his  apprentice-
ship, and  turned  out  upon  the  world  as  a  "  tramp-
ing jour  printer."  Fourteen  months  of  such  ex-
perience sufficed.  He  visited  his  father,  who  had
now  removed  to  the  "  new  country  "  near  Erie,  Pa.,
worked  with  him  on  the  farm  when  he  could  not
find  employment  in  country  printing-offices,  sent
home  most  of  his  earnings,  when  he  could,  and  at
last  decided  to  seek  his  fortune  in  New  York.
With  his  wardrobe  in  a  bundle,  slung  over  his
shoulder  by  a  stick,  he  set  out  on  foot  through  the
woods,  walked  to  Buffalo,  thence  made  his  way,
partly  on  canal-boats,  partly  by  walking  the  tow-
path,  to  Albany,  and  then  down  the  Hudson  on  a
tug-boat.  With  $10  in  his  pocket,  and  his  stick
and  bundle  still  over  his  shoulder,  on  18  Aug.,
1831,  he  entered  the  city  in  which  he  was  to  be


recognized  M  the  first  of  American  journalists.
He  wandered  for  days  from  one  printing-office  to
another  vainly  searching  for  work.  His  grotesque
appearance  was  against  him:  lobod J  enppoaed  M
could  be  a  competent  printer,  and  nm-t  thought
him  a  runaway  apprentice.  At  last  an  Irishman
at  the  cheap  boarding-house  he  had  found  told
him  of  an  office  where  a  compositor  was  needed ;
a  Vermont  printer  interceded  for  him,  when  he
was  about  to  be  rejected  on  his  appearance,  and  at
last  he  was  taken  on  trial  for  the  day.  The  matter
assigned  him  had  been  abandoned  by  other  print-
ers because  of  its  uncommon  difficulty.  At  night
his  was  found  the  best  day's  work  that  anybody
had  yet  done,  and  his  position  was  secure.

He  worked  as  a  journeyman  printer  in  New
York  for  fourteen  months,  sometimes  in  job-offices,
for  a  few  days  each  in  the  offices  of  the  "  Evening
Post "  and  the  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"  longer  in
that  of  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  making  friends
always  with  the  steady  men  he  encountered,  and
saving  money.  Finally,  in  January,  1833,  he  took
part  in  the  first  effort  to  establish  a  penny  paper
in  New  York.  His  partner  was  Francis  V.  Story,
a  fellow-printer;  they  had  $150  between  them,
and  on  this  capital  and  a  small  lot  of  type  bought


on  credit  from  George  Bruce,  on  his  faith  in  Gree-
ley's honest  face  and  talk,  they  took  the  contract
for  printing  the  "  Morning  Post."  It  failed  in
three  weeks,  but  they  had  only  lost  about  one
third  of  their  capital,  and  still  had  their  type.
They  had  therefore  become  master  job-printers,
and  Greeley  never  worked  again  as  a  journeyman.
They  got  a  "  Bank-note  Reporter  "  to  print,  which
brought  them  in  about  $15  a  week,  ana  a  little  tri-
weekly paper,  "  The  Constitutionalist,"  which  was
the  lottery  organ.  Its  columns  regularly  contained
the  following  card:  "Greeley  and  Story,  No.  54
Liberty  street,  New  York,  respectfully  solicit  the
patronage  of  the  public  to  their  business  of  letter-
press-printing, particularly  lottery-printing,  such
as  schemes,  periodicals,  and  so  forth,  which  will
be  executed  on  favorable  terms."

Mr.  Greeley  had  renewed  his  habit  of  writing
for  the  papers  on  which  he  was  employed  as  a
compositor.  He  was  thus  a  considerable  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  and  now,  by  an
article  contributed  to  the  "  Constitutionalist,'  de-
fending the  lotteries  against  a  popular  feeling  then
recently  aroused,  he  attracted  the  attention  of
Dudley  S.  Gregory,  of  Jersey  City,  the  agent  of  a
great  lottery  association,  whose  friendship  soon  be-
came helpful  and  was  long-continued.  His  part  tier,
Story,  died  after  seven  months,  and  his  brother-in-
law,  Jonas  Winchester,  was  taken  into  the  partner-
ship instead.  The  firm  prospered,  and  by  1834
Mr.  Greeley  again  began  to  think  of  editorship.
The  firm  now  considered  itself  worth  $3,000.  With
this  capital  and  the  brains  of  the  senior  partner,
the  "  New  Yorker,"  the  best  literary  weekly  then


D APPI-ETON  Ik  C*  MEW  YORK


(JUKI


780


in  America,  WM  flMwiffrfl. Shortly  bafttl  it»  W>
pearance  James  Gordon Bennett -v  i  - 1 1 « -<  1  Mr.  G
ley  and  propowd  to  unite  willi  him  in  BOfhHahillf
a  now  |iii|mt  t<>  lie  called  the  "  New  York  Herald."
In  declining, Mr.  <•  commended  another

|Mirtn<T.  who  MOtptod  and  continued  the  partner-
ship with  Bonneti  until  the  "  llcnild"  office  was
hurmil,  when  bt  retired.  The  "  New  Yorker"  ap-
peared on  22  March.  1884,  sold  one  hundred  copies
of  its  first  nuinlier.  and  for  three  months  MMMij
increased  its  eirculation  from  this  poinl  over  one
hundred  copies  a  wwk.  Hv  BoptembOT,  hoWOfM,
it  had  risen  to  LQOQ,  At  the  end  of  a  year  it  was
10,  at  the  end  of  the  second  year  7,000,  and  of
the  third  i»,.VH>.  It  was  steadily  |>opular  with  the
press  and  |>eople,  and  steadily  unsuccessful  POMS*
larily.  The  first  year  showed  a  loss  of  $3,000,  the
second  year  of  $3,000  niori'.  and  the  third  year  of
a  further  $'2,000.  Mr.  Greeley  became  widely
known  and  resjieetcd  hs  it**  editor,  was  able  to  add
to  his  income  by  furnishing  editorials  to  the
"  Dailv  Whig"  and  other  journals,  and  within  four
years  had  attained  such  prominence  that  the  tow-
headed  printer  who  was  mistaken  for  a  runaway
apprentice  and  dismissed  from  the  '•  Kvening
1'i.st  "'  ofllce,  because  the  proprietors  wished  to
have  "at  least  decent  lixikinij  men  at  the  cases,"
was  selected  by  WIIUmD  H.  Seward  and  Thurlow
Wee<l  as  the  best  man  available  for  the  conduct  of
a  campaign |>aper,  which  they  desired  to  ]>ublish

at Albanv,  to  be  called  tl JelTersoniun." He

continueii  his  work  on  the  "New  Yorker,"  but
went  back  and  forth  between  New  York  and  Al-
bany each  week.  The  "  Jeffersonian,"  for  a  cam-
paign paper,  was  unusually  quiet,  calm,  and  in-
struetive;  but  it  seems  to  have  given  the  Whig
central  committee  satisfaction,  and  it  still  further
brought  its  editor  to  the  notice  of  the  press  and  of
influential  men  throughout  the  state.  The  "Jef-
fersonian" lasted  until  the  spring  of  1839,  and
Mr.  (ireeley  was  paid  a  salary  of  $1,000  for  con-
ducting it.  A  few  months  later  the  country  en-
tered u|K>n  the  extraordinary  popular  excitements
attending  the  presidential  canvass  of  1840,  and
when  Mr.  Greeley,  prompt  to  seize  the  opportunity,
issued  simultaneously  at  New  York  and  Albany,
under  the  firm-name  of  "II.  Greeley  &  Co.,"  the
first  numlicr  of  a  new  campaign  paper  called  the
"  Log  Cabin,"  it  sprang  at  once  into  a  remarkable
circulation;  20,000  copies  of  the  first  issue  were
printed,  and  this  was  thought  to  be  an  extrava-
gant supply ;  but  it  was  MOOdily  exhausted.  Other
editions  were  called  for,  and  finally,  the  type  hav-
ing been  distributed,  the  number  had  to  be  reset.
and  in  all  48,000  copies  were  sold.  In  a  few  weeks
60,000  subscriptions  had  been  received,  and  the
advance  did  not  cease  until  the  weekly  issue  had
risen  to  between  80,000  and  90,000  copies— a  circu-
lation then  al>solutely  unprecedented.  The  "Log
Cabin"  was  a  vivacious  political  journal,  much
more  aggressive  than  the  "Jeffersonian  "  had  been,
and  displaying  many  of  the  personal  peculiarities
of  its  editor,  his  quaint ness,  his  homely  common
.sense,  and  an  extraordinary  capacity  for  compact
and  pungent  statement.  It  printed  rough  carica-
tures ,,f  Van  Burcn  and  other  I  >emocrats,  gave  a
good  deal  of  campaign  POOtiy,  with  music  attached,
and  yet  made  room  for  lectures  opOO.  the  "  Kleva-
tion  of  the  I ADOting  ('lasses."  In  all  the  heat  and
fury  of  that  turbulent  campaign  its  editor  set  in
one  respect  an  example  of  moderation  DOtoiwWI
followed  in  contests  of  a  much  later  date.  In  an-
swer to  a  correspondent  he  said  flatly:  "Articles
assailing  the  primal  character  of  Mr.  Van  Boob
or  any  of  his  MppofWH  cannot  be  published  in


the  'Log  Cabin.'"  Meantime,  Mr.  Greeley  was
widely  consulted,  was  appointed  on  campaign  com-
mittees, asked  to  make  sjiceches,  and  called  h
and  thither  to  aid  in  adjusting  |>o|itical  differences.
lie  had  Income  a  pMOOB  of  iutlueii<  e  ami  a  |m >lit i-
cal  factor.  He  continued  his  ptfMf  for  one  week
after  the  term  promised,  in  order  to  send  to  his
readers  a  complete  account  of  the  victory,  the
election  of  (Jen.  ilarris.ni  as  president,  with  as  full
returns  of  the  vote  a>  poMMN.  After  an  interval
of  a  few  weeks  it  WM  resumed  as  a  familv  f>oliti-
cal  paper,  and  continued  until  it  was  able,  on  :t
April,  1841,  to  announce  t hut  "on  Saturday,  April
UM h  instant,  tin'  mbacribw  will  publish  the  first
iiuiiiUt  of  a  new  in<prning  journal  of  |>olitics(
literature,  and  general  intelligence.  "The  Trib-
une,' as  its  name  imports,  will  lalxir  to  advance
the  interests  ,,f  the  people  and  to  promote  their
moral,  social,  and  poUtioal  well-U-ing.  The  im-
moral and  degrading  police  reports,  advertise-
ments, and  other  matter  which  have  been  allowed
to  disgrace  the  coluinnsof  our  leading  penny  papers
will  Ih.'  carefully  excluded  from  this,  and  no  exer-
tion spared  to  render  it  worthy  of  the  hearty  ap-
proval of  the  virtuous  and  refined,  and  a  welcome
visitant  at  the  family  fireside.  Horace  (ireeley,
30  Ann  street."

Until  this  time  Mr.  Greeley  had  acquired  great
reputation,  but  no  money.  In  spite  of  the  brilliant
success  of  the  "Log  Cabin,"  and  the  general  es-
teem for  the  "  New  Yorker,"  neither  had  ever  been
profitable,  and  their  editor,  always  talked  of  as
"able,  but  queer,"  began  also  to  l>e  recognized  as
lucking  in  business  qualifications.  He  gave  credit
profusely,  loaned  money  when  he  had  it  to  almost
any  applicant,  made  his  paper  sometimes  too  good
for  the  popular  demand,  and  had  no  faculty  for
advertising  his  own  wares.  Once,  when  admitting
that  his  pa|>er  was  not  profitable,  he  frankly  said:
"Since  the  "New  Yorker' was  first  issued,  seven
copartners  in  its  publication  have  successively
withdrawn  from  the  concern,  generally,  we  regret
to  say,  without  having  improved  their  fortunes  by
the  connection,  and  most  of  them  with  the  convic-
t  ion  that  the  work,  however  valuable,  was  not  calcu-
lated to  prove  lucrative  to  its  proprietors.  '  Y'ou
don't  humbug  enough '  has  been  the  complaint  of
more  than  one  of  our  retiring  associates;  'You
ought  to  make  more  noise,  and  vaunt  your  own
merits.  The  world,  will  never  Wlieve  you  print  a
good  paper  unless  you  tell  them  so.'  Our  course
has  notl)een  changed  by  these  representations."

Mr.  Greeley,  although  eccentric  enough  in  his
ap|M-arance  and  habits,  had  thus  far  developed
but  few  eccentricities  of  thought.  He  WM  tem-
jierate  almost  to  the  verge  of  total  abstinence,
partly.no  doubt,  from  taste,  partly  also,  perhaps,
from  his  observations  on  the  intcin|>erate  habits
common  about  his  father's  earlv  home  in  New
Hampshire.  He  was  opposed  to  slavery,  but  rather
deprecated  northern  interference:  approved  of  the
colonization  society,  and  opposed  anti-slavery  so-
cieties at  the  north.  He  U'lieved  prohibition  im-
practicable, but  was  warmly  in  favor  of  high
license.  He  was  vehemently  in  favor  of  a  protec-
tive tariff,  and  always,  as  he  expressed  it,  "an
advocate  of  the  interests  of  unassuming  industry."
He  had  bOM  captivated  by  vegetarian  notions,  and
was  for  a  short  time  an  inmate  of  a  Grahamite
boarding-house.  Then-  he  met  Miss  Cheney,  a
young  teacher  from  Connecticut,  who  was  making
a  short  stay  in  New  York,  on  her  way  to  North
Carolina.  She  was  a  highly  nervous,  excitable  per-
son, full  of  ideas,  prone  to  "  isms."  and  destined  to
have  a  strong  and  not  always  helpful  influence  on


736


GREELEY


GREELEY


his  life.  He  continued  the  acquaintance  by  corre-
spondence, became  engaged,  married  her  in  North
Carolina,  and  made  a  short  wedding-journey,  of
which  his  first  visit  to  Washington  was  the  princi-
pal feature.  About  the  same  period  he  contributed
a  good  many  verses  to  the  "  Log  Cabin  " — M  H  ist  orie
Pencilling*,"  "Nero's  Tomb,  "Fantasies,"  "On
the  Death  of  William  Wirt,"  etc.  They  are  not
destitute  of  poetic  feeling,  but  in  later  years  he  was
never  glad  to  have  them  recalled.  In  1859,  learn-
ing that  Robert  Bonner,  of  the  "New  York  Led-
ger," proposed  to  include  them  among  representa-
tive poems  in  a  volume  to  be  made  up  from  authors
not  appearing  in  Charles  A.  Dana  s  "  Household
Book  of  Poetry,"  Mr.  Greeley  wrote :  "  Mr.  Bonner,
be  good  enough — vou  must— to  exclude  me  from
your  new  poetic  Pantheon.  I  have  no  business
therein,  no  right  and  no  desire  to  be  installed
there.  I  am  no  poet,  never  was  (in  expression),
and  never  shall  be.  True,  T  wrote  some  verses  in
my  callow  days,  as  I  suppose  most  persons  who  can
make  intelligible  pen-marks  have  done;  but  I
was  never  a  poet,  even  in  the  mists  of  deluding
fancy.  .  .  .  Within  the  last  ten  years  I  have  been
accused  of  all  possible  and  some  impossible  offences
against  good  taste,  good  morals,  and  the  common
weal  ;  I  have  been  branded  aristocrat,  commu-
nist, infidel,  hypocrite,  demagogue,  disunionist,
traitor,  corruptionist,  and  so  forth,  and  so  forth,
but  cannot  remember  that  any  one  has  flung  in  my
face  my  youthful  transgressions  in  the  way  of
rhyme.  .  .  .  Let  the  dead  rest !  and  let  me  enjoy
the  reputation,  which  I  covet  and  deserve,  of  know-
ing poetry  from  prose,  which  the  ruthless  resur-
rection of  my  verses  would  subvert,  since  the  un-
observing  majority  would  blindly  infer  that  /con-
sidered them  poetry."

In  establishing  the  "  Tribune,"  Mr.  Greeley  had
considerable  reputation,  wide  acquaintance  among
newspaper  men  and  practical  politicians,  one
thousand  dollars  in  money  borrowed  from  James
Coggeshall,  and  the  promise  from  another  source
of  a  thousand  more,  which  was  never  realized.  He
had  employed,  some  time  before,  at  $8  a  week,  a
young  man  fresh  from  the  Universitv  of  Vermont.
This  young  man,  Henry  J.  Raymond,  now  became
his  chief  assistant  in  the  conduct  of  the  new  paper,
and  gradually  a  considerable  force  of  people  of
similar  fitness  gathered  about  him,  the  paper
always  having  an  attraction  for  men  of  intellect
and  scholarly  tastes.  In  the  early  years  it  thus
enjoyed  the  services  of  George  William  Curtis,
Wdliam  Henry  Fry,  Charles  A.  Dana,  Margaret
Fuller,  Albert  Brisbane,  Bayard  Taylor,  Count
Gurowski,  and  others.  Of  its  first  number,  5,000
copies  were  printed,  and,  as  Mr.  Greeley  said,  "  with
difficulty  given  away."  About  600  subscribers  had
been  procured  through  the  exertions  of  his  personal
and  political  friends.  Being  published  at  first  at
one  cent  a  copy,  it  was  regarded  as  a  serious  rival
by  the  cheap  papers,  and  the  "  Sun "  especially
undertook  to  interfere  with  its  circulation  by  for-
bidding its  newsboys  to  sell  the  new  paper.  The
public  considered  this  unfair,  and  the  "  Tribune  "
was  greatly  helped.  In  four  weeks  it  reached  a
circulation  of  6,000 ;  in  four  weeks  more  its  circu-
lation had  risen  to  the  limit  of  the  press,  being
between  11,000  and  12,000.  Its  business  manage-
ment was  chaotic,  but  by  July  the  chances  for  a
permanent  success  were  so  clear  that  Thomas
McKlrath,  a  business  man  of  excellent  standing,
was  taken  in  as  an  equal  partner.  A  weekly  issue
was  projected,  and  on  20  Sept.  the  "  New  Yorker  "
and  the  "Log  Cabin"  were  merged  in  the  first
number  of  "  The  New  York  Weekly  Tribune,"


which  soon  attained  considerable  circulation  and
ultimately  became  a  great  political  and  social
force  in  rural  communities,  particularly  in  the
period  of  the  anti-slavery  discussion  prior  to  and
during  the  war  for  the  Union.  From  this  time
forward  Mr.  Greeley's  business  prosperity  was
secure,  but  the  "  Tribune  "  might  easily  have  been
far  more  successful  from  the  mere  money  point  of
view  if  its  editor  had  been  less  outspoken  and  in-
different to  the  light  in  which  the  New  York  pub-
lic might  regard  his  opinions.  The  controlling
influences  in  the  city  were  then  largely  favorable
to  free-trade  :  but  he  made  the  "  Tribune  "  aggres-
sively protectionist.  A  commercial  community
was  necessarily  conservative,  but  the  "Tribune
soon  came  to  be  everywhere  regarded  as  radical.
New  York  had  close  business  connections  with  the
south,  but  the  "  Tribune ''  gradually  became  more
and  more  explicit  in  its  anti-slavery  utterances.
The  prevailing  religious  faith  among  the  better
educated  classes  was  orthodox ;  Mr.  Greeley  con-
nected himself  almost  from  the  outset  with  a  Uni-
versalist  church.  He  aimed  always  to  practise  the
utmost  hospitality  toward  new  ideas  and  their  ex-
ponents, so  that  people  soon  talked  of  the  "  isms  "
of  the  "  Tribune.  Sympathizing  profoundly  with
workingmen,  he  was  led  constantly  to  schemes  for
bettering  their  condition,  and  became  interested  in
the  theories  of  Fourier.  Before  the  "  Tribune "
was  a  year  old  he  had  discussed  the  subject  of
"  Fourierism  in  France  "  in  an  article  beginning
thus :  "  We  have  written  something,  and  snail  yet
write  much  more,  in  illustration  and  advocacy  of
the  great  social  revolution  which  our  age  is  des-
tined to  commence,  in  rendering  all  useful  labor  at
once  attractive  and  honorable,  and  banishing  want
and  all  consequent  degradation  from  the  globe.
The  germ  of  this  revolution  is  developed  in  the
writings  of  Charles  Fourier."  In  March,  1842,  he
began  publishing,  under  a  contract  with  a  number
of  New  York  Fourierites,  one  column  daily  on  the
first  page  of  the  "  Tribune  "  on  Fourierite  topics,
from  the  pen  of  Albert  Brisbane.  The  theories
here  advanced  were  also  occasionally  defended  in
the  editorial  columns.  Mr.  Greeley  became  a  sub-
scriber to  one  or  two  Fourierite  associations,  no-
tably that  of  the  "American  Phalanx"  at  Red
Bank,  N.  J.,  and  occasionally  addressed  public
meetings  on  the  subject.  When  the  famous  Brook
Farm  experiment  was  abandoned,  its  chief,  George
Ripley,  sought  employment  on  the  "  Tribune,"
and  was  soon  its  literary  editor.  Another  of  its
members,  Charles  A.  Dana,  became  in  time  the
"  Tribune's  "  managing  editor.  Another,  Margaret
Fuller,  contributed  literary  work  and  occasional
editorials,  and  lived  in  Mr.  Greeley's  family :  and
another,  George  William  Curtis,  was  also  employed.
In  1846  Henry  J.  Raymond,  who  had  now,  owing
to  some  disagreement,  left  the  "  Tribune  "  and  be-
come a  leading  editor  on  the  "Courier  and  En-
quirer," saw  that  Fourierism  offered  an  inviting
point  for  attack  upon  the  "  Tribune."  Mr.  Greeley,
whose  conduct  of  the  paper  was  always  argumenta-
tive and  pugnacious,  responded  to  some  criticism
by  challenging  Mr.  Raymond  to  a  thorough  dis-
cussion of  the  whole  subject,  in  a  series  of  twelve
articles  and  replies,  to  be  published  in  full  in  all
the  editions  of  each  paper.  Mr.  Raymond  ac-
cepted, and  made  therein  his  first  wide  reputation
in  New  York.  Mr.  Greeley's  articles  were  un-
doubtedly able,  but  he  was  not  so  adroit  a  fencer
as  his  opponent,  and  he  had  the  unpopular  side.
The  discussion  left  on  the  public  mind  the  impres-
sion that  Mr.  Raymond  was  the  victor,  and  t he
Fourierite  movement  from  that  date"began  its  de-


UKKELEY


GREELEY


<-litn-  in  A  met;  ivs  careful

t ark  hi-.  dissent  boa  manvof  Fourier'*  propo-
sition,. In  thf  dlsnonttOIl  Mr.  Raymond  endeav-
ored to  bra  liini  into  tin-  |«i>ilinn  that  in>  man
can  right  fully  OWII  land  iMib-tant  ially  1 1n-  doctrine

of  a hi<ii  Henry George  has  sines  boon  the  apostle),
but Mr.  Greeley  indignantly  repudiated it. In

later  \<ars  he  dwelt  upon  tin-  principle  <»f  associa-
ti.m  a>  the  only  <>nc  in  Fourier'*  scheme  that  par-
ticularly attracted  him;  and  in  the  form  of  oo-op-
eration  anvmg  working-men  this  always  received
hi>  zealous  support.

The  rapping!  and  alleged  spiritual  manifesta-
tion* of  the  Fo\  Maternal  Rooheeter  early  attract-
ed attention  in  the  "  Tribune,"  and  were  fairly  de-
scribed and  discussed  without  absolute  incredulity.
In  1S4M,  at  Mrs.  (Jreeley's  invitation,  the  Fox  sis-
ters spent  some  time  in  his  family  as  hi*  gueota.
He  Uateoed  attentively  to  what  they  said,  inquired
with  interest  into  details,  but  hesitated  to  accept
the  doctrine  of  aotaal  spiritual  communications,
and  at  any  rate  failed,  he  said,  to  see  that  any  good
came  of  them.  Nevertheless,  the  OfMIMainded
readiness  that  he  displayed  in  investigating  this,
like  any  other  new  subject  presented  to  him,  led  to
his  identification  for  some  time  in  the  public  mind
with  the  spiritualistic  movement,  so  that  as  effec-
tive a  weapon  as  could  be  used  against  the  "  Trib-
une "  in  commercial  and  conservative  New  York
wa*  to  call  it  a  Fourierite  and  spiritualistic  organ.
With  all  his  radicalism,  however,  there  were  two
subjects  on  which,  then  and  throughout  life,  he
was  steadily  conservative.  He  constantly  defend-
ed the  sanctity  and  permanence  of  the  family  rela-
tion, and  protested  against  anything  m  legislation
or  public  practice  tending  to  break  down  the  sanc-
tion of  the  Sabbath  as  a  dav  of  rest.

Meanwhile,  the  "Tribune*  prospered  moderately
and  almost  continuously,  and  if  Mr.  Greeley  had
not  been  hopelessly  incapable  in  business  matters,
should  soon  nave  placed  him  in  a  position  of  com-
fortable independence.  In  twenty-four  years  it  in-
vested from  its  earnings  $382,000  in  real  estate  and
machinery,  and  divided  among  its  owners  a  sum
equal  to  an  annual  average  of  over  $ 50,000.  But
Mr.  Greeley  inherited  his  father's  tendency  to  reck-
less indorsements  for  his  friends,  was  readily  im-
posed upon  by  adventurers,  and  found  it  easier  to
pre  a  dollar  to  every  applicant  than  to  inquire  into
Ins  deserts.  In  spite  of  an  income  liberal  for  those
days,  he  was  thus  often  in  serious  straits  for  money,
and  lived  in  an  extremely  plain  if  not  always  eco-
nomical fashion.  Presently,  as  his  property  be-
came more  valuable,  he  contracted  the  habit  of
rai*ing  monevfor  immediate  necessities  by  parting
with  some  of  it.  After  it  was  clear  to  practical
men  that  the  "Tribune"  was  a  success,  he  sold
half  of  it  to  Thomas  McEIrath  for  $2,000.  By  t he
time  it  was  seven  years  old  he  owned  less  tlian  a
third  of  it.  In  1800  his  interest  was  reduced  to
three  twentieths,  in  1868  to  less  than  one  tenth,
and  by  1M72  he  actually  owned  only  six  shares  out
of  the  handled  into  which  the  property  was  then
divided.  Meantime,  though  always  hamjKTed  by
his  business  ideas,  the  property  had  advanced  in
value  until  in  1H(>7  he  was  able  to  sell  at  $6,500  a
share,  and  his  last  sale  was  at  $!UMM).  The  price
of  the  daily  "  Tribune  "  wa*  kept  at  one  cent  until
the  beginning  of  its  second  volume,  when  it  was
advanced  to  two  cents  for  a  single  Dumber, OT  nine
cent-  a  week.  It  then  had  18,000  subscribers,  and
dill  not  lose 800 of  them  bv  the  increase  hj  price,
ir  later  it  had  reached  a  circulation  of  20.000.
and  advert iseim-nt-  wen  10  numerous  that  freipieiit
supplements  wire  hmod  After  a  time  the  price
vol.  ii. — 47


was  again  advanced  to  three  cents,  and  finally  to
four. The  emulation  1008  to  a  atei  -<■  of

00  to  40,000,  and tli- a  .tra-

ordinary  Interest,  especially  during  the  civil  war
when  for  month*  it  reached  from  00,000  to  667900.
The  weekly  edition,  being  'r,,)'  'hen  from  OOBpeti-
tkm,  With  strong  weekly  issues  in  the  inland  cities.
gained  a  wide  circulation  throughout  the  entire
north,  In-ing  probably  more  generally  read  for
soma  year*  iii  the  northern  states  and  territories
than  any  other  one  n«w-pa|«r.  Muring  political
canvasses  it  sometimes  reached  a  total  circulation
of  a  quarter  of  a  million  copies,  and  often  for  years
rangJN  steadily  above  100,000  copies  a  week.  A
semi-weekly  edition  was  begun  for  the  benefit  of
weekly  readers  enjoying  mail  facilities  that  led
them  to  want  their  news  oftener,  and  this  edition
ultimately  attained  a  steady  circulation  of  from
15.000  to '20.000  copies.

Pint  Whig,  then  Anti-slavery  Whig,  then  Re-
publican, the  "Tribune's"  pohtioal  course  was  gen-
erally in  accord  with  the  more  popular  and  aggres-
sive tendency  of  these  parties.  But  it  was  also  a
highly  individuated  journal,  constantly  represent-
ing many  opinions  advocated  by  its  editor  irre-
spective of  partv  affiliations,  and  sometimes  againet
t  lie  in.  He  held  that  the  worst  use  any  man  could
be  put  to  was  to  hang  him,  and  for  many  vears
vehemently  opposed  capital  punishment.  lie  fa-
vored the  movement  for  educating  women  as
physicians,  and  sought  in  many  ways  to  widen  the
sphere  of  their  employments.  But  he  opposed
woman  suffrage  unless  it  could  be  first  shown  that
the  majority  of  women  themselves  desired  it.  He
assailed  repudiation  in  every  form,  north  or  south,
and  was  the  bitterest  critic  of  the  repudiating
states.  In  practice  a  total  abstinent,  he  always
favored  the  repression  of  the  liquor  traffic,  and,
where  possible,  its  prohibition,  lie  did  not  believe
prohibition  possible  in  states  like  New  York,  and
there  he  favored  high  license  and  local  option.  He
thought  popular  education  had  been  directed  too
much  toward  literarv  rather  than  practical  ends,
and  earnestly  favored  the  substitution  of  scientific
for  classical  studies.  He  gave  the  first  newspaper
reports  of  popular  lectures  by  Prof.  Louis  Agassiz
and  other  eminent  scientists;  but  he  thought  ill  of
theatres,  and  in  the  early  days  of  the  "  Tribune  "
would  not  insert  their  advertisements.  He  encour-
aged the  discussion  of  a  reformed  spelling;  but.
while  allowing  the  phonetic  system  to  be  com-
mended in  his  columns,  refused  to  adopt  it.  He
gave  much  space  to  accounts  of  all  co-operative
movements  among  laborers,  and  sought  to  encour-
age co-operation  in  America  as  a  surer  protection
for  labor  than  trades-unionism.  He  sought  to  re-
main on  good  terms  with  the  latter,  and  even  ac-
cepted the  first  presidency  of  Typographical  Union
No.  6;  but  when  subsequently,  under  this  union,
a  strike  was  ordered  in  his  office  to  prevent  the  in-
sertion of  an  advertisement  for  printers  by  a  rival
papery  he  gave  notice  that  thenceforward  lie  would
tolerate  no  trades-union  meddling,  should  mind  his
own  business,  and  require  them  to  mind  theirs.
He  was  a  warm  Mend  U)  every  movement  in  be-
half of  the  Irish  peoola,  and  particularly  for  the
restoration  to  them  of  a  greater  measure  of  self-
government.  He  advocated  judicious  but  liberal
appropriations  for  internal  improvements,  and  was
coii*picuous  in  urging  government  aid  for  the  con-
struction of  the  first  Pacific  railroad.  He  strove
to  diffuse  knowledge  of  the  west  and  promote  its
settlement,  giring  much  space  to  descriptions  of
different  localities,  and  rnaJnng  remoral  to  the  west
hi*  panacea  for  all  sorts  of  misfortune  and  ill-luck


738


GREELEY


GKKKLKY


in  the  east  Be  actively  encouraged  one  of  his
agricultural  editors  to  establish  a  colony  in  Colo-
rado on  land  that  could  In-  cultivated  only  by  irri-
pition,  and  was  proud  that  the  successful  town
banded  by  this  colony  was  called  by  his  name,  and
that  its  first  newspaper  Inire  as  its  title  the  "(ire-lev

Tribune,"  in  so  enlarged  fac-simile  of  his  own
handwriting.  He  had  personally  a  great  fondness
for  farming,  but  little  success  at  it.  though  he  de-
rived greel  comfort  ami  recreation  from  his  experi-
ments on  the  farm  that  he  bought  at  Chappaqua,
thirty-three  miles  north  of  New  York,  where  his
family  resided  in  the  summer,  and  where  for  many
years  he  spent  his  Saturdays  chopping  down  or
trimming  nis  trees,  and  occasionally  assisting  at
other  farm  labor.  He  favored  an  international
copyright.  He  constantly  watched  for  new  men  in
literature,  was  one  of  the  first  editors  in  America
to  recognize  the  rising  genius  of  Dickens,  and
copied  a  sketch  by  "  Boz  '  in  the  first  issue  of  his
first  newspaper.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  in  the
east  to  discover  Bret  Harte,  and  perhaps  the  ear-
liest to  recognize  Swinburne.  He  held  frequent
public  discussions — one  with  Samuel  J.  Tilden  and
Parke  Godwin  on  protection,  another  with  Robert
Dale  Owen  on  marriage  and  divorce.  He  frequent-
ly addressed,  in  his  editorial  columns,  open  letters
to  distinguished  public  men,  promptly  printed  re-
plies if  any  came,  and  was  apt  to  follow  these  with
a  telling  rejoinder.  Thurlow  Weed,  Benjamin  F.
Butler,  Oliver  P.  Morton,  John  J.  Crittenden,  Sam-
uel J.  Tilden,  and  many  others,  were  thus  singled
out.  He  was  fond  of  taking  readers  into  his  con-
fidence. Thus  he  published  details  of  his  experi-
ments in  farming,  and  printed  serially  a  charming
autobiography.  He  announced  his  intended  move-
ments, particularly  his  trips  to  Europe  and  through
the  west.  The  latter  proved  an  ovation,  especially
in  the  territories  and  in  California.  Being  arrested
once  in  Paris  as  a  director  of  the  American  world's
fair,  at  the  suit  of  a  disappointed  French  exhibitor,
he  published  a  graphic  and  amusing  account  of  his
imprisonment  in  Clichy.  He  admired  Fenitnore
Cooper,  and  yet  was  involved  in  the  series  of  libel
suits  instituted  by  that  novelist,  through  a  letter
(written  by  Thurlow  Weed)  published  anonymously
in  the  "  Tribune  " ;  whereupon  he  pleaded  his  own
case,  and  promptly  published  an  amusing  report
of  the  trial  and  the  adverse  verdict.  Sometimes,
especially  in  discussion,  he  was  less  good-humored.
In  an  angry  letter  to  a  state  officer  about  some
public  documents  advertised  in  the  New  York
"Times,"  he  referred  to  its  editor  as  "that  little
villain,  Raymond."  Replying  to  a  charge  against
him  by  the  "  Evening  Post "  of  some  corrupt  asso-
ciation with  the  slave  interest,  he  began,  "  You  lie,
villain,  wilfully,  wickedly,  basely  lie."  A  sub-
scriber in  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  discontinued  his  newspa-
per on  the  ground  of  Greeley's  opposition  to  Will-
iam II.  Seward,  and  angrily  said  his  only  regret  in
[larting  was  that  he  was  under  the  necessity  of
osing  a  three-cent  stamp  to  do  it.  Greeley  pub-
lished the  letter  with  this  reply :  "  The  painful  re-
gret expressed  in  yours  of  the  19th  inst.  excites  my
sympathies.  I  enclose  you  a  three-cent  stamp  to
replace  that  whose  loss  you  deplored,  and  remain,
Yours  placidly."  Quaint  letters  like  this,  the  oddi-
ties of  his  excessively  crabbed  handwriting,  pe-
culiarities of  dress,  his  cravat  (apt  to  be  awry),  nis
white  coat,  his  squeaky  voice,  his  shuffling  manner,
came  to  be  universally  known,  and  only  seemed  to
add  to  the  personal  fondness  with  which  his  read-
ers and  a  large  portion  of  the  general  public  re-
garded him.  He  became,  in  spite  of  almost  every
oratorical  defect,  a  popular  speaker,  always  in  de-


mand, and  always  nested  with  the  loaded  applause
on  whatever  occasion,  social,  educational,  reforma-
tory, or  political,  he  appeared.  As  early  as  Janu-
ary, 1848,  he  was  announced  as  a  lecturer  on  the
subject  of  "  Human  Life,"  the  advertisement  being
accompanied  with  the  request,  "  If  those  who  care
to  hear  will  sit  near  the  desk,  they  will  favor  tin-
lecturer's  weak  and  husky  voice."  He  was  after-
ward able  to  make  this  weak  and  husky  voice  heard
by  mass  meetings  of  thousands,  and  by  the  deliv-
ery of  lectures  throughout  the  west  he  often  more
than  doubled  in  a  winter  the  annual  salary  that  he
received  from  the  "  Tribune."  But  he  went,  when-
ever he  could,  wherever  he  was  asked,  whether  paid
or  not.  He  was  always  ready  to  write  for  other
people's  papers,  too,  sometimes  for  pay,  because  he
needed  the  money,  but  almost  as  readily  without  it,
because  he  craved  new  audiences.

In  1848  he  was  elected  to  the  National  house  of
representatives,  to  fill  a  vacancy  for  three  months.
Regarding  as  an  abuse  the  methods  then  pursued
by  congressmen  in  charging  mileage,  he  published
a  list  of  the  members^  mileage  accounts.  This
caused  great  indignation,  which  was  heightened  by
the  free  comments  on  congressional  proceedings  con-
tributed daily  to  the  "  Tribune  "  over  his  signature.
Thus  he  said  that  if  either  house  "  had  a  chaplain
who  dared  preach  of  the  faithlessness,  neglect  of
duty,  iniquitous  waste  of  time,  and  robbery  of  the
public  by  congressmen,  there  would  be  some  sense
in  the  chaplain  business ;  but  any  ill-bred  Nathan
or  Elijah  who  should  untertake  such  a  job  would
be  kicked  out  in  short  order."  He  broke  down  the
mileage  abuse.  He  also  introduced  the  first  bill
giving  homesteads,  free,  to  actual  settlers  on  the

Eublic  lands.  In  1861  he  was  a  candidate  for
r.  S.  senator  against  William  M.  Evarts,  defeating
Evarts,  but  being  defeated  in  turn  by  the  combina-
tion between  Evarts's  supporters  and  a  few  men
favoring  Ira  Harris,  of  Albany,  who  was  elected.
In  1864  he  was  one  of  the  Republican  presidential
electors.  In  1867  his  friends  again  put  him  for-
ward for  the  senate,  but  his  candor  in  needlessly
restating  the  views  he  held  on  general  amnesty,
then  very  unpopular,  made  his  election  impossible.
The  same  year  he  was  chosen  delegate-at-large  to
the  convention  for  revising  the  state  constitution.
At  first  he  took  great  interest  in  the  proceedings,
but  grew  weary  of  the  endless  talk,  and  finally  re-
fused either  to  attend  the  body  or  draw  his  salary.
Two  years  later  he  was  made  the  Republican  can-
didate for  state  comptroller,  at  a  time  when  the
election  of  the  ticket  was  known  to  be  hopeless,
and  in  1870  he  was  again  nominated  for  congress
by  the  Republicans  in  a  hopelessly  Democratic  dis-
trict, where  he  reduced  the  adverse  majority  about
1,700,  and  ran  largely  ahead  of  the  Republican  can-
didate for  governor.  On  the  death  of  Charles  G.
Halpine  ("  Miles  O'Reilly  "),  he  accepted  an  appoint-
ment to  the  city  office  that  Halpine  had  held,  and
discharged  the  duties  gratuitously,  turning  over
the  salary  to  Col.  Halpine's  widow.  With  one
notable  exception,  this  completes  his  career  as
office-holder  or  candidate  for  office.

Mr.  Greeley's  hostility  to  slavery  grew  strongef
from  the  beginning  of  his  editorial  career.  In  Lotf
he  was  intense  in  opposition  to  the  Mexican  war,  on
the  ground  that  it  was  intended  to  secure  more
slave  territory.  In  1852  he  sympathized  with  the
Free-soil  movement,  and  disapproved  of  the  Whig

Elatform — "spat  upon  it,"  as  he  said  editorially —
ut  nevertheless  supported  the  Whig  candidate,
Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  because  he  thought  that
better  than,  by  supporting  a  ticket  that  he  knew
could  not  be  elected,  to  risk  the  success  of  the


grkklky


ORKKLEY


erata.  [a  1856  he  wu  hh  anthoaiaetlo  nip-
porter  <>f  John  C.  Fremont,  and  tltiri  ii^r  tin-  n>\t
four  or  live  years  may  09  said  to  have  been  the
(  inspiration  anil  greatest  popular  leader  in  the
ii)o\.iiiciit  thai  carried  tin-  Republican  party  into
|m,w.  r. B  liotod in  Virginia  in 1886  for

circulating  incendiary  dooamente— viz..  tin-  "Trii»-

unc."  Postmasters  in  many  places  in  the  south  rc-
i  to  deliver  the  paper  at  all,  and  |>ersons  sub-
scribing for  it  were  ■omotilW  threatened  with
lynching.  Congressman  Albert  Rust  made  a  j>cr-
sonal  assault  ap(M  him  in  Washington,  and  no
northern  name  provoked  at  the  south  more  con-
stant and  hitter  denunciation.  Throughout  the
Kansas-Nebraska  excitement  the  "Tribune"  was
constantly  at  a  white  heat,  and  its  voluminous  cor-
respondence and  tinging  editorials  greatly  attlHtt-
lated  tin'  northern  movement  that  made  Kansas  a
free  state.  Still,  he  favored  only  legal  and  consti-
tutional method-  for  opposing  the  aggressions  of
slavery,  and  brought  apoo  himself  the  hostility  of
the  (Jarrison  and  Wendell  Phillips  aliolitionlsts,
who  always  distrusted  him  and  often  stigmatized
him  as  cowardly  and  temporizing.

I'p  to  this  time  the  popular  judgment  regarded
Seward,  Weed,  and  Greeley  as  the  great  Republi-
can triumvirate.  Rut  in  \Xi4  Mr.  Oreelev  had  ad-
inaeed  a  highly  characteristic  letter  to  Gov.  Sew-
ard complaining  that  Seward  and  Weed  had  some-
times need  their  political  power  to  his  detriment,
and  shown  no  consideration  for  his  difficulties,
while  some  of  Seward's  friends  thought  Greeley  an
obstacle  to  the  governor's  advancement.  Having
lal>ored  to  secure  a  legislature  that  would  send
Mr.  Seward  to  the  l'.  S.  senate,  it  seemed  to  him
"a  fitting  time  to  announce  the  dissolution  of  the
political  firm  of  Seward,  Weed,  and  Greeley  bv  the
withdrawal  of  the  junior  partner."  The  fetter
showed  that  the  writer  was  hurt,  but  it  was  not
unfriendly  in  tone,  and  it  ended  thus:  "You  have
done  me  acts  of  valued  kindness  in  the  line  of  your
profession ;  let  me  close  with  the  assurance  that
these  will  be  ever  gratefully  remembered  by  Yours,
Horace  Greeley."  Gov.  Seward's  friends  claimed
that  on  account  of  Greeley's  disappointment  as  an
office-seeker,  as  shown  in  this  private  letter,  he  had
resolved  to  prevent  Seward's  nomination  for  the
presidency  in  1860.  Mr.  Greeley  denied  this  em-
phatically, but  declared  that  he  did  not  think  the
nomination  advisable,  and  that  in  opposing  Seward
he  discharged  a  public  duty,  in  utter  disregard
of  personal  considerations.  At  any  rate,  he  did
oppose  him  successfully.  The  Seward  men  pre-
vented his  reaching  the  National  convention  as  a
delegate  from  New  York;  but  he  secured  a  seat  as
delegate  from  Oregon  in  place  of  an  absentee,  and
■awe  such  an  effectual  opposition  to  Mr.  Seward
that  he  may  fairly  lie  said  to  have  brought  about
the  nomination  of  Abraham  Lincoln.  In  the  can-
rase  that  followed,  the  M  Tribune  "  was  still  a  great
national  force.  Immediately  after  the  election  Mr.
Greeley  said :  "If  my  advice  should  1h-  asked  re-
specting Mr.  Lincoln's  cabinet,  I  should  recom-
mend the  appointment  of  Seward  M  secretary  of
state.  It  is  the  place  for  him.  and  he  will  do  honor
to  the  country  in  it."

When  the  civil  war  approached.  Mr.  Greeley  at
first  shrank  from  it.  He  hoped,  he  said,  never  to
live  in  a  Union  whereof  one  section  was  pinned  to
the  other  by  bayonets.  Rut  after  the  attack  on
Fort  Sumter  and  the  uprising  at  the  north  1.
arged  the  most  rigorona  prosecution  of  the  war,
to  the  end  that  it  might  Ik-  short.  He  chafed  at
the  early  delays,  and  the  columns  of  his  paper  car-
ried for  weeks  a  stereotyped  paragraph,  "On  to


Richmond  !"  demanding  the  speediest  ad  van
the  National  at  al newspaper!  hastened

in  conseoiie to  hold  him  napOBMnM  for  thedi  —

r  at  Hull  Run,  and  his  horror  at  the  calamity,
and  sensitiveness  under  the  attacks,  for  a  time  com-
pletely prostrated  him.  He  subsequently  replied
to  his  critics  in  an  editorial,  which  Ix-cainc  famous,
headed  ".lust  Once,"  wherein  he  defended  the  de-
mands for  aggressive  action,  though  denying  that
the  "(>n  to  Richmond-'  paragraph  was  his,  and
-i\  ing  he  would  have  preferred  BOl  to  iterate  it.
Henceforth  he  would  bar all  criticism  0B army

movements  in  bit  paper  "unless  sninobody  should

undertake  to  prove  that  (Jen.  Patterson  is  a  wise
ami  brave  commander."  If  there  was  anything  to
be  said  in  Patterson's  behalf,  he  would  mak
exception  in  his  favor.  He  continued  to  siipiwrt
the  war  with  all  possible  vigor,  encourage  volun-
teering, and  sustain  the  drafts,  meantime  making
more  and  more  earnest  appeals  that  the  cause  of
the  war — slavery— should  f>e  abolished.  Finally  he
addressed  to  President  Lincoln  a  powerful  letter
on  the  editorial  page  of  the  "Tribune."  which  he
entitled  "The  Prayer  of  Twenty  Millions."  Ho
made  in  it  an  impassioned  appeal  for  the  liberty  of
all  slaves  whom  the  armies  could  reach,  and  said  :
"On  the  face  of  this  wide  earth.  Mr.  President,
there is  not  one  disinterested,  determined,  intelli-

?[ent  champion  of  the  Union  cause  who  does  not
eel  that  all  attempts  to  put  down  the  rebellion,
and  at  the  same  time  uphold  its  inciting  cause,  are
preposterous  and  futile ;  that  the  rebellion,  if
crushed  out  to-morrow,  would  be  renewed  within
a  vear  if  slavery  were  left  in  full  vigor  ;  that  army
officers  who  remain  to  this  day  devoted  to  slavery
can  at  best  be  but  half-way  loyal  to  the  Union :
and  that  every  hour  of  deference  to  slavery  is  an
hour  of  added  and  deepened  peril  to  the  Union.  1
appeal  to  the  testimony  of  your  ambassadors  in
hurope.  It  is  freely  at  your  service,  not  mine.
Ask  them  to  tell  you  candidly  whether  the  seeming
subserviency  of  your  policy  to  the  slave-holding,
slavery-upholding  interest  is  not  the  perplexity,
the  despair  of  statesmen  and  of  parties ;  and  be
admonished  by  the  general  answer."  This  appeal
made  a  profound  impression  upon  the  country,  and
drew  from  the  president  within  two  days  one  of  his
most  characteristic  and  remarkable  letters,  likewise
published  in  the  "Tribune."  Mr.  Lincoln,  after
saying  that  "if  there  be  perceptible  in  it  [Mr.
Greeley's  letter]  an  impatient  and  dictatorial  tone,
I  waive  it  in  deference  to  an  old  friend,  whose  heart
I  have  always  supposed  to  be  right,"  continued :
"  My  paramount  object  is  to  save  the  Union,  and
not  either  to  save  or  destroy  slavery.  .  .  .  What  I
do  about  slavery  ami  the  colored  race  I  do  because
I  believe  it  helps  to  save  this  I'nion.  and  what  I
forbear  I  forbear  because  I  do  not  believe  it  would
help  to  save  the  Union.  ...  I  have  here  stated
my  purpose  according  to  my  views  of  official  duty,
and  I  intend  no  modification  of  my  oft-expressed
personal  wish  that  all  men  everywhere  should  be
free."  The  emanci|>ation  proclamation  was  issued
within  a  month  after  this  correspondence.

In  18<M  Mr.  Greeley  became  convinced  that  the
rebels  were  nearer  exhaustion  than  was  thought,
and  that  by  a  little  diplomacy  they  could  be  led  in-
to propositions  for  surrender.  He  accordingly  be-
sought the  president  to  send  some  one  to  confer
with  alleged  Confederate  commissioners  in  Canada.
Mr.  Lincoln  finally  sent  Mr.  Greeley  himself,  sub-
sequently despatching  one  of  his  private  secreta-
ries. Col.  John  Hay,  to  the  spot  to  watch  the  pro-
ceedings. It  was  found  that  theso-ealled  commis-
sioners had  not  sufficient  authority. The  nego-


740


GREELEY


GREELEY


tiations  failed,  and  Mr.  (iiv.l.v's  share  in  the  busi-

roughl  apoa  him  more  censure  than  it  de-

s.rM.I. A-  -'"■ii  M  the  .surrender  did  DOOM  lie  was
•agar  (Of  universal  amnesty  and  impartial  suffrage,

and  he  thought  (he  treatment  of  Jefferson  Davis  a
When,  after  imprisonment  and  delay,
.eminent  still  failed  to  brine;  Mr.  Davis  to
trial,  Mr.  Greeley  visited  Kielmiond  and  in  the
open  court-room  signed  his  bail-bond.  This  act
provoked  a  storm  of  public  censure.  Be  bad
been  writing  a  careful  history  of  the  civil  war  un-
der the  title  of  "The  American  Conflict."  The
first  volume  had  an  unprecedented  sale,  and  he
had  nali/.ed  from  it  far  more  than  from  all  his
other  occasional  publications  combined.  The  sec-
ond volume  was  just  out,  and  its  sale  was  ruined,
thousands  of  subscribers  to  the  former  volume  re-
fusing to  take  it.  On  the  movement  of  George  W.
Blunt,  an  effort  was  made  in  the  Union  League
club  to  expel  Mr.  Greeley.  This  roused  him  to  a
white  heat.  He  refused  to  attend  the  meeting,  and
addressed  to  the  president  of  the  club  one  of  his
best  letters.  "  1  shall  not  attend  your  meeting  this
evening.  ...  I  do  not  recognize  you  as  capable  of
judging  or  even  fully  apprehending  me.  You  evi-
dently regard  me  as  a  weak  sentimentalist,  misled
by  a  maudlin  philosophy.  I  arraign  you  as  narrow-
minded  blockheads,  who  would  like  to  be  useful  to
a  great  and  good  cause,  but  don't  know  how.  Your
attempt  to  base  a  great  enduring  party  on  the  heat
and  wrath  necessarily  engendered  by  a  bloody  civil
war  is  as  though  you  should  plant  a  colony  on  an
iceberg  which  had  somehow  drifted  into  a  tropical
ocean.  I  tell  you  here  that,  out  of  a  life  earnestly
devoted  to  the  good  of  human  kind,  your  children
will  recollect  my  going  to  Richmond  and  signing
the  bail-bond  as  the  wisest  act,  and  will  feel  that
it  did  more  for  freedom  and  humanity  than  all  of
you  were  competent  to  do,  though  you  had  lived
to  the  age  of  Methuselah.  1  ask  nothing  of  you,
then,  but  that  you  proceed  to  vour  end  by  a  brave,
frank,  manly  way.  Don't  sidle  off  into  a  mild
resolution  of  censure,  but  move  the  expulsion
which  you  purposed  and  which  I  deserve  if  I  de-
serve any  reproach  whatever.  ...  I  propose  to
fight  it  out  on  the  line  that  I  have  held  from  the
day  of  Lee's  surrender.  So  long  as  any  man  was
seeking  to  overthrow  our  government,  he  was  my
enemy ;  from  the  hour  in  which  he  laid  down  his
arms,  he  was  my  formerly  erring  countryman."
The  meeting  was  held,  but  the  effort  at  any  censure
whatever  failed.

Mr.  Greeley  did  not  greatly  sympathize  with  the
movement  to  make  the  foremost  soldier  of  the  war

President  in  18(>8,  but  he  gave  Gen.  Grant  a  cor-
ial  support.  He  chafed  at  the  signs  of  inexperi-
ence in  some  of  the  early  steps  of  the  administra-
tion, and  later  at  its  manifest  disposition  to  en-
courage, in  New  York,  chiefly  the  wing  of  the
Republican  party  that  had  been  unfriendly  to
himself.  He  disapproved  of  Gen.  Grant's  scheme
for  acquiring  Santo  Domingo,  and  was  indignant  at
the  treatment  of  Charles  Sumner  and  John  Loth-
rop  Motley.  The  course  of  the  "  carpet-bag  "  state
governments  at  the  south,  however,  gave  him  most
concern,  and  brought  him  into  open  hostility  to
the  administration  he  had  helped  to  create.  In
1871  he  made  a  trip  to  Texas,  was  received  every-
where with  extraordinary  cordiality,  and  returned
still  more  outspoken  against  the  policy  of  the  gov-
ernment toward  the  states  lately  in  rebellion.  Dis-
satisfied Republicans  now  began  to  speak  freely  of
him  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  against  Gen.
Grant.  Numbers  of  the  most  distinguished  Re-
publicans in  the  senate  and  elsewhere  combined  in


the  formation  of  the  Litwral  Republican  party,
and  called  a  convention  at  Cincinnati  to  nominate
a  national  ticket.  Eastern  Republican*,  outside  of
.New  York  at  least,  generally  expected  Charles
Francis  Adams  to  be  the  nominee,  and  he  had  the
united  support  of  the  whole  revenue  reform  and
free-trade  section.  But  Mr.  (ireeley  soon  prOTsd
stronger  than  any  other  with  western  and  southern
delegates.  On  the  sixth  ballot  he  receiv.
votes,  against  324  for  Adams,  a  sudden  concentra-
tion of  the  supporters  of  B.  Gratz  Brown  upon  Mr.
Greeley  having  been  effected.  Immediate  changes
swelled  his  majority,  so  that  when  the  vote  was
finally  announced  it  stood :  Greeley,  482 ;  Adams,
187.  In  accepting  the  nomination,  which  he  had
not  sought,  but  by  which  he  was  greatlv  gratified,
Mr.  Greeley  made  the  restoration  of  all  political
rights  lost  in  the  rebellion,  together  with  a  suffrage
impartially  extended  to  white  and  black  on  the
same  conditions,  the  cardinal  principle  of  the
movement.  His  letter  ended  with  this  notable
passage :  "  With  the  distinct  understanding  that,
if  elected,  I  shall  be  the  president,  not  of  a  party,
but  of  the  whole  people,  1  accept  your  nomination
in  the  confident  trust  that  the  masses  of  our  coun-
trymen, north  and  south,  are  eager  to  clasp  hands
across  the  bloody  chasm  which  has  too  long  divided
them,  forgetting  that  they  have  been  enemies  in
the  joyful  consciousness  that  they  are  and  must
henceforth  remain  brethren."

Mr.  Greeley's  nomination  at  first  caught  the
popular  fancy,  and  his  canvass  promised  for  a  time
to  resemble  that  of  1840,  in  the  enthusiastic  tur-
moil of  which  he  had  first  risen  to  national  promi-
nence. But,  contrary  to  his  judgment  (though  in
accordance  with  that  of  close  friends),  the  Demo-
crats, instead  of  putting  no  ticket  in  the  field,  as
he  had  expected,  formally  nominated  him.  This
action  of  his  life-long  opponents  alienated  many
ardent  Republicans.  The  first  elections  were  con-
sidered in  his  favor,  and  when  in  the  summer
North  Carolina  voted,  it  was  believed  that  his
friends  had  carried  the  state.  The  later  official
vote,  however,  gave  the  state  to  the  Grant  party,
and  from  that  time  the  Greeley  wave  seemed  to  be
subsiding.  At  last,  on  appeals  from  his  supporters,
who  thought  extraordinary  measures  needful,  he
took  the  stump  in  person.  The  series  of  speeches
made  in  his  tour,  extending  from  New  England
through  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  and  Indi-
ana, evoked  great  enthusiasm.  All  sides  regarded
them  as  an  exhibition  of  brilliant  and  effective
work  unprecedented  in  that  generation.  But  they
were  not  enough  to  stem  the  rising  tide.  Mr.
Greeley  received  2,834,079  of  the  popular  vote,
against  Gen.  Grant's  3,597,070 ;  but  he  carried  none
of  the  northern  states,  and  of  the  southern  states
only  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Maryland,  Missouri,  Ten-
nessee, and  Texas.

He  had  always  been  more  sensitive  to  attacks
and  reverses  than  the  public  imagined,  and  now
the  strain  proved  too  great.  The  canvass  had
been  one  of  extraordinary  bitterness,  his  old  asso-
ciates reviling  him  as  a  turn-coat  and  traitor,  and
some  of  the  caricatures  being  unparalleled  for  t  heir
ferocity.  His  wife,  always  feeble,  and  of  late  years
suffering  greatly  from  a  combination  of  nervous
and  other  diseases,  fell  ill  while  he  was  &\»
his  tour.  On  his  return  he  watched  almost  con-
tinuously for  weeks  at  her  bedside,  and  ho  buried
her  in  the  closing  weeks  of  the  canvass.  For  years
he  had  been  a  sufferer  from  insomnia:  he  had  nec-
essarily lost  much  sleep,  and  during  and  after  his
wife's  illness  he  scarcely  slept  at  all.  Ilewa-  agj
disappointed  in  the  election,  for  he  had  known  for


711


weeks  that  defeat  was  inevitable.  Nor  ill. I  this
act.  though  generally  lHwmirovwl  bl his  friends,

friendships.  Henry  Ward  I
VTOte:  "You  may  think,  amidst  etottdl  >>f  MBOha
and  dust,  that  all  your  old  friends  who  |Mtrt<-<l  OOttV
pans  with  ><>u  in  tin-  late  campaign  will  turn  u
momentary  difference  into  a  life-long  alienation.
It  will  nut  1h<  so.  1  s|H-ak  fur  myself.  an<l  also
from  what  I  |mt.-.  i\.  in  other  nun's  luart -
nun-  poliUosJ  Influence  may  for  a  tune  bl  im-
paired, bal  your  own  power  for  good  in  tin-  far
wider  fields  of  industrial  economy,  social  ami  civil
criticism,  and  the  general  well-being  of  •Ooletj,
will  not  I*-  lessoned,  hut  augmented."  lint  .Mr.
Greeley's  nervous  exhaustion  resulted  in  an  inflam-
mation of  the  u|i|kt  membrane  of  the  brain,  lie
resumed  his  editorial  duties,  hut  in  a  few  days  was
unahle  to  continue  them.  Me  mrtfrflrH  trrt|TrtTT.
delirium  soon  set  in.  and  he  died  on  2!)  Nov..  191%,
The  personal  ragMd  in  which  he  was  held,  even
by  his  bitterest  opponents,  at  onoa  became  mani-
fest. His  IkhIv  lay  in  state  in  the  city  hall,  and  a
throng  of  many  thousands  moved  during  every
hour  of  the  daylight  through  the  building  totM  it.

The  president,  vice-president,  and  chief  justice  of
the  I  nited  States,  with  a  great  number  Ox  the  lead-
ing public  men  of  both  parties,  attended  the  fu-
neral, and  followed  the  hears*',  preceded  by  the
mayor  of  the  city  and  other  civic  authorities,  down
Fifth  avenue  and  Broadway.  John  <».  Whittier
descriU-d  him  as  -our  later  Franklin,"  and  the
majority  of  his  countrvnien  have  substantially  ac-
cepted that  phrase  as  designating  his  place  in  the
history  of  his  time,  while  members  Of  the  press
consider  him  perhaps  the  greatest  editor,  and  cer-
tainly the  foremost  |Militieal  advocate  and  contro-
versialist, if  not  also  the  most  influential  popular
writer,  the  country  has  produced. In  1867  Francis

B.  Carpenter  painted  i  portrait  of  Mr.  Qrseley  for

the  *•  '1  riliuiie  "  association  ;  a  larger  one,  executed
by  Alexander  Davis,  was  exhiiiited  in  the  I'aris

salon,  afterward  bcOSIM  the  property  of  White-
law  Raid,  and  is  now  (1887)  in  the' ••  Tribune  "
counting-room.  At  the  time  of  Mr.  Greelev's  \  i-it
to  Home,  Hiram  Powers  made  a  portrait  host
and  at  a  later  date  Ames  Van  Wart  executed
one  In  marlile.  on  a  commission  from  Marshall
<>.  Roberta,  The  bronze  bust  in  Greenwood  ceme-
tery am  presented  by  the  printers  of  the  United
states. John  Qi  A.  Ward  is  now  (1887)  completing

a  colossal  sitting  figure,  to  l>e  owl  in  bronse  and
j'l.i"  d  at  the  entrance  of  the  "  Tribune  "  building.
The  aooompanying  |K>rtrait  is  from  an  excellent
photograph  by  Bogardus.  Mr.  Qreehyjrs  works
are  "Hints  Toward  Reforms"  (New  York,  1850):
"Glances  at  Kurope"  (1)451):  "History  of  the
Struggle  f.»r  slavery  Extension"  d  *."><;>■  "Over-
land  Journey  to  Baa  Francis,.,"  (I860);  "The

American Conflict"  (2  vols.. Hartford, 1804-'<5) ;

M  BeooUeotions.of  ■  Busy  Life  "(New  York.  I868j

new  ed..  with  ■ppandis  containing  an  account  of
his  later  years,  his  argument  OB  marriage  and  di-
vorce with  Robert  Hale  Owen,  and  miscellanies.
New  York,  1878);  "  Essays  on  Political  Economy

(Boston.  1H70);  and  "  Wliat I  Know  of  Farming"
\ >rk.  1871). He  also  assisted  his  brother-in-
law,  John F.  Cleveland, in  editing  "A Political

look  "(New  York,  i860), and  ■apervissd  for

BUUiy  years  the  annual  i->ue-  of  the  ••  Whig  Alma-

md  the  M Tribune  Almanac." Lives  of  Hor-
ace Greeley  have  been  written  by  Jsmes  Parton
York. 1855; new wis., INT.*. ami I

:  and  Lewis

I>.  mgersoU  (Chicago,  i*?:b.  There  is  also  a
••  Memorial  of  11


QUI  I  LY, tdolphai  rTashiagtaa,
b.  in Newburyport,  Mai  He

nadnatedsl  Brown  high-school  in  1800.  and

enlisted  in  the  I'.'th  MssSBCfattSStti  regiment  on
:{  July.  I86t After  rising  to  DM  rank  of 1-t

St.  be  wassppomted  2d  lieutenant  in  the  G
.  S.  colored infantry. 1* March, I***!.  »n<  pro-
noted  to  1st  lieiitenaiit,  96  April,  1*01.  and  00 \'-i
1  major  of  volunteer!  for
faithful  servi.es  during  the  civil  war. He  WSJ  ap-

r tinted  2d  lieutenant  in  the  86th  regular  infantry.
March.  lstiT,  assigned  to  the  Bth  cavalry  on  14
•Inly.  1869, and  promoted  to  1m  lieutenant.  27  May.
Sm.h  after  the  war  he  m  detailed  f<>r  duty  in
the  signal  service. and  in  1KH1  was  selected  to  com-
mand the  expedition  sent  into  the  arctic  regions
by  the  government,  in  accordance  with  the  plan  of
the  Hamburg  international  geographical  congress
of  1879,  to  establish  one  of  a  chain  of  thirl
circuni|Milar  stations  for  scientific  purposes.  His
party,  twenty-five  in  all.  sailed  from  St.  John's.
Newfoundland,  in  the  ••  ProtCUS,"  on  ?  .Iiilv,  1881,

ami  reached  Discovery  harbor,  hit.  *i 44  N'..  long.

04°  45'  W.,on  12  Aug..  lsxl.  taking  with  them  ma-
terials for  a  house,  instruments  for  scientific  oh*
servatioti.and  stores  for  t  went  v-m", en  months.  Ar-
rangement shad  bean
made  to  send  out  ex-
peditJom  in  thesum-
niers  of  1882  and
lss:;.  with  addition-
al  stores  for  the  par-
ty; but  Greely  was
ordered,  if  these  ex-
peditions failed  to
reach  him.  to  aban-
don the  station  not
later  than  Septem-
ber, 1KS:5. and  retreat
southward  along  the
coast  by  l>oat. The

iUrty  remained  at
HsoOVSry  harbor
nearly  two  years,  fre-
quent explorations
Ining  made  into  the
surrounding  coun-
try. On 15 May.

1888,  three  of  the  party  succeeded  in  reaching  a
|M.int  farther  north  than  any  previously  attained.

(See  Bk.un.vki>.  D.L.)  Lieut.  Greely  made  two
trips  into  the  interior  of  (irinnell  Imiu\  in  the  sum-
mer of  1SM2.  discovering  a  lake  sixty  miles  long;
which  he  named  Lake  Ilazen.  two  new  mountain
ranges,  the  altitude  of  whose  highest  peak.  Mount
Arthur.  SUB  6^000  (bet,  and  many  rivers  and  gla-
ciers. Meanwhile,  the  two  relief  expeditions  had)
failed  to  reach  Ihscovery  harbor. That  of  1868.  in

the  '•  Neptune."  under  hiellt.  Beelie.  oiilv  succeeded

in  reaching  hit.  71  20  X..  and  that  of  'lNH3.  in  the
"Proteus  and  the  "Yantic,"  under  Lieut,  Gar-
Hngton,  resulted  iii  the  destruction  of  the  former
vessel  by  the  ice.  Both  expeditions  left  stores  in
caches  at  various  |H»ints.  ( )n '.»  Aug..  lsv">.  <ireelv
and  his  party  set  out  on  their  retreat  southward,
after  making,  (luring  nearly  two  years,  systematic
oliscrvat ions  ,,f  temperature,  atmospheric  pressure,
the  direction  and  height  of  the  tides,  the  velocity
of  the  wind,  and  the  inteiisitv  of  gravity.  The
health  of  all.  up  to  this  time,  had  bsSB  excellent.
<>n  IS  Oct.,  after  meeting  with  various  adven-
ture*, drifting  about  Smith  sound  for  thirty  days
on  an  ice-Hoc,  ami  being  compelled  M  abandon

their  steam  launch  in  the  ice.  they  reached  Cape
Sabine,  whan  they  established  their  winter  quar-


ijU^^a-r


74*2


GREEN


GREEN


Ban  they  suffered  tfrvatly  from  want  of
imivi-i.-ii-.  iinii  wan  finally  Eoroed  t«>  live  on  boiled
strip*  "f  *eal-*kin.  lichens,  and  shrimps.  Sixteen
of  the  parts  died  of  starvation,  MM  was  drowned,
and  <>ne.  Private  Henry,  was  shut  by  Lieut,  Greek's
orders,  i»n  the  ground  that  he  rc[>eatedly  stole  food.
The  *c\cii  survivors  were  rescued  by  the  third  re-
lief expedition,  under  ('apt.  Wintield  Sohley,  on  22
Jane,  [888,  In  so  exhausted  a  condition  that  forty-
eight  hour-'  delay  would  have  been  fatal.  Since
the  return  of  Lieut  Greek  he  has  been  charged
with  incapacity  and  arbitrary  conduct  in  his  man-
agement of  tin-  expedition;  but  these  charges  have
not  been  listened  to  l>v  his  superiors.  He  was  pro-
moted to  captain,  11  June,  1896,  aiid  in  1887,  after
the  death  of  Gen,  William  B,  llazen.  was  appointed
by  President  Cleveland  to  succeed  that  officer  as
chief  of  the  signal-service  corps,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general.  In  1885  he  was  given  the
queen's  gold  medal  by  the  Royal  geographical  so-
ciety of  London,  and  he  has  also  received  a  gold
medal  from  the  Paris  geopraphical  society.  He  has
published  "Three  Years  of  Arctic  Service  "(New
York,  issii).  See  also  "The  Rescue  of  Greely,"  by-
Cant.  Wintield  S.  Schley,  U.  S.  N.  (1885).

GREEN,  Alexander  Little  Page,  clergyman,
b.  in  Sevier  county,  Tenn.,  6  June,  1806:  d.  in
Nashville,  15  July.  1874.  He  received  an  academic
education,  was  ordained  elder  in  the  Tennessee  con-
ference of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1827,
and,  besides  performing  missionary  abor,  filled  sev-
eral pastorates.  In  1844  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
general  conference  which  met  in  New  \  ork  city  to
adopt  measures  for  the  organization  of  the  Meth-
odisl  Episcopal  church,  south,  and  was  one  of  the
commissioners  in  the  adjustment  of  the  church
property  question  consequent  on  the  division.  He
was  the  principal  organizer  of  the  publishing-house
at  Nashville,  and  chairman  of  the  book  committee.
Mr.  Green  was  a  trustee  of  Vanderbilt  and  Nash-
ville universities,  and  was  an  authority  in  Indian
lore.  He  published  "  Church  in  the  Wilderness  "
(Nashville,  1840),  and  was  preparing  a  work  on
"  The  Fishes  of  North  America.

GREEN,  Anna  Katharine,  author,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  11  Nov.,  1846.  She  was  graduated  at
Ripley  female  college,  Poultney,  Vt.,  in  1867,  and
in  1857-60  lived  in  Buffalo.  In  November,  1884,
she  married  Charles  Rohlfs,  of  Brooklyn.  Her
novels,  all  of  which  are  detective  stories,  include
'•The  Leavenworth  Case "  (New  York,  1878);  "A
Strange  Disappearance"  (1879);  "The  Sword  of
Damocles  "  (1881) ;  "  X.  Y.  Z."  (1883) ;  "  Hand  and
Ring  "  (1883) ;  "  The  Mill  Mystery  "  (1886) ;  and
"  7  to  12  "  (1887).  She  has  also  published  "  The
Defence  of  the  Bride,  and  other  Poems  "  (1882),  and
"Risifi's  Daughter,"  a  dramatic  poem  (1886).

GREEN,  Beriah,  reformer,  b.  in  New  York
state  in  1794;  d.  in  Whitestown,  N.  Y.,  4  May,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in
1819,  and  studied  theology  with  the  intention  of
becoming  a  Presbyterian  minister,  but  formed  a
creed  of  his  own,  which  did  not  admit  of  his  join-
ing any  denomination.  He  removed  to  Kenne-
bunk.  Me.,  in  1820.  and  the  following  year  to  Ohio,
and  was  professor  of  sacred  literature  in  the  West-
ern Reserve  college.  His  determined  opposition  to
slavery  shortened  his  stay  in  this  community,  and
three  years  later  he  became  president  of  the  Oneida
institute,  Ohio.  Throughout  his  life  he  was  the
earnest  friend  of  Gerrit  Smith  and  other  abolition-
ists, and  in  1834,  having  taken  an  active  part  in
the  formation  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society,
was  chosen  its  president.  Mr.  Green  was  also  a
temperance  advocate  and  promoter  of  public  edu-


cation. In  1845  he  founded  the  Manual  labor  school
in  Whitestown.  N.  Y.  He  had  just  ifldroooud  the
board  of  excise  in  the  town-hall  of  Whitestown,
urging  the  prohibition  of  intoxicating  liquors, and
was  waiting  at  the  head  of  a  line  of  citizens  to

tlace  his  vote  in  the  ballot-box,  when  he  fell  dead,
le  published  ••  History  of  the  Quakers" (Albany,
1823)  and  ••Sermons  and  Discourses,  with  a  Few
Essays  and  Addresses"  (Utica,  N.  Y..

GREEN,  Charles,  naval  officer, b. in  Connecticut
in  1814 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  7  April,  1887.  lb-
entered  the  U.  S.  navy,  1  May,  1826,  became  passed
midshipman,  28  April,  1*:{2."  lieutenant,  8  March,
1837,  commander,  14  Sept.,  1855,  captain,  16  July,
1862,  and  commodore,  4  April.  1867.  On  account
of  incapacity  resulting  from  long  and  faithful  ser-
vice he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.  15  Nov.,  1862.
When  commanding  the  "Jamestown  "  in  1861-'2,
and  on  blockade  duty  off  Savannah,  Ga.,  Fernan-
dina,  Fla.,  and  Wilmington,  N.  C,  he  took  six
prizes.  While  on  the  coast  of  Florida  he  sent  out
a  boat-expedition  and  destroyed  the  bark  "  Alvara-
do  "  under  the  guns  of  the  fort  at  Fernandina.

GREEN,  Duff,  politician,  b.  in  Kentucky,  15
Aug.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Dalton,  Ga..  10  June,  1875.  He
studied  law  in  early  life,  and  was  admitted  to  prac-
tice. From  1825  to  1829,  during  the  administra-
tion of  John  Quincy  Adams,  he  edited  the  opposi-
tion journal  at  Washington.  During  Jackson  s  first
term  he  conducted  the  administration  organ,  "The
United  States  Telegram."  Mr.  Green  was  credited
with  immense  party  power,  and  it  was  believed  that
he  influenced  the  policy  of  the  executive ;  but  in
1830,  on  the  alienation  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  he  took
sides  with  the  vice-president.  He  supported  Henry
Clay  for  the  presidency  in  1832,  ana  Mr.  Calhoun
in  1836,  and  for  many  years  was  a  political  power
in  his  section  of  the  country.  His  later  life  was
devoted  to  the  advancement  of  the  industrial  in-
terests of  the  south.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Facts
and  Suggestions"  (New  York,  1866).

GREEN,  Ezra,  physician,  b.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,
17  June,  1746;  d.  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  25  July,  1847.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1765,  and  began
the  practice  of  medicine  in  1768.  In  June,  1775,
he  joined  the  continental  army  as  surgeon,  was  on
the  Canada  expedition,  and  in  the  sloop-of-war
"  Ranger,"  under  Paul  Jones,  in  1777.  He  re-
mained in  the  service  until  1781,  when  he  resigned
and  engaged  in  trade.  Dr.  Green  was  a  Federal-
ist in  polities,  and  a  delegate  to  the  New  Hamp-
shire constitutional  convention  of  1820.

GREEN,  Francis,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,  1
Sept.,  1742;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,  21  April,  1809.
His  father,  Benjamin,  was  president  of  the  coun-
cil and  commander-in-chief  of  Nova  Scotia.  Fran-
cis was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1760;  joined  the
army  as  an  ensign  after  the  beginning  of  the  French
war," was  present  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  1758,
at  that  of  Martinique,  andin  1762  at  the  capture
of  Havana.  In  1765  he  went  to  England,  and  on
his  return  sold  his  commission  and  settled  in  busi-
ness in  Boston.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolu-
tion, although  he  declared  that  he  was  the  friend
of  liberty,  he  adhered  to  the  crown.  In  177<>  he
went  to  Halifax,  where  he  was  appointed  a  magis-
trate, returned  to  New  York  in  1777,  and  the  next
year  was  proscribed  and  banished.  He  remained
in  England  till  1784,  when  he  returned  to  Nova
Scotia,  and  was  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Halifax
and  senior  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.
He  returned  to  Massachusetts  in  17!»7.  and  settled
in  Medford.  He  published  "The  Art  of  Impair*
ing  Speech"  (London,  1783),  and  a  translation  of
the  "  Letters  of  Abbe  de  l'Epee  "  (Boston,  1803).


asm


6KEE>  Mathews,  naval  officer.  l».  in  I

Boston.  M  IN earl]  '■• sine  a

seaman,  mid in  -1  un<-.  1881, WSJ  appointed  acting

r  in  the  I'.S.  miw,  hihI  attached  to  tin-  sloop

'•  \  iliccnni-."  «»f  tllf  \\  est (illlf  soliadroll. Subse-
quently In-  saw  active  service  at tin-  |m>xc*  of  the
— i|ii>i, nerved  on the sloop  ••Omnia,"' and
OTtnmarntfd  the  steamer  "Commodore." In  April.

1884]  Bt  wax  nromoftd  to  acting  volunteer  lieuten-
ant, ami  Mired  "ii  >|Miial  ilut  v  mi  tlif  ••  Niagara."
Liter  In'  riiiiunaiiilril I  In-  and partici-

n  the  capture  ■>!  Fort  Fishar.  After  the
clone  of  tin-  war  he  was  transferred  to  the  regular
navy,  anil  in  December,  1888,  was  commissioned
lieutenant-commander.  From  1*73  till  I
wan  oonneeted  with  five  sarpaditions  for  determin-
ing  exact  latitudes  and  longitades  in  rariooa  parts
of  tin-  world.  In  July.  1MM3,  he  was  made  com-
mander, and  after  *•  .tin- t  inn-  spent  on  slmre  duty
was  given  command  of  the  "Vantic."  Com-
mander Crccii  has  been  associated  in  the  publica-
tion of  government  rc|Mirts,  such  as  "  Navigation
of  the  Caribtaan  Sea"  (1877):  "A  lu-|»ort  on
Telegraphic  Determination  of  Longitudes  in  the
West  Indies  and  <  'ent  nil  America"  (1N77);  similar
rc|H.rts  for  South  America  (1890),  and  tl.
Indies,  China,  and  .Ju|mn  (1888),  and  a  work  on
iiihical  Positions"  (1883).
(jltEEN,  Horace,  physician,  b.  in  Crittenden,
Rutland  co.,  Vt.,  84  I>ec.,  1802;  died  in  Sin-;  Sing.
N.  V..  8B  Nov..  1S(;<5.  He  was  educated  at  the  high-
school  at  Hrandon  and  the  classical  tobool  of  Rut-
land,  Vt.,  and  in  1824  was  graduated  in  medicine
in  Middlebury.  He  began  practice  in  Rutland,
and  after  several  years  went  abroad,  and  studied
in  the  hospitals  of  Edinburgh,  London,  and  Paris,
making  a  specialty  of  the  diseases  of  the  throat
and  air-passages.  Ho  was  elected,  on  his  return,
to  the  "hair  of  these  diseases  in  the  Medical  col-
lege of  OawUatOQ,  Vt.,  and  remained  there  until  his
removal  to  New  Vork  city  in  1880,  Bs  revisited
the  hospitals  in  Paris  in  1881,  and  on  his  return
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  the  theory  and  practice
Of  medicine  in  the  New  Vork  medical  college.  He
assisted  in  establishing  the  "American  Medical
Monthly"  in  is."i4,  and  became  one  of  its  editors.
His  health  failing  in  WA\,  he  resigned  his  profes-
sorship and  went  to  Cul>a,  dying  of  a  lingering
pulmonary  disease.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  bv  the  University  of  Vermont.  His
works  are  "A  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  the  Air-
Passages  "  (New  York,  1846) ;  "  Pathology  and
Treatment  of  Croup"  (1849);  "Surgical  Treat-
ment of  the  Polypi  of  the  Larynx"  (1852);  "Re-
port of  I  Hundred  Cases  of  Pulmonary  Diseases"
(1858);  and  ••  Select  ions  from  the  Favorite  Prescrip-
tion-of  Living  American  Phvsicians"  (1858).

(•RKEN,  Jacob,  patriot,  i».  in  Maiden,  Mass.,
22  June,  1722;  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  .1.,  24  May,
1796.  His  parents  were  poor  and  he  was  appren-
ticed to  a  trade  in  order  to  unit  his  college  ex-
jH-nscs.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1744,
and  under  the  influence  ofGoOQJS  Whitcfield  be-
came a  clergyman  in  174.~>,  and  WM  in-tailed  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Morristown.  N.  .1.
To  support  his  family  ho  also  studied  and  practised
medicine  while  occupying  this  pulpit.  In  1787 OS
was  elected  president  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress  of  t  hat
state  in  177.").  was  chairman  of  the  committee  that
drafted  the  state  constitution,  and  wrote  a  scries
>>f  articles  on  the  depreciation  of  paper  CUI
which  hail  wide  circulation.  His  suggestion-  >  •
gnrding the redemption  of continental  currency

inch the same  as  were those all.


adopt.-d  bjooMsisss Mr. Graao*i  publishad  works

are  »  Sermon-"  (Philadelphia,  1"*»H);  "  Sermons  "
V  Pamphlet  on  the  Jewish  Church "
I  an  "  Autobiography,"  which  was  pnb-

lishcd  in  ••  The  Christian  Advocate "  by  his  mm. —

Hi-  SOU.  Ashbel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hano\er,  Morn*
\.  .!..<;  Julj,  1788;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  19  May.
taught  to  acquire  the  means  to  attend  college,
but in 1778  hi-  stadias were  interrupted l>\

tutionary  war,  in  which  he  served  as  a  sergeant
until  the  spring  of  17H2. He  then  entered  Pn>
ton,  was  graduated  in  17*4.  and  the  mxt  year  was

appointee!  tutor, and  afterward  baoains  profsssorof

mathematics  and  natural  philosophy.  In  17*'l  In-
was  liosnasd  SO  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  New
Brunswick,  and  the  next  year  was  installed  pastOt
of  the  Id  Pie-byterian  church  of  Philadelphia.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  assembly  of  his
church  in  17JM),  and  moved  g  renewal  of  communi-
cations between  this  and  the  Congregational  church.
In  1792  he  was  appointed  chaplain  to  congress.
The  Princeton  college  buildings  were  destroyed  by
fire  in  1802,  and  when  it  was  rebuilt.  Dr.  Cm  n.
who  had  been  one  of  its  trustees  since  1790,  was
elected  its  president  in  1N12.  The  same  year  the
title  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  the  I'niversity  of
North  Carolina,  ana  he  was  elected  president  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  Princeton  theological  seminary.
He  resigned  the  presidency  of  Princeton  in  l£
and  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  edited  "  The
Christian  Advocate  "  for  twelve  years,  and  during
a  portion  of  the  time  "The  Assembly's  Magazine.
During  this  period  he  frequently  supplied  vacant
pulpits.  He  was  a  voluminous  writer.  His  prin-
cipal works  are  "  Discourse  delivered  in  the  College
of  New  Jersey,  with  a  History  of  the  College"
(Boston,  1822);  "Presbyterian  Missions"  (16
"Sermons  on  the  Assembly's  Catechism"  (lxlH);
'•  Sermons  from  1790  to  1836  "  (183<i) :  and  "  Re-
ports and  Addresses  from  1793  to  lK{(i  "  (1837).
He  also  edited  Dr.  Witherspoon's  works,  and  an
autobiography  of  Jacob  Green  (Philadelphia,  1 v
— A-hbcl'-  son,  Jacob,  scientist,  b.  in  Philadelphia.
26  July,  1790;  d.  there,  1  Feb.,  1841,  in  his  boyhood
developed  a  taste  for  botany,  and  made  a  large  col-
lection of  plants.  At  an  early  age  he  wrote  a
treatise  on  electricity  which  gave  him  a  reputation.
In  1806  he  was  graduated  at  the  I'niversity  of
Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  began  practice,  but
accepted  in  1818  the  chairs  of  chemistry,  experi-
mental philosophy,  and  natural  history,  in  Prince-
ton. In  1822  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  in
Jefferson  medical  college,  where  he  remained  until
his  death. He i-  the  author  of  "  Chemical Dia-

frams";  "Chemical  Philosophy "  (Philadelphia,
829);  "Astronomical  Recreations"  (IN,". I  j  A
Svllabus  of  a  Course  of  Chemistry "  (l^tt);
"Trilobites"(2  vols.,  1KJ2);  "The  Botanv  of  the
I'nited  States"  (1833);  "Notes  of  a  Traveller"
(1881);  and  ••  Diseases  of  the  Skin  "( 1 -

<»REEN,  James  Stephen,  politician,  b.  in  Fau-
quier county,  Va.,  28  Feb.,  1817;  d.  in  St.  Loins,
I  ...  !i  Jan.,  1890;  He  received  a  common-school
education,  removed  to  Alabama,  and  afterward  to
Missouri,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and
began  to  practise  at  Canton.  He  was  pre-idciitial
elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dallas  ticket  in  1*44,  and
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  1S47  till  186L  He  was  charge  d'affaires  in
the  Tinted  States  of  Columbia  in  1888,  and  was
appointed  consul  in  1H.*>4.  but  did  not  act  in  that
capacity.  On  his  return  in  1KVJ  he  was  again
slatted  representative  to  congress,  but  did  not  take
hi-  scat,  having  l>ecn  chosen  to  the  I'.  S.  senate,
wheie  he  served  from  1*57  till  1861. He  bore  a


744


GREEN


GREEN


conspicuous  part in  tin- Kansas  contest,  1857-'8,
and  presentee!  the  majority  report  of  the  committee
on  territories  In  favor  <>f  in  admission  as  a  state,
onder  the  Leoompton  constitution.
GREEN. Jolin. phvsician.  b,  in  Worottin,

M.i-..  in  17H4:  .1.  there,  IT  Oct..  1866.  II''  WM
graduated  at  Brown  in  1K04.  and  received  his
medical  degree  from  I>oth  Brown  and  Harvard  in
1896.  He  established  a  large  practice  in  Worces-
ter, accumulated  a  valuable  professional  library,
and  in  IN.")!*  presented  7.0(H)  miscellaneous  works
to  the  citv  of  Worcester  as  a  basis  for  a  public
library.— His  nephew,  John,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mam,  fl  April.  1K;J."».  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1S.V>,  admitted  a  fellow  of  the  Massachusetts  med-
ical society  by  examination  in  1858,  studied  medi-
cine at  Cambridge  and  m  Kurope  in  1855-'60,  and
took  his  medical  degree  at  Harvard  in  1866.  In
is.">7  he  accompanied  Prof.  Jeffries  Wyman  on  a
scientific  expedition  to  Surinam.  He  began  prac-
tice in  Boston  in  1861,  and  during  1862  was  in  the
medical  service  of  the  Western  sanitary  commis-
sion of  the  U.  S.  army,  and  acting  assistant  sur-
geon in  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  He  visited
Europe  in  1865  in  order  to  pursue  studies  in  oph-
thalmology, and  removed  to  St.  Louis  in  1866.
He  is  an  original  member  of  the  Ophthalmological
society  of  America,  was  elected  professor  of  this
branch  and  of  otology  in  the  St.  Louis  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1868,  became  surgeon
to  the  St.  Louis  eye  and  ear  infirmary  in  1872,  and
ophthalmic  surgeon  to  St.  Luke's  hospital  in  1874.
He  is  a  member  of  the  principal  medical  societies
both  of  the  state  and  country,  and  has  contrib-
uted numerous  papers  on  his  specialty  to  various
professional  journals.

GREEN,  John  Cleve,  merchant,  b.  in  Law-
renceville,  N.  J.,  14  April,  1800;  d.  in  New  York
city,  28  April,  1875.  He  received  an  academic
education,  and  in  early  manhood  entered  a  count-
ing-house in  New  York  city.  He  went  as  super-
cargo to  South  America  and  China  from  1823  till
1833,  and  while  in  Canton  became  a  member  of
the  firm  of  Russell  &  Co.,  and  was  eminently  suc-
cessful in  business.  He  returned  to  New  York  in
1839  with  a  large  fortune,  and  settled  there,  con-
tinuing his  connection  with  the  China  trade.  Much
of  his  time  was  devoted  to  religious  and  charitable
enterprises.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  New  York
hospital,  of  the  Deaf  and  dumb  asylum,  president
of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Home  for  cripples,
and  for  many  years  financial  agent  and  trustee  of
Princeton  theological  seminary.  He  endowed
Princeton  seminary  with  the  Helena  professorship
of  history,  built  one  of  the  professor's  houses,
renovated  the  chapel,  expending  a  sum  which
amounted  to  its  original  cost,  remodelled  the  dining-
hall,  and  bequeathed  to  the  institution  $50,000.
Mr.  Green  also  founded  at  Princeton  the  "  John  C.
Green  "  school  ol  science,  and  was  liberal  in  his
gifts  to  the  University  of  New  York.  A  Green
memorial  alcove  containing  his  portrait  was  added
to  the  New  York  society  library  hy  his  widow,  who
gave  $50,000  for  that  object.— His  brother,  Henry
Woodhull,  jurist,  b.  in  Lawrenceville,  N.  J.,  20
Sept,  1802;  d.  in  Trenton,  19  Dec.,  1876,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1820,  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Trenton  in  1825,  and  continued  in  practice
there  for  twenty-one  years.  He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1842,  of  the  Constit  utional  con-
vention of  1844,  and  was  appointed  afterward
chancery  reporter.  He  was  chief  justice  of  the
state  supreme  court  from  1846  till  1860,  when  he
became  chancellor,  but  failing  health  compelled
him  to  resign in 1866. His  later years were


given  to  -tudy  and  so  educational  and  charitable

enterprises.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  Princeton
I  theological  seminary  from  1888  till  his  death,  and

from 1NIM)  till 1K7I5  was  president  of the bofJld.

In  1K50  the  degree  of  LL.D.  was  conferred  on  him
:  by  Princeton. He  published  two  volumes  of  "  Be-

Jorte  of  Cases  in  the  Courts  in  Chancery  of  New
rrsey  "  (New  York,  1842-'<5).

GKEEN,  John  Orne,  physician,  b.  in  Maiden.
Bfsm,  14  May,  1799;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mas*.,  88  Dec,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1^17.  and
at  the  medical  school  in  1822.  He  then  settled  in
East  Chelmsford  (now  Lowell),  Mass.,  and  practised
his  profession.  In  1834  Dr.  Green  was  councillor
of  the  Medical  society  of  Massachusetts,  and  in
1846  delivered  the  annual  address  before  that  body.
From  1868  till  his  death  he  was  senior  physician
of  St.  John's  hospital.  For  many  years  he  was
president  of  the  "  Old  residents'  historical  society,"
chairman  of  the  school  committee,  and  was  inter-
ested in  municipal  affairs.  He  published  "  History
of  Small-Pox  in  Lowell "  (Boston,  1837);  "  Memorial
of  John  C.  Dalton  "  (1864) ;  u  An  Address  before
the  Citizens  of  Lowell  at  the  Dedication  of  the
Green  School-House  "  (Lowell,  1865) ;  "  Lowell  and
Harvard  College  in  the  '  Transactions  of  the  Old
Residents'  Association'"  (1877);  and  an  address
before  that  body  (1868). — His  son,  John  Orne,
physician,  b.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  7  June,  1841,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1863,  and  at  the  medical
school  in  1866.  In  1867  he  visited  Europe,  and
studied  in  Berlin,  Vienna,  and  Wiirzburg,  his
specialty  being  aural  surgery.  On  his  return  he
settled  in  Boston,  Mass.  In  1869-'70  he  was  in-
structor in  aural  surgery  in  Harvard,  and  since
that  date  has  been  aural  surgeon  in  the  Boston
city  hospital.  Dr.  Green  has  contributed  frequent
papers  to  medical  and  surgical  journals.

GREEN,  John  Thompson,  jurist,  b.  in  Me-
chanicsville,  S.  C,  18  Oct.,  1827 :  d.  in  Sumter,  S.  C,
27  Jan.,  1875.  He  was  educated  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1849.  He  frequently  served  in  the  state
legislature  between  1850  and  1865,  having  been
first  elected  on  the  co-operative  ticket,  in  opposi-
tion to  that  which  advocated  the  secession  of  the
state,  and  throughout  the  war  he  was  a  consistent
Unionist.  From  1868  until  civil  rule  was  rein-
stated he  was  provost  of  Sumter  county.  On  the
reconstruction  of  the  state  government  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  3d  judicial  district,  and
held  office  till  his  death.  In  1874  he  was  the  un-
successful candidate  for  governor  of  the  Independ-
ent Republican  and  Conservative  parties.

GREEN,  Jonathan  H.,  "the  reformed  gam-
bler," b.  near  Lawrenceburg,  lnd.,  in  1813.  His
mother  died  while  he  was  in  infancy,  and  his  fa-
ther, who  was  dissipated,  bound  him  to  an  unkind
master.  After  various  adventures,  he  ran  away
from  his  employer  in  1829,  and  obtained  work  in
Cincinnati,  where,  for  some  boyish  offence,  he  was
arrested  and  thrown  into  jail,  where  he  contracted
the  habit  of  card-playing  with  his  companions.
For  the  next  twelve  vears  he  led  a  wandering  life,
travelling  up  and  down  the  Mississippi,  under
feigned  names,  and  engaging  in  gambling  as  a  pro-
fession. He.  was  often  imprisoned,  and  on
caped  from  jail  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  by  means  of
false  keys.  He  reformed  in  1842.  and  the  next
year  began  a  lecturing  tour,  in  which  he  revealed
the  vices  of  gambling.  He  was  received  by  respect-
able citizens,  visited  state  prisons,  held  open-air
meetings,  and  was  active  in  the  cause  of  reform.
In  1847  he  engaged  in  a  controversy  with  an
avowed  gambler,  named  Freeman,  before  the  citi-


GREEN


740


/in-  of  Philadelphia. Tin-  pram  commented  favor-
ably on Mr.  Green'*  ;: I  mom  and  good  m»t urt*

during  the  discussion,  ami  the  three  day-'  argu-
ini'iii  ass  published  in  most  ..f  the  newtnani
x.nif  <>f  tin-  psriodioala  of  that  date. He  ass  pub-
lished "Gambling  Unmasked,  an  Autobiography"
(Philadelphi  • Band  of  Broth-

lip  watt  living  in  Philadelphia  in  1887.
i.KI  I  v.  Joseph,  poet,  b.  in  Bo-ton.  Maes.,  in
I.  in  London,  England.  11  Dec..  l7*o. n.
was  graduated  at Harvard in 1  726.  and  e-poii-ed

(riot  i*aust«;  in  17»»0  he  was  one  of  tin*  llfty-
eight  Boston  memorialists  who  arrayed  themselves

•  the  crown,  and  in  1704  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee with  Samuel  Adams  to  report  instruction-,  to
the  Boston  representatives.  He  change<l  his  ]«iliti-
cal  \  iews,  however,  on  the  UfOOpOOt  01  the  W,  ami
was  ap|Miinte<l  in  1774, by  Gov.  Thomas  Once,  '""'
of  the  ••  mandamus "  oounafl  for  remodelling  the

niuient of Ma.ssachusetts  in  order  to  curtail

the  right* of  the  ookmbta He  did  not  take  the

oath of ..fl'iic. hut signed the loyal  address  ap-

r roving  Gov.  Hutchinson's  political  cour-e,  and  in
?7<">  was  proioribed  and  banishe«l.  Green  was  re-
garded as  the  wit  of  his  day.  and  his  potttioal  lain-
pOOttS,  in  which  he  satirized  first  one  and  then  the
other  party,  gave  him  a  wide  celebrity.  His  works
Include  -The  Wonderful  Lament  of  Old  Mr.  Ten-
or." written  after  the  change  in  currency  (Boston,
1744),  and  •'  Poems  and  Satires"  (1780).

GRKKN.  Joseph  F.,  naval  oflicer,  b.  in  Maine,
M  Nov..  1811.  He  was  appointed  midshipman,  1
Nov..  1887,  and  promoted  to  passed  midshipman,
1(»  June,  18881  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant.
W  Feb..  l*oSi,  and  throughout  the  Mexican  war
was  attached  to  the  ship-of-line  "Ohio,"  of  the
Pacific  squadron,  and  took  part  in  all  the  Impor-
tant  actions  on  the  Pacific  coast.  From  1850  till
1858  ho  served  at  the  Boston  navv-yard  on  ord-
nance duty,  and  at  the  naval  academy.  He  was
commissioned  commander,  14  Sept-  1855,  captain
in  l^">-2,  commanded  the  steam  sloop  "Canan-
daigua,"  of  the  Booth  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron, in  l888-'4  and  participated  in  the  homhard-
mentof  Fort  Wagner,  18  July.  1888.  From  1866
till  1868  he  was  on  ordnance  duty  at  the  Boston
navv-yard.  and  was  commissioned  as  commodore,
24  July,  1*67.  He  was  assigned  to  special  duty  in
1K09.  commanded  the  southern  ■Qnadson  of  the
Atlantic  Beet  in  1870,  was  commissioned  rear-admi-
ral the  mm  vear,  and  retired  M  Nov.,  1878.

GRKKN.  Louis  Warner,  educator.  !>.  in  Boyle
county,  Ky..  88  Jan..  1*<H>:  ,1.  in  Danville.  Kv..'2<>
March,  l*i>:{.  lie  was  graduated  at  Centre  college,
Ky.,  in  IXV),  and  at  the  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1XS2.  He  was  then  licensed  to  preach
and  appointed  professor  in  Centre  ooUeaa,  and.
after  remaining  there  two  years,  went  to  Europe,
where  he  spent  some  months  in  study.  On  his  re-
turn. Mr.  (Jreen  was  appointed  vice-president  of
Centre  college,  and  professor  of  lielles-lettres.  and
at  the  same  time  was  associate  POtOT  of  the  Pre—
byterian  church  in  Danville,  lie  was  afterward
■BOted  to  the  chair  of  oriental  literature  in  the
ii  theological  seminary  at  Alleghany,  Pa..
where  he  remained  for  wren  year-,  lb-  then  be*
came  pa-tor  of  the  2d  Pi v-liytenan  church  in
Baltimore,  and  in  1848  was  obossn  president  of
Hampden  Sidney  college,  when-  he  remained  until
In  that  rear  be  removed  to  Kentucky,  ami
was  president  of  the  State  normal  school.  II
want  accepted  the  presidency  of  Centre  ■
and  returned  to  Danville.

GRKI  Y  M.i  it  in  t,  soldier,  b.  in  Lewis  county,
Mo.,  about 1825;  d.  in  Vh-kshurg,  Miss.,  27  June,


1868. At  tlie  hngtimfcn  of  the  civil  war  h-
gaui/iii a reguneiii  Paris, Mo.,  and. join-

■  ■•■ii.  Sterling  Price,  contributed  largely  lo  the

ese  of  the  Confederate-  iii  the  capture  of  LsS*

ington.  Mo.,  and  the  Union  garrison  commanded

I.  Jemes  A.  Mulligan. He  ordered  his  men

to  roll  htatii|»-bales  up  the  river-bank,  which  formed

movable  breastworks. After  this Imttlc  he was

appointed brigadier  -  teuauL  larval  with  •

Etta  throughout  the  Mi— ouri  campaign,  and  was

ooaapioaoai  for  braveiv  in  the  batuasoi  Farming-
ton.  I uka.  Corinth,  and  Baker's  Creek.

(iRKKN.  Nun  in,  osprtaliet,  1>.  in  New  Albany,
Ind.,  17  April.  l*ix.  ||,.  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  I/>uisville,  Ky..  in  !
and  afterward  served  three  terms  in  the  Kentucky
legislature.  lb-  became  president  of  the  South"
western  telegraph  company  aUuit  1854,  was  after-
ward vice-president  of  the  Aineriean  and  Western
union  companies,  and  in  1*7*  succeeded  William
Orton  as  president  of  the  last-named  soipomtlon.
Dr.  (Jreen  was  also  president  of  the  Louisville,
Cincinnati,  and Lexington  railroad  in  1868-T8.

(iRKKN.  Samuel,  printer,  b,  in  England,  in
1015 :  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1702.  He  was
one  of  the  first  printers  in  New  Kngland,  being  the
successor  of  Stephen  Dave  (7.  o.  lb-  printed  the
M  Cambridge  Platform"  in  104*J,  and  a  revised  edi-
tion of  the  Psalms  in  1650.  In  October,  I
Green  was  granted  by  act  of  legislature  300  acres
of  land,  "  where  it  is  to  be  found."  It  was  subse-
quently laid  out  for  him  in  Haverhill.  In  1655  a
second  press  arrived  from  Kngland.  and  in  1888
he  printed  a  version  of  the  Psalms  in  the  Indian
tongue.  In  1661  the  New  Testament  was  issued;
and  in  16(v5  the  entire  Old  and  New  Testament,  with
the  New  England  Psalms  in  Indian  vena,  trans-
lated by  Rev.  John  Eliot  (q.  r.),  was  published  in
the  dialect  of  the  Nipmuck  or  Natick  Indians.  A
second  edition  of  the  Indian  Bible  was  printed  in
1685.  Green  continued  printing  to  an  advanced
age.  He  had  nineteen  children,  and.  although  his
descendants  were  nearly  all  printers,  there  was  no
printing  done  in  Cambridge  for  many  years  after
his  death.— His  son.  Bartholomew,  printer.  1).  in
Cambridge,  Max..  12.  Oct..  1666;  d.  in  Boston,
-  Dec.,  17:!2.  succeeded  to  his  father^
business.  He  lir-t  set  up  his  press  in  Cambridge,
and  afterward  at  Boston,  when-  it  was  destn
by  fire,  16  Sept..  Hi!H).  In  the  winter  of  18H
he  resumed  business  in  Boston.  On  24  April,  1704,
he  IsBUed  the  first  number  of  the  "  Boston  News
Letter."  which  was  continued  by  him  during  his
life.  It  was  printed  weekly,  and  published  "  by  au-
thority" of  John  Campbell,  post  master,  who  was
the  proprietor.  It  l»ccamc  the  property  of  Green
eighteen  years  afterward,  and  for  fifteen  years  was
the  only  newspa|H>r  in  the  colonies.  The  contents
of  the  first  iiuiiiIht,  covering  three  pages  of  folio
|H>st.  were  extremely  meagre,  and  it  contained  but
one  advert i.-cment.  that  of  the  proprietor.  Green
endeavored  to  avoid  partisan  discussions  of  the
rdigioUS  and  political  quarrel-  of  the  times. "  The


Design  of  this  Paper"  said  his  prospectus  "is  not
merely  to  Amuse  the  Header,  much  MM  to  Gi
any  ill laiupSM  by  Reproach  or  Ridicule,  to  Pro-


i ratify


mote Contention, or K-poii-e any Party  among
us." For  alMitit  forty  years  (Jreen  was  printer  for

the  government,  and  the  foremost  pnoHshar  in

Bo-ton.  It  was  -aid  of  him  at  his  death  that  he
"had  much  of  that  primitive  Christianity  which
has  always  been  the  distinguishing  glory  of
Kngland."  After  his  death  the  "New-  Letter"
carried  on  by  his  son-in-law.  John  Draj>er,  and
then  by  the  latteVs  son  Richard  (7.  v.\


746


GREEN


GREEN


GREEN,  Samuel  Abbott,  physician,  b.  m  Qto-
ton,  fffnr ,  16  March.  1880.  Ha  m  graduated  at
,1  in  1851,  ami  received  his  inniical  degree
three  rean  later,  alter  which  he  aperd  several
years  iii  Europe,  «>n  his  retorn  he  began  pnotioe
in  BoatotL  and  U'came  one  of  the  district  physi-
« ian>  for  the  city  dispensary.  On  19  May,  1858,  he
was  appointed  by  Gov.  Banks  surgeon  of  the  2d
militia  regiment.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  commissioned  assistant  surgeon  of  the
i-t  Ifeeamehnaatta  regiment  of  volunteers,  and  was
the  first  medical  otlicer  mustered  in  for  three  years'
service.  He  was  promoted  surgeon  of  the  24th
Massachusetts  regimenl  on  8  Sept,  1801,  where  he
remained  until  2  Nov.,  1804,  serving  on  the  staffs
of  various  cavalry  officers.  He  had  charge  of  the
hospital  ship  "  Recruit."  of  the  Burnside  expedi-
tion to  Roanoke  island,  of  the  hospital  ship  "Cos-
mopolitan "  on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina,  and
<luring  the  siege  of  Port  Wagner  was  chief  medi-
cal officer  on  .Morris  island.  In  October,  1863,  he
tree  sent  to  Florida,  and  was  post-surgeon  at  St.
Augustine  and  Jacksonville;  thence  he  was  sent
to  Virginia,  and  was  with  the  army  when  Bermuda
Hundred  was  taken.  He  was  appointed  acting
staff-surgeon,  and  was  stationed  three  months  at
Richmond  after  the  fall  of  that  city.  For  gallant
and  distinguished  services  in  the  field  in  1864  he
was  brovetted  lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers.  Dr.
Green  organized  "  Roanoke  cemetery  "  in  1862,  which
was  one  of  the  first  regular  burial-places  for  Na-
tional soldiers.  After  the  close  of  the  war  Dr.
Green  was  from  1865  until  1872  superintendent  of
the  Boston  dispensary,  a  member  of  the  Boston
school  board  in  1860-'2  and  1866-72,  trustee  of
the  public  library  in  1868-'78,  and  acting  libra-
rian from  October,  1877,  to  October,  1878.  In
1870  Gov.  Claflin  appointed  him  one  of  a  commis-
sion to  care  for  disabled  soldiers.  In  1871  he  be-
came city  physician  of  Boston,  and  retained  the
office  till  1880.  He  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
board  of  experts  authorized  by  congress  in  1878  to
investigate  the  yellow  fever,  and  in  1882  he  was
elected  mayor  of  Boston.  Dr.  Green  has  given
much  time  to  historical  studies,  and  for  some  years
has  been  librarian  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society.  In  addition  to  a  large  number  of  papers
on  scientific  and  historical  subjects,  he  has  pub-
lished "  Mv  Campaigns  in  America :  a  Journal  kept
by  Count  William  de  Deux-Ponts,  1780-1,"  trans-
lated from  the  French  manuscript,  with  an  intro-
duction and  notes  (Boston,  1868) ;  "  An  Account  of
Percival  and  Ellen  Green  and  of  Some  of  their  De-
scendants" (printed  privately,  Groton,  Mass.,  1876) ;
"  Epitaphs  from  the  Old  Burying-Ground  in  Gro-
ton, Massachusetts"  (1879);  "The  Early  Records
of  Groton,  Mass.,  1662-1677"  (1880);  "History  of
Medicine  in  Massachusetts,"  a  centennial  address
delivered  before  the  Massachusetts  medical  society
at  Cambridge,  7  June,  1881  (Boston,  1881);  "Gro-
ton during  the  Indian  Wars "  (Groton,  1883) ;
"Groton  during  the  Witchcraft  Times"  (1883);
"The  Boundary -Lines  of  Old  Groton"  (1885);
"  The  Geography  of  Groton."  prepared  for  the  use
of  the  Appalachian  (mountain)  club  (1886);  and
"Groton  Historical  Series"  (20  numbers,  1883-'7).
GREEN,  Seth,  pisciculturist,  b.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y..  19  March,  1817;  d.  there,  20  Aug.,  1888.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  but  early
manifested  a  passion  for  hunting  and  fishing.  For
years  he  had  the  only  fish  and  game  market  near
his  home.  In  1837  he  conceived  the  idea  of  the
artificial  propagation  of  fish,  and  in  1838,  during  a
trip  to  Canada,  made  observations  on  the  habits
of  salmon. Observing  that  as  soon  as  the  spawn


was  east  the  male  salmon  ami  other  fish  ate  it.  he
devoted  his  attention  to  methods  of  protecting
it.  and  increased  the  yield  of  fish  till  lie  had  raised
the  product  to  ninety-five  per  cent.  In  1884  he
discovered  a  method  of  artificially  impregnating
dry  spawn,  and  began  the  propagation  of  fi>h  m  ■
business  at  Caledonia,  Livingston  co„  N.  Y.  In
1867,  by  invitation  of  the  fish  commissioners  of
four  of  the  New  England  states,  he  experiment-
ed on  the  hatching  of  shad  at  Holyoke,  on  the
Connecticut  river,  and  by  his  improvements
hatched  in  a  fortnight's  time  15,000,000,  and  in
1886,  40,000,000.  His  work  was  afterward  ax-
tended  to  the  Hudson,  the  Potomac,  the  Susque-
hanna, and  other  important  rivers,  where  he  suc-
ceeded in  artificially  propagating  fifteen  of  the
more  common  species  with  largely  increased  prod-
ucts. In  1868  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  fish
commissioners  of  New  "York,  and  soon  afterward
made  superintendent  of  fisheries  in  that  Mate.
He  transported  in  1871  the  first  shad  ever  taken
to  California.  As  a  result,  over  1,000,000  market-
able shad  were  sold  on  the  Pacific  coast  in  1885.
He  hatched  artificially  the  spawn  of  about  twenty
kinds  of  fish,  and  also  hybridized  striped  bass
with  shad,  shad  with  herring,  brook  trout  with
salmon  trout,  brook  trout  with  California  salmon,
.salmon  trout  with  white-fish,  and  European  trout
with  American  brook  trout.  He  was  decorated
with  two  gold  medals  by  the  Societe  d'acclima-
tation  of  Paris.  He  invented  important  appli-
ances for  use  in  hatching  shad,  trout,  and  otner
fishes,  and  was  the  author  of  "Trout  Culture"
(Rochester,  1870),  and  "Fish  Hatching  and  Fish
Catching"  (1879).

GREEN,  Thomas,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
England:  d.  in  Maryland.  He  was  one  of  the  Ro-
man Catholic  pilgrims  that  accompanied  Leonard
Calvert  to  Maryland  in  1634,  and  was  appointed
a  privy  councillor  in  1639.  Leonard  Calvert  named
him  governor  on  his  death-bed.  He  served  in
1637-%,  and  was  again  chief  executive  for  a  part
of  1649,  during  the  absence  of  Gov.  Stone.  He  was
reappointed  a  privy  councillor  toward  the  end  of
the  same  year,  and  as  such  took  part  in  the  assem-
bly that  passed  the  toleration  act.  The  date  of  his
death  is  not  known.

GREEN,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1816 :  d.  in  Blair's  Plantation,  La.,  14  April,  1864.
His  father  was  chief  justice  of  Tennessee  and  presi-
dent of  Lebanon  law-college.  The  son  removed  to
Texas  in  early  manhood,  was  a  ranger  in  the  war  of
Texan  independence,  and  also  served  in  the  Mexi-
can war.  In  1855-'8  he  was  clerk  of  the  supreme
court  of  Texas.  He  afterward  joined  the  Confed-
erate army,  and  was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Val-
verde,  Bisland,  and  Galveston,  and  the  capture  of
the  "  Harriet  Lane."  In  the  campaign  of  1863  he
commanded  the  cavalry  of  Gen.  Richard  Taylor's
division,  and  repulsed  the  National  army,  com-
manded by  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel  and  Gen.  Cuvier
Grover,  at  the  battle  of  Bayou  la  Fourche.  After
this  action  he  was  appointed  major-general  for  dis-
tinguished services,  and  placed  in  command  of  the
cavalry  of  the  trans-Mississippi  department.  In
April,  1864,  he  commanded  trie  Texas  infantry  in
the  Red  river  campaign.  He  was  mortally  wounded
near  Pleasant  Hill,  12  April,  1864,  by  a  shot  from
B  National  gun-boat.

GREEN,  Thomas  Jefferson,  soldier,  b.  in  War-
ren county.  N.  C,  in  1801 ;  d.  there,  13  Dec.,  1863.
He  removed  to  Texas  early  in  life,  and  served  as
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  the  war  of  Texan
independence.  In  1843,  with  other  officers,  be
refused  to  obey  the  orders  of  Gen.  Sunuiurville


(iltl  1  \


747


loyalty  ha  doubted,  iiml.  with  a  small  force,

left  iIk-  iiuiiii  body  of  troope  and  niijnk.il  the

f . > w  n  of  Mi.  r.  The  battle  was  disastrous  l<>  th«'
|  :  offloen  ami  nun  were  taken  pri*-

In  ■Itomptinfl  to  escape,  they  «cR'  recap-
tured, taken  t<>  tin-  city  ..f  Mexico,  and  every  tenth

man  WM  ordered  t.i  bl  —  f i « »t  by  Santa- Anna.  Often
was  kept  n  prisoner  at  hard  labor  till  I •»  Best*
1844,  wh.-ii.  with  KM  (ithi-rs,  hi-  was  released.  II.-
rasaored  t.>  Oalifornia  serend  years  later,  air  fad  in
the  tc,  and  was  major-general  of  militia.

When  theeivil  war  began  he  entered  the  Confed-
erate army,  and  was  engaged  in  the  early  Virginia
campaign*  He  published  "The  Mi.r  Bzpedinon "
rk,  1845). — His  ion,  Wharton  Jackson.
politician,  h.  in  St.  Mark's.  Fla..al*>ut  lK-pt,  wasedu-

eated  el  Harvard,  the  D.  s.  military  academy,  and

the  universities  <.f  Virginia  and  Cumltcrland.  Tenn.

iaited  Bnropein  1888,  and  on  hie  return  set-
tled as  a  planter  in  Warren  county.  N.  ('.  He
ad  throughout  the  <-ivil  war  in  the  Confederate
army  ee  Uentenant-oolonal  of  a  North  Carolina
regiment,  was  wounded  at  Washington.  X.  ('..  ami
I  sburg,  and  imprisoned  at  the  (dose  of  the  war
at  Johnaon'l  island.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  convention  of  lHtjH,  and  was
elected  to  congress  in  lSS-i.  and  re-elected  in  1**1.

0BBBN,  Traill,  chemist,  b.  in  Beaton,  Pa.,  25
May.  lHt:$  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
lK:r>,  was  for  a  rear  physician  to  the  Philadelphia
di>|Hnsary,  and  then  settled  in  Easton.  where  he
has  since"  practised.  In  1837  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor of  general  and  applied  chemistry  in  La-
fayette, and  four  years  later  was  called  to  the
chair  of  natural  sciences  in  Marshall  college,  where
lie  remained  until  1S47.  He  returned  during  the
same  year  to  Easton,  resuming  his  chair  in  Lafay-
ette, which  he  has  since  occupied.  At  his  own  ex-
cuse he  erected  an  observatory  there,  and  on  the
establishment  of  the  Pardee  scientific  department
of  Lafayette  he  became  its  dean.  Dr.  (ireen  haj
held  several  state  appointments  in  connection  with
hospitals  ami  similar  work,  and  was  for  some  time
president  of  the  school  l)oard  at  Easton.  He  is  a
member  of  many  scientific  societies,  was  president
of  the  Pennsylvania  mcdioal  society  in  1888,  and
first  president  of  the  American  academv  of  medi-
cine. He  delivered  the  annual  address. before  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1KN0,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I>.
from  Wa-hiicrton  and  Jefferson  colleges  in  1868,

QBEEN,  William  Alexander,  physician,  b,  in
Augusta,  (ia..  ."">  Jan..  \*'-M.  He  s|>ent  liis  early  life
as  a  clerk  in  a  drug-store,  devoting  his  spare  hours
to  the  study  of  medicine.  In  1N57  he  was  gradu-
ated from  the  Augusta  medical  college.  He  then
settled  in  Americus.  (Ja..  and  remained  there  till
1861,  when  be  entered  the  Confederate  army.  He
afterward  became  surgeon,  and  then  chief  surgeon
of  artillery  in  the  :U\  army  corps,  on  the  statf  <>f
Sen.  D.  P.  Hill,  where  he  remained  till  the  surren-
der of  Lee.  He  served  00  many  l>at t le-ficlds.  and
was  the  lirM  t<>  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  medical
authorities  in  the  field  the  operation  for  resection.
He  was  the  inventor  of  a  hypodermic  svringe,  the
_'ticr  of  a  hypodermic  syringe-needle,  and  of
Green's  "pocket -eases/'  He  introduced  many  new
remedies  (iy|M>derinieally.  and  gave  much  attention
to  pharmacy  and  chemistry.  After  the  war  he
returned  to  ft moffk IIM.  and  in  1H7."»  removed  to
Macon.  He  has  published  many  articles  in  medical
journals,  ami  i>  the  author  of  [wipers  <>n  the  "Small-
"  Vaccination  and  its  Keeulte,"  and  "  The
Use  of  the  Hypodermic  Syringe."


QUI  I  Y William Henri, clergyman, b. in
Mile,  Burlington  co  He

was  graduated  al Lafayette  in 1840,  studied

Princeton,  when-  he  became  a  teacher  in
daiii.d  in  1848.  Hi
..f  the  Central  Presbyterian  ohnrefa  in  Philadelphia
in  1840,  and  Mm.-  is;,i  has  been  professor  of  He-
brew and  <>ld  Testament  literature  in  Princeton
theological  seminary.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Old
Testament  company  of  the  American  committee
for  the  revi-i-.ii  «>f  the  Bible.  In  1888  he  declined
the  iiresidency  of  Princeton.  He  has  published
••  Hebrew  (Jrammar"  (Xew  York,  1861);  ••  ||.  |

Chreetomathy,"  The  Pentateuch  Vindi-

cated from  the  Asperekma  of  Coleneo"  (iki
••The  Argument  of  the  Book  of  Job  Unfolded

(1S7I):  ".Moms  and  the  Prophets"  (INK!,;  and
"The  Hebrew  Feasts "  ( 1 885).

GREEN,  William  Mercer.  P.  K.  bishop,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C..  |  Mas.  1 71»s;  d.  in  S-wanee,
Tenn..  bl  Feb.,  1887.  Hi's  father,  a  wealthy  rice-
planter,  died  when  his  son  was  a  boy.  On  his
mother's  side  he  was  of  (Junker  origin,  and  owed
much  to  the  example  and  strict  discipline  which
she  furnished  and  enforced,  lie  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1M*.  and
studied  theology.  He
W8J  ordered  deacon  in
Christ  church.  Ra-
leigh. X.  c.,  by  Biehon
B.C.  Moore, &  April,
1881,  and  ordained
priest  in  St.  James's
church,  Wilmington,
X.  01/80  April.  [888,
by  the  same  bishop.
He  became  rector  of
St.  John's  church,
Williamsborough,  in
I88L  Emir  years  later
he  removed  to  Hills-
borough and  became
rector  of  St.  Matthew's
church,  which  was
founded  by  him.  In
1837  he  was  appointed
chaplain  anil  profes-
sor of  belles-lettres  in  the  University  of  Xorth
Carolina.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  184.5.  Dr.  Green
was  elected  to  In-  the  first  bishop  of  the  diocese  of
Mississippi  in  1840, and  was  consecrated  in  St.  An-
drew's church.  Jackson.  Mis-..  'Jl  I'.b..  1800.  Bishop
(ireen  devoted  himself  to  his  work  with  energy,  but
after  thirty-three  years  of  faithful  service  was  com-
pelled, by  the  infirmities  of  age,  to  avail  himself  of
the  aid  of  an  assistant  1 1888).  He  was  among  the
earliest  and  most  earnest  foundersof  the  Univcrsitv
Of  the  Booth,  at  Scwanee.  Tenn..  in  1M(H).  In  Im'.'t
be  beoaBJM  its  chancellor.  Bishop  Green  printed
a  few  sermons  on  "  Baptismal  Bcgcm-ration  "  and
"Apostolic  Succession,'  and  also  an  oration  on
"The  influence  <>f  Christianitv  upon  the  Welfare
of  Nations"  (Hillsborough.  X.'  C.  1881);  but  his
chief publications  were a brief  "Memoir  <>f the

Bight  Reverend  IWrisifi  Rarensoroft,of  Xorth  Garo>
lina"  (1880),  and  a  "Life  ..f  the  Bight  Rererend
Bishop  Otey,  of  Tenneaeee*1  (Xew  York.  1886).

(iKKKXE,  Albert  Norton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, B.  L  in  Feb..  is(r.»:  d.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio.
4  Jan..  1888,  Be  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1820,
studied  law  with  John  Whipple,  and  was  admitted
to  the  l»ar  in  ls-j:{.  He  practised  in  Providence,
where,  in  \Xi2,  he  was  elected  clerk  of  the  citv
council,  and  clerk  of  the municipal  court,  which


W.Jfc.%


GREENE


„{]]>■<■  beheld  Bur twenty-five rrnn  Hewaechoean
lodge  "f  the  municipal  court  in  1866,  end  after  fall-
tog  heaJtli  oompelled  his  reeigyrkm,  in  in<»7.  be

I  with ln>  daughter  in  Cleveland. He was

actively  connected  with  the  educational  interest*

of Rhode hland.  ami is  said I<>  have  drafted the

original  school  iiiii  <»f  the  state. Judge  Greene

-  .(Mated  in  the  founding  of  the  Providence
nthena'iim.  and  was  president  of  the  Rhode  Island
historical  society  from  1854  till  his  death,  lie  l«-
•H  a  collect ion"of  American  poetry,  which  passed
into  the  hands  of  Caleb  Fiske  Harris,  from  whose
estate  it  was  purchased  by  Henry  B.  Anthony  and
bequeathed  to  Brown  university.  A  catalogue  of
the  collection  has  been  prepared  and  published  by
John  c.  Stookbridge  (Providence,  1H86).  Judge
Greene  published  in  ls:{:{  a  quarterly  entitled  the
"  Literary  Journal,"  but  discontinued  it  at  the
end  of  tiie  year.  He  was  the  author  of  several
well-known  ]K>ems,  including  "Old  Grimes."'  "The
Militia  Muster.*"  ••  Adelheid,"  "The  Baron's  Last
Banquet,"  and  "  Canonchet,"  published  in  Wilkins
U|Hlike's  "  History  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in
Narrairansett"  (New  York,  1847).

GREENE,  Asa, author.!),  in  Ashburnham.  Mass.,
in  1788;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1837.  He  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1818,  and  received  his
medical  degree  at  the  Berkshire  medical  school  in
1827.  About  1830  he  settled  in  New  York,  where
he  became  a  bookseller,  and  for  some  time  edited
the  ••  N'ew  York  Evening  Transcript."  He  pos-
sessed great  humor,  and  had  good  powers  of  de-
scription. His  books  include  "  The  Life  and  Ad-
ventures of  Dr.  Dodimus  Duckworth,  A.  N.  Q. ;
to  which  is  added  the  Historv  of  a  Steam  Doctor"
(New  York.  is:::i);  "The  Perils  of  Pearl  Street"
(1884);  "The  Travels  of  Ex-Barber  Fribbelton  in
America"  (1835);  "A  Yankee  among  the  Nulli-
fies "  (1835) ;  "  A  Glance  at  New  York  "  (1837) ;
and  "  Debtors'  Prison  "  (1837).

GREENE,  Charles  Ezra,  engineer,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1842.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1862.  and  later,  during  the  civil
war.  served  as  a  volunteer  in  the  U.  S.  army.
He  was  graduated  at  the  Massachusetts  insti-
tute of  technology  in  1868,  and  in  1872  became
professor  of  civil  engineering  in  the  University
of  Michigan.  In  addition  to  his  teaching  he  has
constructed  the  Huron  river  trestle  bridge  at  Ann
Arbor.  Professor  Greene  is  a  member  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  scientific
associations.  Besides  papers  contributed  to  engi-
neering journals,  he  has  published  "Graphical
Methods  for  Analysis  of  Bridge  Trusses,  extending
to  Continuous  Girders  and  Draw-Spans "  (New
York.  1875) ;  and  "  Graphics  for  Engineers,  Archi-
tects, and  Builders,"  in  three  volumes,  entitled,
respectively,  "  Roof  Trusses,"  "  Bridge  Trusses,"
and  "Arches  in  Wood,  Iron,  and  Stone"  (1876-'80).

GREENE,  Christopher,  soldier, b.  in  Warwick,
R.  I.,  12  May,  1737  ;  d.  in  Westchester  county.  N.  Y.,
13  May,  1781.  He  served  in  the  Rhode  Island  legis-
lature in  1772-'4,  and  was  chosen  a  lieutenant  in
the  Kentish  Guards  in  1774.  In  May,  1775,  he
was  appointed  by  the  legislature  a  major  in  the
army  of  observation,  was  given  command  of  a  com-
pany, marched  to  Cambridge,  and  subsequently
was  placed  by  Washington  in  command  of  the  first
battalion  under  Benedict  Arnold,  whom  he  accom-
panied on  his  expedition  to  Quebec.  In  the  assault
on  that  city  under  Richard  Montgomery  he  led  a
detachment  of  troops,  and  when  Arnold  was  wound-
ed he  was  taken  prisoner.  He  was  exchanged  after
eight  months"  confinement,  and  in  June,  1776.  he
was  promoted  to  major  under  James  M.  Varnuin.


A


GREENE

In  October  he  was  made  colonel,  with  charge  of
Fort Mercer,  on  the  Delaware. A year  later,  in
October,  1777,  the  fort  was  assaulted  by  the  Bet-
riana, under
Count  Donop,
who  were  re-
pulsed with
heavy loss,
andtheircoin-
niander  mor-
tally  wound-
ed. Congress
voted Greene
asword.which
in 1786 was

E  resented  to
is  son  by
Gen.  Henry
Knox,  who
was  then  sec-
retary of  war.
In  1778  Col.
Greene  and
his  regiment
were  detached
for  special  ser-
vice in  Rhode
Island,  and  was  placed  under  the  command  of  Gen.
John  Sullivan,  whose  headquarters  were  in  Provi-
dence. Early  in  1781,  while  in  command  on  the
Croton  river,  his  headquarters  were  surrounded  b
a  party  of  loyalists,  by  whom  he  was  killed
monument  to  his  memory  was  erected  near  Red
Bank,  N.  J.,  in  October,  1829,  by  New  Jersey  and
Pennsylvania  volunteers.

GREENE,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stoneham.
Mass.,  15  Nov.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Westborough,  Mass.,  7
April,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1821,
spent  two  years  in  teaching,  and  then  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1826.
Two  years  later  he  became  assistant  secretary  of
the  American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign
missions,  and  during  his  first  year  of  service  made
a  tour  extending  over  nearly  6,000  miles,  and  last-
ing eight  months,  during  which  he  visited  nearly
thirty  missions  to  the  Indian  tribes.  In  1832  he
was  chosen  corresponding  secretary,  succeeding
Jeremiah  Evarts,  and  was  ordained  as  a  Congre-
gational minister  in  August,  1833.  He  continued
his  connection  with  the  board  until  1848.  and  his
duties  consisted  largely  in  editing  the  "  Missionary
Herald,"  and  in  correspondence  with  the  Indian
missions.  Failing  health  caused  him  to  decline  a
re-election,  and  he  settled  in  Westborough,  where
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  except  a  short
residence  in  Windsor,  Vt.  Mr.  Greene  prepared
twelve  of  the  "  special  reports "  of  the  society,
many  of  which  were  of  great  value.  He  was  also
associated  with  Lowell  Mason  in  the  compilation
of  the  hymn-book  called  "  Church  Psalmody."

GREENE,FrancesHarriet,author.  b.in  Smith-
field,  R.  I.,  4  Sept.,  1805 ;  d.  in  California.  10  June.
1875.  She  was  educated  in  Providence.  R.  I.,  and
was  early  thrown  on  her  own  resources  for  support
through  the  business  failure  of  her  father,  George
Whipple,  who  was  at  one  time  a  wealthy  citizen
of  Smithfield.  In  1842  she  married  at  Lowaat
Mass.,  Charles  C.  Greene,  an  artist,  and  removed  to
Springfield,  Mass. The  marriage  proved  uncon-

fenial,  and  she  was  divorced  in  September,  1847.
n  1860  she  visited  California,  was  married  in  1862
to  William  C.  McDougal,  of  that  state,  and  re-
mained there  till  her  death.  In  the  Dorr  rebellion
in  Rhode  island,  in  May.  is  12.  she  became  a  violent
partisan  of  the  suffrage  party,  and  suffered  much


740


social  un|»opularitv  from  her  course.  During  thi*
rear  she  conducted  "The  Wampannag." a  journal
designed  f<>r  til*-  elevation  of  the  laboring  clasaat,
ami  oontribntod  frequently  to  "  reform  penodioala,M

particularly  to  ••  Tin-  Spiritual  Philosopher,"  a  pa-
per devoted  to  the  exposition  of  the  principli
DSfeUTC  in  their  application  to  individual  ami  social
life.  In  1848  sin-  became  tin-  editor  of  "The
Young  Ladies' Journal  of  .Science.  Literature,  and
a  monthly  magazine  published  in  New  York
<itv.  Ifn.  Greene  is  the  author  of  "  The  <  >riginal  "
ridence,  K.  1..  1829);  "  Memoir  of  Eleanor
Kid  i  388);  ••  The  ftfe-

(•liaiii.  •"  1 1  ^  »1  > :  "Might  and  Bight,!  Hiatorj  of
the  l>urr  ReMlion"(1844);  "  Primary  Class-Hook
of  Botany  "  QftW  York.  1868);  "Shahmah  in  Pur-
suit of  Freedom"  (1858);  "The  Dwan  Bov,  and
Minor  Poena"  (1858);  and  a  work  published  post-
humously, entitled  "  Ilevomi  the  Yeil."  by  Fman-
uel  Owiuraborg  and  others,  through  the  mini]  of
Frances  11.  Greene  McDougal  (18?X).

QBEENE,  George  Sears,  soldier,  b.  in  Appo-
MH  Warwick.  H.  I..  <i  .May.  1801  Be  is  a  de-
scendant in  the  sixth  generation  from  John  (ireene,
deputy  governor  of  Rhode  I-land.  whose  father.
John,  came  from  Salisbury.  England,  in  1686.  and
settled  in  Warwick.  R.  I.,  in  1645.  (Jcorge  Sears
was  graduated  at  the  V.  S.  military  academv  in
1668,  atoond  in  his  class.  He  served  in  various
garrisons  and  as  instructor  at  West  Point  until
>.  when  he  left  the  annv  and  U-caine  a  civil
engineer,  building  manv  railroads  in  the  states  of
Maine.  Massachusetts,  "Rhode  Island,  New  York.
Maryland,  and  Yirginia.  In  1856  he  served  in  the
Croton  aqueduct  department  in  the  city  of  New
York.  He  designed  and  built  the  reservoir  in  Cen-
tral park,  ami  the  enlargement  of  High  Bridge.
He  re-entered  the  army  in  1866  as  colonel  of  the
60th  New  York  regiment,  and  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  28  Aprd.  1862.  He
commanded  his  brigade  at  Cedar  Mountain,  9
Aug.  1X62,  and  was  in  command  of  the  2d  division
of  the  12th  army  corps  in  the  battle  of  Antietam.
He  also  led  his  brigade  at  the  battle  of  (hancel-
loreriUa.  At  Gettysburg,  on  the  night  of  2  July,
1888,  with  a  part  of  his  brigade,  he  held  the  right
win>;  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at  Culp's  Hill
against  more  than  a  division  of  Confederate  troops,
thereby  averting  a  disaster  which  woajd  have  re-
sulted from  turning  the  right  wing  of  the  army,
lb-  wa-  transferred  to  the  western  armies  in  Sep-
tcmlier,  1868,  and  in  a  night  engagement  at  Wau-
hatchie,  near  Chattanooga,  88  Oct..  1863,  was  dan-
genmsly  wounded  in  the  jaw.  This  wound  disabled
him  from  active  service  tdl  January,  1888,  when  he
rejoined  Sherman's  army  in  North  Carolina  and
participated  in  the  engagements  preceding  John-
ston's surrender.  He  was  hrevctted  major-general
of  volunteers  for  his  services  on  13  March,  1865,
and  retired  from  the  army  in  1866,  In  186?  he  be-
calm- chief  engineer  and  commissioner  of  the  Cro-
ton aipieduct  department,  ami  held  the  office  till
1^71.  when  he  was  made  chief  engineer  of  public
works  in  WaabJngton,  1>.  c.  but  realgnod  in  l*?'-'.
lb-  was  pr.sident  of  tin-  American  society  of  civil
engineers  from  1875  till  1877.  and  sine-  that  date
aat  baoB  engaged  as  consulting  engineer  on  vari-
ous norka.  |'..r  s,Veral  years  ba  was  alao  |>resident
of the  New York genealogical ami Uograpbioal

iy.  Mis  KHLfcreorre  Soars,  Jr.,  b.  in  Lex-
ington, Ky..  86  Nov..  Is.;;;,  entered  Harvard  in
•.  but  left  before  graduating  in  order  to  study
civil  engineering  under  his  father.  Be
assistant  engineer  on  the  Croton  aqueduct.  08J  vari-
ous railroads  in Cuba,  and  in  oopper  mining  «>n


I^ke  Superior. During  1868  he  condm  '

and  accurate  topigrnphica)  surveys  in  West-
chester county  and  lx>ng  Island  City.  N.  Y.,  and
at  that  time  introduced  several  valuable  improve-
ments in  instruments.  The*--  ha\e  ejajaj  baan
adoptad  by  the  l'.  S.  BOajl  survey,  and  have  eOBM
into  general  use.  In  ix?.">  he  was  appointed
L'ine.r-in-chief  of  the  Department  of  dooka.  I
York  city,  in  which  capacity  he  designed  ami
euted  river  walls,  wharves,  and  piers  in  difficult
situations.  In  \sr,~  (,,•  Ucame  a  iiicihIkt  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers,  was  dire
from  1X82  till  1886,  and  vice-president  in  Iks
— Another  son.  Samuel  Dana,  natal  officer,  b.
in  CumU-rland.  Md.,  11  l-'el...  ls;:<i:  ,|.  i„  Ports-
mouth naw-vard.  N.  II..  11  I>ec..  1k*4.  wa»  gradu-
atcd  at  thel'.  S.  naval  academy  in  1888, and  served
as  midshipman  on  the  "  Hartford."  of  the  China
squadron.  On  his  return  to  the  I'nited  States  in
1861  he  volunteered  for  service  on  the  iron-dad
"Monitor,"  then  building  at  New  York. and  served
continuously  on  this  vessel  from  the  day  she  was
launched  until  she  foundered  off  Ca|»e  Hatteras  on
the  night  ol  89  l>cc.  1868,  The  "Monitor"  left
New  York.  <!  March,  1862.  for  Hani|iton  Roads.  She
was  built  for  river  and  harbor  service,  and  on  her
way  narrowly  escaped  sinking  on  two  occasions,  so
that  her  officers  and  crew  had  baan  without  sleep
for  forty-eight  hours  when  they  arrived  at  Hampton
Roads  on  the  momingof  9  March.  1862.  Notwith-
standing their  exhaustion,  they  proceeded  imme-
diately to  attack  the  "  Merrimac,"  and  in  the
memorable  engagement  that  followed,  her  com-
manding officer,  Lieut.  Worden.  directed  the
movements  of  the  vessel  from  the  pilot-house,
while  Lieut.  Greene  had  charge  of  the  guns  in  the
turret.  He  personally  fired  every  shot  until  near
the  close  of  the  action,  when  the  command  de-
volved on  him  in  consequence  of  the  wounding  of
Lieut.  Worden.  In  the  delay  incident  to  the
change  of  command  the  vessels  drifted  apart.  As
soon  as  Lieut.  Greene  reached  the  pilot-house  he
turned  the  "Monitor"  again  toward  the  "  Merri-
mac," but  the  latter  was  already  in  retreat  toward
Norfolk.  Being  without  a  pilot,  he  was  unable  to
follow  the  "Merrimac"  into  the  tortuous  channel
of  the  Elizabeth  river,  and,  after  firing  a  few  shots
after  her.  returned  to  the  wooden  vessels  which  had
been  saved  from  destruction  by  the  timely  arrival
of  the  "  Monitor."  He  was  afterw  ard  engaged  in
the  attack  on  Fort  Darling  and  other  naval  actions
on  the  James  river.  After  the  loss  of  the  "  Moni-
tor "  he  served  as  executive  officer  of  the  "  Florida  "
on  blockade  duty  in  1863,  of  the  "Iroquois,"  in
search  of  the  "  AlaUima."  in  1864-'5,  ami  on  vari-
ous other  vessels  from  1x65  till  1869.  He  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-commander  in  1866,  ami  to
commander  in  18?2.  and  commanded  the  "Juni-
ata "in  lx?:,.  the  -  Monongahela"  in  1X?6-'?.  and
the  "  Despatch  "  in  lxX2-'4.  He  also  served  at  the
naval  academy  as  assistant  professor  of  mathe-
matics in  isd.">  'x.  of  astronomy  in  1871-%  and  as
assistant  to  the  sii|>crintcmlent  in  18?8 -*x2.  He
received  a  vote  of  thanks  from  the  legislature  of
Rhode  Island  for  his  gallant  services  in  the  action
between  the  "Monitor  "and  the  "Merrimac." —
Another  eon,  Francis  Vinton,  soldier,  b.  in  Provi-
dence. B,  I..  81  June.  I860,  was  graduated  at  the
C.  S.  military  academy  in  1*?0.  and  assigned  to
the  engineer  corps,  lb-  s,-rved  on  the  international
commission  for  the  survey  of  the  northern  U>un-
dary  of  the  United  States,  as  assistant  astronomer
and  surveyor  in  lX?-J-'t;,  was  promoted  to  1st
lieutenant,  13  Jan..  lx?},  and  was  military  attache*
toll,  . .ition  at  St. Petersburg  iii-lx??-^.


750


:kxe


GRKKXE


bring  f<»r  ii  vear  with  the  Russian  army  hi  the
Arid? He  hi  eerietanl  to  1 1 1«-  engfoeer  m  charge

,,f pabUo  works in  tin- District of (  oltimhia  in

88,  being  meda  captain  in  January,  1HS3,  in-

■trootor  in practical  engineering at West Point

from  l  Sept,  1886,  to  January,  1886,  and  on  31
Dec.  of  the  latter  year  reeignod  his  commission.
lie  has  published  "'Deflections  of  the  Plumb-line
slang  tlie  46th  PnmUel"  (1876): "The  Russian

Armv  end  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-X"
(9  fOUk,  New  Fork.  1871);  "Army  Life  in  Russia"
(1880);  and  "The  Mississippi"  (in  "Campaigns  of
the  Civil  War"  series,  18*2).

GREENE,  Xathanael,  soldier,  b.  in  Potowo-
mut.  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Warwick,  R.  1.,
ti  June.  1742;  d.  at  Mulberry  Grove,  Ga.,  19
June,  1786.  He  was  the  fifth  in  descent  from
John  Greene,  ■  surgeon,  who  came  over  in  the
next  company  after  Roger  Williams,  and  became
an  original  proprietor  in  both  Providence  and
Sliawomet.  Xathanael  was  the  fourth  son  in  a
familv  of  eight  boys  and  one  girl,  two  being  the
issue  of  Xathanael  the  elder's  first  marriage,  and
the  others  of  the  second.  The  elder  Xathanael
was  a  Quaker,  exercising  on  Sunday  his  gift  as  a
preacher,  and  his  sons  were  brought  up  according
to  the  strictest  principles  of  that  sect.  Young
Xathanael  was  trained  in  common  with  the  other
boys  to  work  in  the  field,  the  mill  and  the  forge.
Young  Greene  was  of  a  robust  nature,  fond  of
athletic  sports,  in  which  he  excelled ;  but  he  was
also  of  a  studious  disposition.  A  chance  meet-
ing with  a  young  collegian  named  Giles  aroused  a
desire  for  more  knowledge  than  the  crude  educa-
tional materials  in  vogue  in  this  Quaker  com-
munity afforded  His  father  was  appealed  to,  to
enlarge  his  means  of  study;  and  shortly  after-
ward Xathanael,  under  the  guidance  of  a  Scotch-
man named  Maxwell,  began  Latin  and  geometry.
Euclid  became  an  absorbing  study,  and  a  copy  of
this  treatise,  purchased  with  his  own  earnings,
was  his  almost  constant  companion  on  his  daily
round  of  duty.  Between  1753  and  1755  he  made
the  acquaintance  of  President  Stiles,  then  a  clergy-
man in  Xewport,  and  under  his  guidance  acquired
a  knowledge  of  such  authors  as  Locke,  Watts,
and  Swift.  The  latter  was  his  literary  model,
and  he  shaped  his  ideas  of  history  upon  Fergu-
son's "  History  of  Civil  Society."  About  the  same
time  he  met  Lindley  Murray,  the  "grammarian
of  three  generations  of  ungrateful  school-boys,"
with  whom  he  had  many  profitable  discussions
on  the  subjects  of  his  readings.  In  1760  Xathan-
ael took  a  step  that  exhibited  his  independence  of
judgment  and  action.  At  that  time  a  strong
prejudice  against  inoculation  prevailed,  and  ( the
practice  of  it  had  been  forbidden  by  the  assem-
blies of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island,  the  lat-
ter rejecting  it  as  late  as  1772.  Greene,  finding
the  scourge  of  small-pox  raging  in  Xew  York  on
one  of  his  visits,  submitted  to  inoculation,  much
to  the  scandal,  it  is  presumed,  of  his  neighbors
and  friends.  In  order  to  conduct  intelligently  a
lawsuit  in  which  the  family  had  become  involved,
he  made,  in  his  twentieth  year,  a  thorough  study
of  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries "  and  Jacob's
"  Law  Dictionary."  As  the  business  of  the  Greene
forge,  at  Coventry,  required  the  constant  atten-
tion of  one  of  the  partners,  Xathanael  removed
to  that  place  in  1770.  In  April,  1765,  he  had
been  admitted  a  freeman  in  Warwick,  by  virtue  of
his  proprietorship  of  an  estate  at  West  Greenwich.
Three  years  later  he  canvassed  the  county  for  sig-
natures to  the  association  test,  and  shortly  after
his  removal  to  Coventry  he  sat  in  the  general  as-


sembly as  a  representative  from  that  place.  The
disputee  between  the  colonies  end  the  British  gov-
ernment were  commented  upon  by  the  young  legis-
lator, and  so  well  known  were  his  sentiments  that
the  royal  agents  appointed  to  seek  out  the  offend-
ers in  the  Doming  of  the  "Peepe"  at  once  fixed
their  suspicions  upon  him,  and  for  some  time  he
was  in  danger  of  being  summoned  to  the  court  of
Inquiry  at  Newport,  lie  was  convinced  that  war
would  be  the  outcome  of  pending  troubles,  and
applied  himself  to  the  study  of  military  science.
t  nun  Sliarpe's  "  Military  Guide,"  Turenne's  "  Me-
moirs," Cajsar's  "  Commentaries,"  and  Plutarch,
he  derived  that  theoretical  military  knowledge
winch  he  so  successfully  put  into  practice  in  his
military  career.  In  1774  an  independent  com-
pany, recruited  from  East  Greenwich,  Warwick,
and  Coventry,  was  formed  under  the  name  of  the
Kentish  Guards,  and  Greene  immediately  enrolled
himself  as  a  private,  after  failing  of  an  election  to
the  office  of  lieutenant. Even  his  admission  as  a

f>rivate  was  some  time  in  doubt,  owing  to  a  slight
imp  in  his  gait.  In  securing  his  military  equip-
ment, Greene  showed  his  customary  energy,  making
a  trip  to  Boston,  and  not  only  bringing  back  the
accoutrements  concealed  under  straw  in  his  wagon,
but  also  having  with  him  a  deserter  from  one  of
the  British  regiments  in  Boston,  whom  he  had
employed  to  act  as  drill-master.  The  Quakers
looked  askance  at  Greene's  interest  in  military
matters,  and  a  conference  resulted  in  the  sever-
ance of  his  formal  connection  with  that  frater-
nity; but  he  never  lost  his  attachment  for  this
simple  religion.  The  news  of  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill  aroused  the  Rhode  Island  assembly,  and  they
voted  to  raise  a  brigade  of  three  regiments  to  join
the  forces  around  Boston,  commissioning  Greene
as  brigadier-general.  This  contingent  joined  the
American  army  at  Jamaica  Plain,  on  3  June,  1776,
and  the  young  officer  at  once  proceeded  with  the
task  of  organizing  the  undisciplined  men  in  his
command.  Washington  arrived  at  Cambridge  on
2  July,  and  upon  Greene  devolved  the  duty  of
welcoming  the  commander-in-chief  in  the  name  of
the  soldiers,  which  task  he  performed  in  a  digni-
fied and  pleasing  manner.  During  the  siege  of
Boston  he  was  stationed  at  Prospect  Hill,  and  in
the  affair  of  Dorchester  Heights  he  commanded  a
brigade.  On  the  evacuation  of  Boston  he  was  or-
dered to  Long  Island,  but  during  the  disastrous
operations  in  this  campaign  he  lay  at  the  point  of
death.  The  American  army  made  a  stand  at  Har-
lem in  the  retreat  from  Long  Island ;  but  the  criti-
cal situation  induced  Greene,  who  had  been  pro-
moted to  major-general,  to  propose  to  Washington
the  abandonment  of  Xew  York,  and  the  occupa-
tion of  the  Westchester  shore  from  King's  Bridge,
and  the  council  of  war  finally  approved  the  plan.
Fort  Washington  was  to  be  held,  to  obstruct  the

t)assage  of  the  Hudson  ;  but  its  downfall  soon  fol-
owed,  and  Greene,  who  advised  its  retention,  has
suffered  in  reputation  in  consequence.  The  ques-
tion of  his  responsibility  has  been  the  subject  of
controversy  between  Bancroft,  the  historian,  and
George  W.  Greene.  Cornwallis  crossed  the  Hud-
son on  18  Xov.,  1776,  and  made  a  movement  to
cut  off  the  American  retreat  to  the  Hackensack ;
but  Greene  engaged  him  at  the  head  of  the  stream,
and  held  him  until  the  troops  had  crossed.  The
retreat  through  the  Jerseys  now  began,  and  the
harassed  army  brought  up  at  Trenton  on  2  Dec.,
where  Washington  at  once  set  about  getting  his
Ijaggage  and  stores  across  the  Delaware.  On  25
Dec.  the  American  army,  with  Greene  in  com-
mand of  the  left  wing  and  Sullivan  of  the  right,


761


mprfaed  tin-  Hessian  patkaa  at  Trenton,  and
gained  ■  complete  victoi  i  I  a  rapid

ill  of  tilt'  enemy,  hut  \sa-  •imimiIimI  l.v  a
OOttncU  of  war.  'I'hr  Mit-.iv.  however,  was
followed  by  u  strategic  movement  OH  the  weakened
garrison  n't  Prfnoaton,  end  after  a  sharp  eiigage-
mtiit  tin-  British  retreated  to  join  the  main  nrmv
Uinlcr Cornwallis. ( i r««in'~ <-« >n< liic-t and wise

oounseli  throughout  the  campaign  had  commanded
him  d>  Washington  ;  ami  when,  in  March.  1777,  the

lnitiT  found  it  necessary  t<>  present  to  congress  his
views  and  |»lans,  Greene  was  selected  f< »r  the  mis-
sion. The  "Ci.nwax  cabal,"  which  in  the  succeed-
ing winter assumed dangerous |>r<  >[««rt  i<  >m-, had

idv  begun  its  work  of  discrediting  Washington
and  Greene  with  congress,  and  partly  mi  this  ac-
count (ireene  was  sent. He  succeeded  in  having  a
resolution  |mssed  relieving  Washington  from  siil>-
nce  to  a  council  of  war.
But  (ireene's  ino-t  Important  work  at  this  period

was  the  part  he  took  in  the  battle  of  the  Brandy-
wme.  1 1  S-pt..  1777.  The  only  hope  of  success  for
the  British  in  the  attempt  to  drive  Washington
from  his  very  strong  [HTtHrHI  at  Chadd's  and  Brin-
ton's  fords  was  in  turning  his  right  flank  by  a  cir-
cuitous march  of  eighteen  miles  up  the  Linea-
ter  road  and  across  the  forks  of  the  Brandywine
toward  Birmingham  meeting-house.  The  British
were  safe  in  trying  this,  because  their  superior
force  (18,000  against  11,000)  enabled  them  to  sepa-
rate the  wings  of  their  army  with  little  risk.
The  movement  was  admirably  conducted  by  Corn-
wallis,  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  striking  the
American  flank,  because  Washington  made  anew
front  with  his  right  wing  under  Sullivan,  near
Birmingham  meeting-house,  so  that  Sullivan  re-
ceived the  attack  on  his  front.  Vet.  in  spite  of
this,  the  superiority  of  the  British  in  discipline
gave  them  the  advantage  in  the  desperate  flght
that  ensued,  and  Cornwallis  succeeded  in  pushing
Sullivan  obliquely  toward  the  village  of  Dilworth.
If  this  movement  had  been  completed  it  would
have  cut  the  American  army  in  two  and  utterly
routed  it;  but  it  was  foiled  by  the  generalship  of
Qraene  in  executing  Washington's  prompt  orders
to  stop  the  dangerous  gap.  Greene  was  in  com-
mand of  the  reserve,  stationed  on  a  lofty  eminence
a  little  in  the  rear  of  Wayne,  who  commanded  the
centre  behind  Chadd's  ford.  On  receiving  Wash-
ington's order  he  marched  his  brigade  five  miles
in  forty-live  minutes,  and,  connecting  with  Sulli-
van near  Dilworth,  averted  the  impending  destruc-
tion of  the  army.  Wayne  had  time  to  withdraw
the  centra,  and  Armstrong  the  right  wing,  in  good
order;  and  so  the  whole  army  was  united  at  Ches-
ter in  excellent  condition.  Careless  writers  have
sometimes  vaguely  deecribed  the  American  army
as  "routed"  at  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine,  and
t  hi ■;  notion  has  crept  into  text-books  of  American
history.  An  army  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be
'Touted  "  when  it  is  ready  to  renew  the  fight  next
day.  The  best  commentary  on  the  battle  of  the
Brandywine  is  furnished  by  the  fact  that,  while  it
was  fought  on  11  Sept..  it  was  not  until  the  Ml h
of  that  month  that  Ben.  I lowe  reached  Philadel-
phia. This  delay  was  due  to  Washington's  skilful
manwuvring ;  but  the  best  of  generals  cannot
manoiivre  and  detain  the  enemy  with  an  army
that  has  just  been  routed.  The  reason  whv  the
Americans  were  nol  routed  at  the  Brandvwine  is
to  be  found  in  t ireene's  memorable  double-quick
manh  to  Dilworth.  and  the  admirable  manner  in
which  he  sustained  the  languishing  tight  at  that
critical  [M>int.
on  M  Bant,  Gen.  Howe,  having  eluded  Waah-


Ington on the Schuylkill, entered Philadelphia,

ming  the  hulk  of  his  army  ut  (icrmuni
and  on  I  (let.  the  luittle  of  (iermantowii  wan
fought,  Greene's  division,  moving  in  a  circuitous
M  to  attack  the  front  of  the  British  right
wing,  delayed  by  the  difficulties  of  the  routs  and  a
mi-take  of  hi-  guide,  did  not  gel  to  the  field  as
early  as  was  planned,  and  Wayne  accidentally  oo-
eiipied  the  ground  assigned  it.  When  victory
-.iiued  imminent  an  unfortunate  mi-hap  turned
the  tide,  and  Sen,  < ireene  again,  with  wonderful
skill,  covered  the  retreat.  The  army  went  into
winter  quarters  at  Valley  Forge,  (ireene  n
while  crossing  to  the  west  bank  of  the  Dalai
to  opjM)se  Cornwallis's  manh  for  its  ftflBWpaflonj
but  he  prudently  retired  on  learning  the  unequal
strength  and  resources  of  the  opposing  forces.
The  defective  organization  and  administration  of
the  quartermaster  -general's  department  had  been,
from  the  beginning  Of  the  war.  a  source  of  embar-
rassment to  the  army:  and,  at  the  earnest  solicita-
tion of  Washington,  Greene  accepted,  in  March,
177s1.  the  office  of  quartermaster-general,  reserving
his  right  to  command  on  the  Mad  of  battle,  <  >n
IS  June  the  British  evacuated  Philadelphia  and
took  up  the  line  of  march  through  the  Jean
Greene  and  Hamilton  urged  giving  them  Imttle,
and  on  28  June  a  general  attack  was  made  on  Clin-
ton's forces  at  Monmouth  Court-Hotise.  (Jen.
Charles  Lee  commanded  the  advanced  corps.  Stir-
ling the  left,  and  (ireene  the  right  wing  of  the
American  forces.  Lee,  who  had  frowned  upon  the
plan  of  opposing  Clinton's  march,  disgraced  him-
self on  the  day  of  battle  by  dilatorv  and  disobedi-
ent conduct.  After  the  battle,  Clinton  continued
his  retreat  to  New  Vork.  and  Washington,  march-
ing northward,  crossed  the  Hudson  and  encamped
in  Westchester  county.  After  the  battle,  (ireene.
taking  no  time  for  rest,  immediately  attended  to
the  numerous  orders  and  dispositions  required  of
him  as  quartermaster-general.

On  the  arrival  of  Count  d'Fstaing  with  the
French  fleet,  it  was  determined  to  make  a  com-
bined attack  on  Newport.  Greene,  from  local  in-
terest, wished  to  take  part  in  the  expedition,  and
in  August  took  up  his  quarters  with  one  division
of  the  army  at  Tiverton.  The  designs  of  the  al-
lies failed  through  a  variety  of  mishaps,  chief
among  which  was  the  disablement  of  the  French
fleet  by  a  tremendous  gale.  Shortly  afterward
Greens  went  to  Philadelphia,  at  the  request  of  the
eoiiunander-in-chief,  to  give  information  of  the
late  expedition,  and  the  causes  of  its  failure,  to
congress,  and  there  he  was  received  with  distin-
raished  consideration.  The  year  1779  was  inact-
ive and  uneventful,  the  Americans  held  the  line  of
the  Hudson,  and  the  operations  of  the  enemy  were
confined  to  bunting  defenceless  towns  on  the
coasts  of  Connecticut  and  Virginia  Greene  found
:>i. umlaut  labor  in  his  difficult  and  annoying  duties
as  quartermaster-general.  The  delays  of  congress
in  providing  for  a  systematic  method  of  raising
supplies  Banged  the  greatest  annoyance.  Tin-
winter  of  1780  was  one  of  great  suffering  to  the
Americans  for  the  want  of  PVOpST  shelter  and  lack
of  food.  A  general  defection  of  the  troops  was
threatened,  and  Knyphausen,  learning  of  it.  ami
hoping  to  deal  a  decisive  Mow,  hastened  from  Staten
Island,  and  on  7  .Inly,  1780,  took  possession  of
Klizabethtown,  and  burned  the  village  of  Connec-
ticut Farms,  but  was  driven  back  from  Springfield
to  the  const,  where  he  tarried  until  Clinton's  ar-
rival from  the  south. Washington  had  proceeded

northward  with  his  main  body,  leafing  Greene,

with  Maxwell's  and  Stark's  brigades,  Lee's  corps.


7/52


GREENE


GREENE


and  the  militia,  to  cover  the  country  and  the  pub*

res. Clinton  attacked  Otoono  at  SpringaeM

on  38  June,  i?*<>;  hut  Greene  bald  him  at  bay  at

the  Rah  way  bridges,  and.  gradually  contracting
his  front,  which  had  been  lengthened  to  cover  the
mountain-passes,  secured  a  strong  position  hack  of
the  town,  and  there  awaited  another  attack.  Clin-
ton's forces,  after  setting  fire  to  the  town,  retreat-
ed, and  did  not  halt  until  they  had  reached  Staten
Island.  Greene  and  his  officers  were  thanked  in
general  orders.  On  17  Sept.,  Washington  set  out
for  Hartford,  for  a  conference  with  Rochambeau,
leaving  Greene  in  command  of  the  army.  The
Americans  moved  forward  to  Tappan  on  the  19th,
and  late  in  the  evening  of  the  25th  Greene  was  ap-
prised, in  a  few  hurried  lines  from  Hamilton,  of
Arnold's  treason.  The  captive  Andre  arrived  at
Tappan  under  close  guard  on  28  Sept.,  and  the  fol-
lowing day  a  board  of  inquiry,  with  Greene  as
S resident,  was  convened  for  his  trial.  With  tears
reene  signed  the  decree  of  the  court  condemning
the  young  officer  to  death.  Clinton  despatched
three  commissioners  to  argue  Andre's  case,  and
Greene  was  sent  by  Washington  to  confer  with
them  ;  but  their  efforts  were  unavailing.  It  has  been
asserted,  but  not  confirmed,  that  Greene  cast  a  de-
ciding vote  in  the  council  against  granting  Andre's
prayer  to  be  shot  instead  of  hanged.  He  held  that
Andre,  if  punished  at  all,  should  receive  the  pun-
ishment meted  to  spies  according  to  the  laws  of
war.  In  August,  1780,  Gen.  Greene,  annoyed  by
the  inefficiency  of  congress  in  providing  supplies,
and  rightly  suspecting  an  intention  on  its  part  of
interfering  with  him  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties
as  quartermaster  -  general,  resigned  that  office.
Washington's  enemies  in  congress  chose  to  con-
sider this  action  as  a  mark  of  disrespect  for  that
body,  and  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  drive  him
from  the  army.  The  post  at  West  Point,  left  va-
cant by  Arnold's  treason,  was  confided  to  Greene,
who  assumed  the  command  on  8  Oct.,  1780.
Gates's  failure  in  the  southern  campaign  com-
pelled his  recall  in  August,  and  by  common  con-
sent Greene  was  looked  upon  as  the  fittest  man  to
retrieve  the  fortunes  of  the  southern  army.  Wash-
ington, empowered  by  congress,  wrote  on  14  Oct.,
asking  Greene  to  take  Gates's  late  command.  The
task  he  found  before  him  on  taking  command  at
Charlotte,  2  Dec,  1780,  was  formidable  enough
to  daunt  the  boldest  spirit.  In  front  of  him  was
an  army  of  3,224  men,  abundantly  clothed  and  fed,
well  disciplined,  elated  with  victory,  and  led  by  an
able  general.  To  oppose  this  force,  he  had  an
army  of  2,307  men,  of  whom  1,482  were  present
and  fit  for  duty,  547  were  absent  on  command,  and
128  were  detached  on  extra  service,  half  fed,  scan-
tily clothed,  cast  down  by  defeat,  and  many  of
them  defiant  of  all  discipline.  Furthermore,  the
country  was  infested  with  Tories.  Recognizing
the  impossibility  of  facing  Cornwallis  with  such
inferior  numbers,  Greene  resolved  to  divide  his
forces,  by  which  means  he  might  not  only  secure
an  abundant  supply  of  food,  but  could  keep  the
enemy  within  narrower  bounds,  cut  them  off  from
the  supplies  of  the  upper  country,  revive  the  droop-
ing spirits  of  the  inhabitants,  threaten  the  posts
and  communications  of  the  enemy,  and  compel
him  to  suspend  his  threatened  invasion  of  North
Carolina.  .Morgan  was  detached  with  the  famous
Maryland  brigade,  and  Col.  Washington's  regiment
of  light  dragoons,  to  take  up  a  position  near  the  con-
fluence of  the  Pacolet  and  Broad  rivers,  in  the
hope  of  threatening  his  adversary's  left  flank.
With  the  other  division,  Greene,  after  a  laborious
march  through  a  barren  country,  took  post  at


Hick's  creek  on  the  Pedee,  near  the  South  Caro-
lina line.  Tarleton,  who  was  hastening  forward
from  the  main  army,  meditating  a  decisive  blow
at  his  despised  opponent-,  attacked  Morgan  at  the
Cowpens,  on  17  Jan.,  1781.  and,  after  a  hard-fought
battle,  was  utterly  routed,  losing  over  :{(M»  men
killed  and  wounded,  with  about  500  prisoners,  out
of  a  total  force  of  1.100.  <  'ornwallis  was  infuriated
by  this  disaster,  and,  ridding  himself  of  his  heavy
luggage  and  whatever  might  impede  his  progress,
at  once  set  out  in  active  pursuit  of  Morgan.  In  a
most  brilliant  march  Greene  effected  a  junction  of
the  two  divisions  of  his  army  at  Guilford  Court-
House  on  9  Feb.,  1781.  He  had  expected  here  to
meet  re-enforcements  from  Virginia,  but,  as  they
had  not  yet  arrived,  he  thought  it  best  to  retreat
toward  them  and  put  the  broad  stream  of  the  Dan
between  himself  and  the  enemy.  By  practising
every  expedient  his  fertile  mind  could  devise,  he
succeeded  in  getting  across  the  river,  without  loss
of  men,  baggage,  or  stores.  Cornwallis,  who  had
been  close  upon  his  heels  for  more  than  200  miles,
finding  his  troops  fatigued  and  dispirited  by  their
fruitless  march,  prudently  retired  to  Hillsbor-
ough. Presently  Greene  received  his  re-enforce-
ment, and  thereupon,  crossing  the  Dan,  came  to
battle  with  Cornwallis  at  Guilford  Court-House,
15  March.  Although  this  battle  was  a  tactical
success  for  the  British,  the  Americans  nevertheless
gained  a  decisive  strategic  advantage,  for  the  ene-
my, being  too  much  shattered  to  continue  the  con-
test, retired  to  Wilmington,  from  which  point  he
moved  into  Virginia  to  effect  a  junction  with  the
forces  of  Gen.  Phillips.  Greene  immediately  turned
his  face  southward,  leaving  Cornwallis  to  proceed
unmolested  into  Virginia.  Greene's  reasons  for
this  move  were  given  to  Washington  in  a  letter  on
29  March,  as  follows :  '•  I  am  determined  to  carry
the  war  immediately  into  South  Carolina.  The
enemy  will  be  obliged  to  follow  us,  or  give  up  the
posts  in  that  state."  If  the  former  took  place,  it
would  take  the  war  out  of  the  devastated  state  of
North  Carolina,  and  give  the  inhabitants  time  to
recuperate ;  and,  in  the  event  of  leaving  the  posts
in  South  Carolina  to  fall,  the  enemy  would  lose
far  more  than  they  could  gain  in  Virginia.

The  most  important  strategic  post  in  South  Caro-
lina was  Camden,  which  stood  at  the  intersection
of  the  principal  roads  leading  to  the  north  and
west  with  those  leading  down  to  the  seaboard.  On
20  April  the  American  army  established  itself  in  a
strong  position  at  Hobkirk's  Hill,  near  Camden,
and  on  the  25th  it  was  assaulted  there  by  the
British  under  Lord  Rawdon.  This  was  exactly  the
move  for  which  Greene  had  been  preparing.  The
assault  ought  to  have  resulted  in  the  total  ruin  of
the  British  army  ;  but,  through  an  accidental  mis-
understanding of  orders,  Greene's  very  best  men  in
the  Maryland  brigade  behaved  badly,  and  he  was
forced  to  abandon  his  position.  The  defeat,  how-
ever, did  not  prevent  his  reaping,  as  he  invariably
did.  all  the  fruits  of  victory.  He  had  already  sent
Marion  and  Lee  to  take  Fort  Watson,  and  thereby
cut  Rawdon 's  communications  with  the  coast.  This
operation,  admirably  planned  and  brilliantly  suc-
cessful, obliged  Rawdon  to  abandon  Camden  and
fall  back  toward  Charleston,  and  from  this  time
Greene  had  the  game  entirely  in  his  own  hands.
During  May  and  June  he  reconquered  all  the  back
country  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  capturing
I'.irt  Bfotte,  Fort  Granby.  Orangeburg,  and  Au-
gusta, with  all  their  garrisons.  After  a  sanguinary
siege  of  twenty-eight  days,  he  forced  the  British  to
evacuate  Fort  Ninety-Six.  and  thus  give  up  their
last  hold  upon  the  interior.  #


98a


Greene's  army  had  now  l»een  incessantly  in  mo-
tion for  seven  i tha. Altar  ■  real  of  hIh.ui  -i\

ts  in  it  secure  position  on  the  high  hill-  of
Santee,  Ik-  met  the  British  army,  in  tin-  coiiiiiiiiihI
of  which  Kawtlon  had  I*  eded  I »y  Stuart,

in  it  decisive  action  at  ISutaw  Spring!.  In  the
morning  the  British  wire  driven  oil  t hi-  held  by  a
■aparb  charge  upon  their  left  Bank;  but,  aft.
treeting  some  distance  In  dieorder,  they  rallied  in
position,  protected  by  a  brick  house  ami
palisaded  garden,  and  succeeded  in  remaining  there
during  the  afternoon,  but  only  because  Qreene  de-

■  I  from  further  attach  until  the  oool  of  the

evening.  For  thus  holding  their  second  uusjUon
a  few  hours,  albeit  OB  sufferance,  the  British  ab-
surdly claimed  a  victory,  ami  the  error  has  bOBB
rapaatad  Of  American  writers  who  ought  to  know
r.  At  nightfall  the  British  retreate.l.  a-
i\v  they  inu^t,  ami  hi<  now  renewed  liis
attack,  The  enemy  were  cha-cd  nearly  thirty  mflw
by  Marion  ami  Lee,  ami  there  was  a  wholesale  cap-
ture of  prisoners,  of  the  '.»,:!(M)  men  with  whom
Stuart  bad  gone  into  the  tattle,  scarcely  more  than
l.oon  reached  Charleston,  where  they  remained  for
the  next  fourteen  months,  shut  up  under  the  shel-
ter of  their  fleet.  The  tattle  of  Eutaw  Springs
was  a  decisive  and  final  victory  for  the  American-
in  Booth  Carolina.

Congress  testified  its  appreciation  of  (Jreene's
brilliant  conduct  by  a  gold  medal  and  a  vote  of
thanks.  Little  more  was  done  till  the  next  July,
when  Savannah  was  taken  by  Wayne.  On  14  I»ec,
I  188,  Qreene  marched  into  Charleston  at  the  head
of  his  army,  and  the  next  summer,  when  the  army
was  disbanded,  he  journeyed  homeward,  stopping
at  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  greeted  by  enthusi-
astic crowds  and  treated  with  high  consideration
by  the  congress  that  had  come  so  near  depriving
the  country  of  his  services.  In  the  autumn  of
1986  he  removed  to  a  plantation  at  Mul tarry  Grove,
which  had  bean  presented  to  him  by  the  state  of
Georgia.  Although  his  fortune  was  impaired  by
the  war.  and  he  was  compelled  to  bear  a  heavy
pecuniary  responsibility  incurred  through  the  dis-
honesty of  sjb  a rtn v  contractor  for  whom  he  had
become  security  while  quartermaster-general,  his
life  00  his  plantation  was  very  happy  in  the  society
Of  his  charming  wifeand  genial  friends.  His  deal  h.
at  the  age  of  forty-four,  was  caused  by  sunstroke.
In  a  speech  lxfore  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.
..uider  Hamilton  said  that  Greene's  qualifica-
tions for  statesmanship  were  not  less  remarkable
than  his  military  ability,  which  was  of  the  highest
order.  Hi-  series  <,f  campaigns  from  Decemljer,
1780,  to  September,  i?si.  will  bear  comparison
with  the  best  work  of  Turenne  or  Wellington.
What  he  might  have  done  on  a  greater  scale  and
with  more  ample  resources,  it  is.  of  course,  impos-
sible to  say  :  but  the  intellectual  qualities  that  he
showed  were  precisely  those  that  have  won  distinc-
tion for  the  foremost  strategists  of  modern  time-.
It  would  be  difficult  to  praise  ton  highly  thesu|»erb
manu'uvring  that  drew  Cornwallis  200  miles  from
his  base,  forced  h  tattle  on  him  at  Guilford  under
such  circumstances  that  victory  proved  hardly  less
fatal  to  him  than  defeat,  and  thus  turned  him  o(T
into  Virginia,  leaving  (Jreene's  hands  free  to  drive
Itawdon  from  Camden  and  reconquer  South  Caro-
lina. Congress  voted  that  a  monument  to  Greene
be  raised  at  the  scat  of  government :  but  more
than  ninety  years  elapsed  before  the  resolve  was
fulfilled  by  placing  an  equestrian  statue,  from  the
hand  of  Henry  Kirke  Brown,  in  Washington.  A
monument,  dedicated  to  OreOM  and  Pulaski  joint-
ly, stands'  in  a  public  square  in  Savannah.  Greene
vol.  ii.— 48


married,  20  Julv,  1774.  Mi--  Catherine  Littlefield,
niece  of  the  wife  of  the  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
the  Catherine  Kay  of  Franklin's  letters,  and  bl  h<  r
he  had  two  -on- and  three  daughters.  The  authori-
tative life  of  the  great  general  i-  by  hi-  grand-on,

a  a-linigtou Grw
York,  1ko7-'71i. The  -ketch  previoualy  pobUahad

by  the  same  author  in  S|mrk-'s  "  Library  of  Ameri-
can Biography  "  wascompiled  from  printc*!  sOU
not from original documents. 'I  In-  oontroi
U-t ween  (ieoiL'e  Bancroft ami I  <-ene,

occasioned  by  some  remarks  in  Bancroft's  history,
was  carried  on  in  the  page*  of  the  "  North  Ameri-
can Review  "and  the  "  Historical  Magazine."  The
letters  connected  with  this  controversy  are  i>itl»-
li-lied  in  the  second  volume  of  Greene's  life,  which
also  contains  numerous  extract-  from  the  general's
private  corresiHindeiice.  The  addresses  on  the  pres-
entation Of the Statue of (Jell. Orcein-  Were pld>-

lished  by  the  government  at  Wa-hingtoii  in  1*70,
in  a  pamphlet  of  eight  J»ages.  A  selection  from
his  despatches  relating  to  tlie  southern  campaign
is  preserved  in  two  folio  volumes  in  the  -tate  de-
partment. Some  of  his  letters  may  In-  found  in
Force's  "Archives."  and  others  in  Sparks's  ••  Corre-
s|M>ndenceof  the  American  Bevolutioii  "  ;  but  the
bulk  nf  his  correspondence  still  remains  in  maim*
script.  Mr.  Greene's  intention,  announced  in
1*7<i,  of  publishing  all  his  grandfather's  papers  in
a  work  of  several  volumes,  was  never  carried  out. —
His  grandson,  George  Washington,  author,  b.  in
Fast  Greenwich.  K.  I.,  8  April,  1811;  d.  there.  |
Feb.,  1868,  entered  Brown  university,  but  left  be-
fore graduation  on  account  of  failing  health.  From
1890  till  1H47  he  resided  in  Europe,  and  in  1K17  he
was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  noma.  On  his  re-
turn to  this  country  in  1X4X  he  was  ap|>ointed  pro-
fessor of  modern  languages  at  Brown.  In  1852  he
removed  to  New  York,  and  devoted  himself  to
teaching,  and  writing  historical  and  other  articles
for  periodicals.  In  1888  he  edited  Addison's  works,
with  copious  notes  (6  vols..  New  York).  He  took
up  his  residence  at  his  native  place  in  1805,  and
soon  afterward  was  chosen  to  represent  the  town
in  the  legi-lature.  He  made  speeches  in  1867  and
1809  on  the  ratification  of  the  14th  and  18th
amendments  to  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  In  1872  he  was  chosen  professor  of  Ameri-
can history  at  Cornell.  His  published  works  in-
clude, besides  two  text-books  of  botany,  one  of
French  grammar,  and  several  addressee;  ••  Histori-
cal Studies"  (New  York,  1850);  "History  and
Geography  of  the  Middle  Ages"  (1851);  «B»»»
graphical  Studies"  (I860) :  "Historical  Yiew  of  the
American  Revolution  "(Boston,  1865);  "Nathanael
On-eiie:  an  Fxamination  of  the  Ninth  Volume  of
Brancroft's  History  "  (1886);  a  life ol  Gen.  Nathan-
ael Greene  in  Sjuirks's  "  American  Biography."  and
a  more  extended  one.  published  separately  ('A  vols..
New  York,  1867-'71»:  "The  Barman  Flement  in
the  War  of  American  Independence  "  1 1*7*0  :  and
a  "  Short  EfiseOty  Of  Rhode  Island"  i  Providence.
1X77).— Nathanael's  nephew.  Albert  Collins.  I
senator,  b.  in  Fast  Greenwich.  R.  I..  15  April,  17!»1  ;
d.  in  Providence.  8  Jan.,  1868,  was  the  son  Of
Perry  Qreesa*  He  received  an  academic  educa-
tion, and  then  studied  law  in  New  York  citv.
where  he  was  admitted  to  the  tar.  Subsequently
he  returned  to  Rhode  Island,  and  then'  pra<ti-<d
his  profession.  In  1815  he  was  elected  to  the  lower
branch  of  the  state  legislature,  in  the  year  follow-
ing was  chosen  brigadier-general  of  the  militia,  and
later  major-general.  He  was  again  elected  to  the
legislature,  and  held  office  from  1822  till  1X25,  ta-
j>caker  during  the  last  year. From  1825  till


7W


GREENE


GREENE


1848  ho  was  attorney-general  of  Rhode  Island,  then
f.ir  two  years  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  when
ho  was  elected  as  a  Whip  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  wr-
ing bom  1  Dec,  1*45,  till  8  March.  1861.  Subse-
quently he  served  for  a  single  term  in  each  branch
of  the legislature,  and  finally  retired  in  1S."»7.

GREEN  K,  Nathaniel,  editor,  b.  in  Boscawen,
N.  II.,  80  May,  1797;  d.  in  Bottom,  Mass..  'Ji»  Nov..
18?7.  He  was  left  early  in  life  dependent  upon  his
own  resources,  and  in  1809  became  an  apprentice
in  the  office  of  the  "New  Hampshire  Patriot."
Th ice  years  later  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Concord
Gazette,"  and  in  1814  removed  to  Portsmouth.
where  he  had  charge  of  the  "New  Hampshire
Gazette."  After  this  he  settled  in  Haverhill,  and
for  two  years  managed  the  "  Haverhill  Gazette."
In  May,  1817,  he  founded  and  edited  the  "  E— ill
Patriot,"  with  which  journal  he  remained  con-
nected until  1821.  when  he  was  invited  to  Boston,
and  there  established  the  "  Boston  Statesman,"
which  first  appeared  as  a  semi-weekly  and  then
became  the  foremost  daily  Democratic  journal
of  the  state.  He  was  postmaster  of  Boston  in
1829-40,  and  again  in  1845-'9.  From  1849  till
1861  he  resided  in  Paris,  and  on  his  return  settled
in  Boston.  He  contributed  more  than  two  hun-
dred poems  to  various  Boston  journals,  which  ap-
peared over  the  pen-name  of  "Boscawen,"  and  he
published  a  translation  of  G.  Sforzosi's  "  History*
of  Italy "  (New  York,  1836)  ;  "  Tales  from  the
German  "  (Boston,  1837) ;  "  Tales  from  the  German,
Italian,  and  French"  (1843);  and  "  Improvisations
and  Translations"  (1852).— His  brother,  Charles
Gordon,  journalist,  b.  in  Boscawen,  N.  II.,  1  July,
1804;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  Sept.,  1886,  was  sent
to  the  Bradford  academy  by  Nathaniel,  in  whose
care  he  was  placed  on  the  death  of  his  father  in
1812.  Subsequently  he  entered  his  brother's  office
in  Haverhill,  and,  following  him  to  Boston,  became
his  assistant  on  the  "Statesman."  In  1825  he
managed  and  for  a  time  edited  the  "  Free  Press "
in  Taunton,  Mass.,  and  after  publishing  the  "  Bos-
ton Spectator"  in  1826,  removed  in  1827  to  Phila-
delphia, where,  with  James  A.  Jones,  he  bought
the  "  National  Palladium,"  the  first  daily  news-
paper in  Pennsylvania,  to  advocate  the  candidacy  of
Andrew  Jackson.  A  year  later  he  became  connected
with  the  "United  States  Telegraph  "  in  Washing-
ton, and  in  1829  he  returned  to  Boston,  succeeding
his  brother  as  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  "  Boston
Statesman."  He  founded,  in  November,  1831,  the
"  Boston  Morning  Post,"  which  he  conducted  until
he  sold  it  in  1875.  Mr.  Greene  was  on  several  occa-
sions a  Democratic  candidate  for  office,  at  one  time  a
member  of  the  state  legislature,  and  naval  officer  of
the  port  of  Boston  for  two  terms,  having  been  ap-
pointed in  1853  by  Franklin  Pierce,  and  reappoint-
ed by  James  Buchanan  in  1857. — Nathaniel's  son,
William  Batchelder,  author,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  4  April,  1819;  d.  in  Weston-Super-Mare,
England,  30  May,  1878,  was  appointed  to  the
U.  S.  military  academy  from  Massachusetts  in
1835,  but  left  before  graduation.  He  was  made  2d
lieutenant  in  the  7th  infantry  in  July,  1839,  and,
after  serving  through  the  Florida  war,  resigned  in
November,  1841.  Subsequently  he  was  connected
with  the  Brook  Farm  movement,  after  which  he
studied  theology,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Har-
vard divinity-school  in  1845.  He  then  became  a
Unitarian  clergyman,  and  for  several  years  was
settled  in  Brookfield,  Mass.  Later  he  went  to
Europe,  but  returned  in  1861.  Although  a  Demo-
crat, he  was  a  strong  abolitionist,  and  at  the  be-
f inning  of  the  civil  war  became  colonel  of  the
4th Massachusetts infantry,  afterward  the 1st


Massachusetts  heavy  artillery.  In  1862,  while
stationed  with  his  regiment  in  Fairfax.  \'a..  he
was  recalled  and  assigned  by  Gen.  McClellan  to
the  command  of  an  artillery  brigade  in  GejD.
Whipple's  division.  He  resigned  his  commission
in  Octolier,  1H62.  and  returned  to  Boston.  Mr.
Greene  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  con-
stitutional convention  in  1853,  was  active  in  all
reform  movements,  and  was  specially  zealous  for
perfect  freedom  of  speech.  lit  was  a  Ane  mathema-
tician, and  was  versed  in  Heb.rw  literature  and  in
Hebrew  and  Egyptian  antiquities.  Republished
numerous  pamphlets,  including  "Sovereignty  of
the  People  (Boston,  1863);  "Explanations  of  the
Theory  of  the  Calculus"  (1870);  "Transcendent-
alism" (1870);  and  "The  Facts  of  Consciousness
and  the  Philosophy  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  "
(1871);  and  in  book-form, "  Remarks  on  the  Science
of  Historv,  followed  by  an  a  priori  Autobiogra-
phy" (1849);  "Theory  of  the  Calculus"  (1870);
and  "  Socialistic,  Communistic,  Mutualistic,  and  Fi-
nancial Fragments  "  (1875).

1. 1: 1  I  Mi.  Samuel  Stillman,  educator,  b.  in
Belchertown,  Mass.,  3  May,  1810;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  24  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown,
with  the  valedictory,  in  1837.  After  teaching  in
the  Baptist  academy  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  and  in
the  English  and  grammar  high-schools  of  Boston,
he  was  the  first  superintendent  of  public  schools
in  Springfield,  Mass.,  and  the  first  agent  of  the
Massachusetts  board  of  education.  He  was  also
superintendent  of  public  schools  in  Providence,
R.  I.  In  1851  he  was  called  to  the  professorship
of  didactics  in  Brown,  and  held  this  place  untd
1855,  when  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  civil  engineering.  He  remained  in  this
chair  until  his  death.  He  was,  at  various  times,
president  of  the  Rhode  Island  institute  of  instruc-
tion, of  the  American  institute  of  instruction,  and
of  the  National  teachers'  association.  He  was  ac-
tive in  the  affairs  of  the  Baptist  denomination  in
Rhode  Island.  Prof.  Greene  was  the  author  of
"Analysis of  the  English  Language "(1848);  "First
Lessons  in  Grammar";  "Elements  of  English
Grammar"  (1852);  "English  Grammar"  (1867);
and  "  Introduction  to  English  Grammar  "  (1868). —
His  nephew,  Charles  Warren,  phvsician,  b.  in
Belchertown,  Mass.,  17  Aug.,  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1863,  and  subsequently  studied
medicine  at  Harvard,  Berkshire  medical  college,
and  at  Dartmouth,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1867.
In  July,  1862,  he  entered  the  army,  and  served  for
three  years,  attaining  the  rank  of  captain.  After
his  graduation  in  medicine  he  practised  in  Massa-
chusetts until  1872,  and  since  has  devoted  himself
to  literary  pursuits.  He  has  been  a  large  contribu-
tor to  various  cyclopaedias,  chiefly  in  the  domain  of
natural  science.  Dr.  Greene  has  held  the  office  of
principal  editor  of  recent,  editions  of  Lippincott's
"Gazetteer "(1879);  Worcester's  "New  School  Dic-
tionary "  (1883) ;  Thomas's  "  Biographical  Diction-
ary "  (1886) ;  and  other  dictionaries,  still  (1887)  un-
published. In  addition  to  the  foregoing  he  wrote
"Animals;  their  Homes  and  Habits'  (Philadelphia,
1886),  and  "  Birds ;  their  Homes  and  Habits  "  (1886).

GREENE,  Theodore  Phinney,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  1  Nov.,  1809;  d.  in
Jaffrey,  N.  II.,  30  Aug.,  1887.  He  was  appoint-
ed midshipman  from  Vermont  in  November,
1826,  and  in  1837  became  lieutenant.  During
the  Mexican  war,  from  1846  till  1848,  he  was
on  the  "Congress,"  having  command  of  the  land
forces  in  Mazatlan  for  six  months,  then  <>n  the
"Cyane."  of  the  home  squadron,  and  in  18
at  the  Boston  navy-yard. He  was  commissioned


<,i:i:i:\H0W


780


commander  in  Sent«mlier,  1855,  and  subsequent  I  v,
until  I h<h».  vai  Hgtithonao Inspector,  after  which
im  hi  th.  ■■•  bland,  Cali-

fornia, until  )sU2.  *  In  Julv, is<'".'.  he  was  made
captain,  and  ghran  command  of  the  *  Santiago  da
Cuba  "and  tin- "Sun  Jacinto." Whik  la  <lmrtr««
<>f  Um  latter.  In-  was  lefl  in  command  of  tin-  i
Gulf  eqondron. Later  be  commanded  the  ••  K
geond, <>;  tin-  w.st  Gulf  squadron,  and  in

the  tr«Mi|.s  while  they  wen?  landing  for
Mobile. In I84WJ  lie  served  mi  < >r< l-

nanoi  duty  in Portsmouth,  N.  II..  and  in 1801

was  siren  command  of  tin-  ■  Powhatan,"  of  Um

Be  squadron. He  reoeiYed  hi*  iwmiml— Imi  as

aonunodore  In  July,  im«;t.  and  had  charge  of  the
Rsnaneola  mivy-yiirti  from  1868 till  1871,  whan  ha
was  retired.  "  In  March,  1878,  ht  b  came  rear-
admiral  "n  the  retired  list.

(.1.-1  KN  E,  W  1111am,  governor  of  Rhode  Island.
b.  in  Warwick,  R.  I..  If  March.  1885;  d.  in  IWi-
denoe,  R.  I..  88  l'«l>..  1758.  Pot  many  years  he
bald  the  office  of  clerk  of  the  oonntj  court  in
Proi  idenoe.  1 1 «-  became  deputy-governor  of  Rhode
Island  in  1 740,  and  was  governor  from  17413  till
1788.  Hi-  eon,  William,  governor  <>f  Rhode
bland,  b.  in  Warwick.  R.  I..  Hi  Aug,  1781 :  d.  than,
N  v..  1808.  Hi-  was  chief  justice  of  the  colony,
and  was  governor  of  the  state  from  1 7  Tm  till  lTsii.
also  for  many  vcars  speaker  of  the  house.— Ray,
eldest  ><>u  of  the  second  William,  senator,  b.  in
Warwick.  R.  I.,  8  Pab-  17»m;  d.  there.  11  Jan..
1  —  * -*.  He  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  1?S4.  and  then
studied  law  in  the  office  of  (ten.  .lames  M.  Yar-
num.  in  Baal  (ireenwich,  R.  I.  Subsequently  he
was  admitted  to  the  Rhode  Island  bar,  ami  began
practice  in  Providence.  He  was  appointed  attor-
ney-general  of  Rhode  Island  in  171M.  succeeding
William  Channing,  and  continued  in  that  office
till  17i»7.  when  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
to  fill  a  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Will-
iam Bradford,  and  served  from  22  Nov.,  1 71>7.  till
7  Dec..  1801.  On  the  completion  of  the  unexpired
term,  Mr.  Greene  was  returned  to  the  senate  for  a
second  term,  but  in  1801  resigned  to  accept  the
otliee  of  ili-t ric-t  judge  of  Rhode  Island.  Tnis  ap-
pointment he  received  fr<>in  John  Adams  as  he
was  alxiiit  retiring  from  the  presidential  chair:
but  some  informality  connected  with  the  appoint*
inent  was  djaoorered  too  late  t<>  Im-  rectified  by  Mr.
Adams,  and  his  successor  refused  to  eorrect  the
error,  in  consequence  of  which,  Mr.  (ireene  lost
lx>th  hi-  senatorial  and  judicial  ofllces.

GRKKNK.  William Houston,  chemist,  b.  in

Columbia.  Pa..  W>  Dee..  1864  He  was  educated  at
the Philadelphia pobUo  schools  and  at JaJfaWOB

medical  college,  where  be  was  gradnated  in  1878.

For  the  three  following  years  be  was  demonstrator
of  chemistry  at  Jefferson  medical  college,  and  then
siMiit  two  yean  irndring  chemiatrj  in  Adolphe
Wurtz's  laboratory  in  Paris.  On  his  return  in  187!)
he  beanie  demonstrator  of  chemistry  in  the  Uni-
;iv  of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  year  iater  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Central  higli-

■1  in  Philadelphia,  which  ofBoe  he  now  holds.
I>r.  Qreene  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  at
home  and  ahroad.  Besides  the  results  of  invest i-
rjatfrrmi  in  obemistrv, oontrtbnted  to  scientific  jour-
nals, he  has  published a translation of  Wurtz's

incuts  of  Modern  Chemistry"  (Philadelphia.
Medical  Chemistrv"  Lessons  in

Chemiatrj  and  edited  Paul  Bert's  ••  I

Step-  In  Scientific  Knowledge"

QR1  I  Mil,  Richard  Th lore,  lawyer,  b.  in

Philadelphia,  Pa..  80  .Ian.. 1><44. After  sludving

unliridge  grammar-school,  at  Oharlin  prepara-


tory school,  and  at Phillips  Andorer  seademv,  he

•  I  Harvard,  and  in  1870  Wat ||
graduate. During  his  college  BOWM  hf  won  mora

than  anv  classinate  or  contem|M.rarv.  1
I^Tn  till  1mT:j  he  was  prinoipaJ  of  the  male  depart-
ment of  the"  Institute  for  colored  Tooth  "  in  Phila-
delphia, ami  for  a  year  filled  a  similar  office  in  the
preparatory  hit'h-scho.,1  in  Washington.  D.C  lb-
was  then  called  to  Jill  the  chair  of  metaphysics  and
logic  in  the  Iniversity  of  Saith  Carolina,  ami  re-
mained there  until  1*77.  also  assisting  in  the  de-
partments of  Latin  and  (ireek.  and  teaching  classes
in  international  law  and  the  COnatitnUoO  of  the
I'nited  States.  In  187."i  he  was  appointed  a  mem-
ber of  the  Ik. aid  of  health  of  Columbia.  S.  &,  and

in  1870  a  member  of  the  state  oonimlseinii  b

organize  the  common  schools  of  Booth  Carolina.
Meanwhile  he  was  graduated  from  the  law  depart •
inent  of  the  Iniversity  of  South  Carolina  in  It
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Washington,  D.
('..  in  April.  1877.  where  until  18X2  he  was  dean
Of  the  law  facultv  in  Howard  university.  Mr.
Greener  has  recently  made  New  York  his  residence,
and  in  October,  1885,  he  was  appointed  examiner
in  the  municipal  civil  service  of  New  York.  Prof.
Greener  was  active  as  a  Republican  campaign
orator  from  187<i  till  1884.  He  received  the  de-
cree of  LL.  I),  from  the  College  of  Lilxria  in  Mon-
rovia in  1882.  ami  was  elected  a  member  of  the
American  philological  association  in  1875.  He  has
been  a  large  contributor  to  journals  and  reviews
and  also  to  various  works  of  reference,  and  has  de-
livered numerous  addresses,  including  his  inaugu-
ral address,  in  the  Booth  Carolina  university.  01
"Charles  Sunnier,  the  Idealist.  Statesman,  and
Scholar"  (June,  1874):  "  Eulogy  on  the  Life  and
N  nrieet  <>f  William  Lloyd  (iarrison  "  (.June.  1879);
'•Socrates  as  a  Teacher  (April,  1880);  "The  In-
tellectual Position  of  the  Negro"  (July,  1880);
"Free  Siieeeh  in  Ireland"  (October,  1888)  i  ••Ben-
jamin nonneker.  the  Negro  Astronomer"  (Feb-
ruary,  18>2):  "Hcnrv  Highland  Garnet"  (Mav,
1888');  and  "An  African  Roscius"  (June.  1882).

GREENFIELD.  Elizabeth  Taylor,  singer,  b.
in  Natchez.  Miss.,  in  1808;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
in  187<i.  She  was  of  African  descent  and  was  born
a  slave,  but  early  gave  great  promise  as  a  singer,
and  was  freed  by  her  mist  i  ess,  Mrs.  Greenfield,  who
pave  her  a  liberal  education.  She  sang  with  sin  -
.  not  only  in  this  country,  but  in  England,
where  the  Duchess  of  Sutherland  and  the  Duchess
Of  Argyll  became  her  patrons.  She  was  known  as
the  "  Black  Swan."

GREKNHOW.  Rnliert. scholar,  b.  in  Richmond.
Va,,  in  1800;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Oil.,  in  l»
Shi  father.  Robert,  was  at  one  time  minor  of  Rich-
mond. His  mother  perished  at  the  burning  of  the
Richmond  theatre  in  1811,  and  the  son  lardy
escaped  with  his  life.  Ha WUS graduated  at  William
and  Mary  in  1810,  and  finished  his  education  in
New  York,  ■tndying  medicine  with  Dr.  David
Hosack  and  Dr.  John  W.  Francis,  and  taking  his
degree  at  tin-  CaHogii  of  phyakianaand  nrgaoni  in

1881.  He  then  visited  Kurope.  where  he  nut  Bvn  n
tad  other  distinguished  men.  and  on  his  return
delivered  lectures  on  chemistry  hefon-  the  New
York  literary  and  philosophical  society.  He  be-
came translator  to  the  <le|>art inent  of  state  in
Washington  in  1888,  and  in  ih.io  remored  ro  Cali-
fornia.  when-  in  \Xhi  he  was  associate  law-ap-nt
to  the  l'.  S.  land  commission.  He  published  a
■•  History  <>f  Tripoli"  (lsXt).  and  ■  ••  Report  on  the
very  of  the  Northwest  Coast  of  North  Amer-
ica." prepared  by  order  of  Oongreai  in  IS
York,  ls40).  and  afterward  enlarged  into  a"llis-


r.v;


GREEN LEAF


GREENOUGH


(..rv  of  Oregon  and  California,"  a  work  of  high
authority  (1840).  Dr.  Groenhow  also  i.  a<l  before
tin'  New  York  historical  society  in  1848  ;i  paper  in
relation  to  the  supposed  missionary  btbonol  Ai<li-
bishop  l'Viii'lon  (since  found  to  have  l>cen  those  of
a  brother)  wrong  the  [roqaohi  of  New  York.

GREEN  LEAF,  Benjamin,  educator.  I>.  in
Haverhill,  Mass..  2.*)  Sept,  17*6;  d.  in  Bradford,
Ma-..  N  Oct.,  1804.  lie  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1818,  was  principal  of  Bradford  academy
in  181  I  -od.  and  of  Bradford  teachers'  seminary  in
1839-'48.  He  represented  Bradford  in  the  legisla-
ture in  1837-9.  Mr.  Greenleaf  published  a  series
of  mathematical  text-lx>oks,  the  first  of  which  was
his  "  National  Arithmetic"  (Boston,  1835).

GREENLEAF,  Ezekicl  Price,  b,  in  Quincv.
Mass.,  22  May,  1790;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass..:!  Dec-..
1886.  He  was  educated  at  Quincv,  and  engaged  in
business  in  Charleston.  S.  ('.,  and  in  Boston,  where
he  failed.  He  then  removed  to  his  father's  farm  in
Quincy.  Inheriting  some  property,  he  invested  it
with  caution,  denying  himself  the  necessaries  of
life  and  living  like  a  hermit.  He  spent  fifty
years  in  Quincy,  but  after  1879  lived  in  Boston.
He  bequeathed  nearly  all  his  estate,  amounting  to
$500,000,  to  Harvard,  with  directions  to  keep  it
apart  from  other  bequests,  as  the  "  Greenleaf  fund" ;
$3,000  of  the  income  is  to  be  divided  yearly  into
scholarships  of  $300  each,  called  the  "  Price  Green-
leaf scholarships,"  and  part  is  to  be  devoted  to  a
special  division  of  the  library,  to  be  known  as  the
"  Greenleaf  department."  In  case  the  regents  of
the  university  fail  to  comply  with  the  conditions,
it  is  to  be  equally  divided  between  the  Homo  for
aged  men  and  the  Children's  hospital  of  Boston.

GREENLEAF,  Moses,  author,  b.  in  Newbury-
port, Mass.,  in  1778;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Me..  20
March,  1834.  Edward,  his  ancestor,  settled  in
Newburyport  in  1635,  and  Moses,  his  father,  was  a
captain  in  the  Revolutionary  arm  v.  He  published
"  Statistical  View  of  the  District  of  Maine  (Boston,
1816),  and  "Survey  of  the  State  of  Maine,"  with  a
map,  the  best  made  up  to  that  time  (Portland,
1829). — His  brother,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  4  Sept.,  1785;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  24  April,  1865,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1814,  and  was  pastor  at  Wells,  Me.,  in  1815-'28.
He  then  took  charge  of  the  Mariner's  church,  Bos-
ton, removed  to  New  York  in  1833,  and  edited  the
"  Sailor's  Magazine."  He  was  also  secretary  of  the
Seamen's  friend  society,  first  in  Boston  and  then
in  New  York,  till  1841.  He  organized  the  Walla-
bout  Presbyterian  church  in  Brooklyn  in  1843,  and
was  its  pastor  till  his  death.  Bowdoin  gave  him
the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1824,  and  Princeton  that  of
D.  D.  in  1863.  Dr.  Greenleaf  published  "  Sketches
of  the  Ecclesiastical  History  of  Maine"  (Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  1821);  "History  of  New  York
Churches "  (New  York,  1846);  and  "Genealogy  of
the  Greenleaf  Family  "  (1854). —  Another  brother,
Simon,  jurist,  b.  in  Newburyport,  5  Dec,  1783;  d.
in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1853,  removed  with
his  father  to  Maine  when  a  child,  and  in  1801
began  the  studv  of  law  in  New  Gloucester,  Me.,
with  Ezekiel  Whitman,  afterward  chief  justice  of
the  state.  In  1806  he  began  practice  in  Standish,
but  in  the  same  year  removed  to  Gray,  where  by
diligent  study  he  laid  the  foundation  of  his  subse-
quent legal  learning.  He  went  to  Portland  in  1818,
and  in  1820,  after  the  admission  of  Maine  to  the
Union,  and  the  establishment  of  a  supreme  court,
he  became  its  reporter,  holding  the  office  till  1832,
when  he  had  reached  the  foremost  rank  in  the
Maine  bar.  He  was  appoint  ad  royal  professor  of
law  in  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1833,  and  in  1846,


on  the  death  of  Judge  Story,  was  transferred  to
the  Dane  professorship.  On  his  resignation  in  1848
he  was  made  professor  emeritus.  During  his  con-
nect ion  with  the  law-school  he  had  the  direction  of
it-  internal  affairs,  and  for  many  months  of  each
year,  during  Judge  Story's  absence  in  Washington,
the  entire  management  and  work  of  instruction
devolved  on  him.  Prof.  Greenleaf  was  for  many
vears  president  of  the  Massachusetts  Bible  society.
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
The  clearness  of  his  style  and  the  correctness  of
his  principles  have  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  of
legal  authors.  His  works  are  "  Origin  and  Princi-
ples of  Freemasonrv"  (Portland,  1890);  "Full
Collection  of  Cases,  Overruled,  Denied,  Doubted,  or
Limited  in  their  Application"  (1821 ;  3d  ed..  by  K.
Hammond,  New  York,  1840,  afterward  expanded
to  3  vols.) ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Supreme
Court  of  Maine,  1820-'31 "  (9  vols.,  Hallowell  and
Portland,  18B2-TO ;  digest,  Portland,  1835 ;  revised
ed.,  8  vols.,  Boston,  1852) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Law
of  Evidence,"  his  greatest  work  (3  vols.,  1842-53  ;
14th  ed.,  with  large  additions  by  Simon  Greenleaf
Croswell,  1883);  "Examination  of  the  Testimony
of  the  Four  Evangelists,  by  the  Rules  of  Evidence
administered  in  Courts  of  Justice,  with  an  Account
of  the  Trial  of  Jesus  "(1840;  London,  1847);  and
an  enlarged  edition  of  William  Cruise's  "  Digest  of
the  Laws  of  England  respecting  Real  Property,"
adapted  to  American  practice  (3  vols.,  1849-'50).
He  also  published  his  inaugural  discourse  on  enter-
ing upon  his  professorship  (Boston,  1834),  and  one
on  the  life  ana  character  of  Joseph  Story  (1845.)

GREENOUGH,  Horatio,  sculptor,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  0  Sept.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass.,  18
Dec,  1852.  His  idea  of  form  was  strongly  marked
in  early  youth,  and  he  manifested  a  striking  me-
chanical aptitude  for  imitating  objects  that  im-
pressed themselves  on  his  mind.  When  he  was
fifteen  years  old,  a  French  sculptor,  Binon,  taught
him  modelling  in  clav,  and  the  rudiments  of  his
art.  Soon  afterward  he  entered  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1825,  and  during  his  career  there
enjoyed  the  advice  of  Washington  Allston.  At  that
time  the  youth  made  the  design  from  which  the
present  Bunker  Hill  monument  was  constructed.
After  completing  his  college  course  Greenough  went
to  Florence,  and  then  to  Rome,  where  he  arrived
in  the  autumn  of  1825.  With  the  exception  of  a
short  sojourn  in  his  native  city  in  1826.  where  he
was  occupied  in  modelling  the  busts  of  many  dis-
tinguished men,  and  a  brief  visit  to  Paris,  for  the
Eurpose  of  modelling  a  bust  of  Lafayette,  he  made
is  permanent  residence  in  Italy,  and  there  pro-
duced most  of  his  historical  and  ideal  compositions.
In  1851  the  sculptor  returned  to  the  United  States,
for  the  purpose  of  placing  a  group  of  four  historical
figures,  entitled  "The  Rescue,  in  Washington.
This  work  was  ordered  by  congress,  and  the  artist
devoted  about  eight  years  to  its  construction.  He
died  suddenly  of  brain  fever.  Greenough  was  an
industrious  artist ;  his  works  are  numerous,  of
extended  scope,  and  "highly  prized.  Amonj:  the
most  important  are  the  colossal  statue  of  Washing-
ton, for  which  congress  voted  an  appropriation  of
$20,000.  It  was  completed  in  1843,  and  now  stands
in  front  of  the  National  capitol.  In  inscribing  his
name  on  this  statue,  Mr.  Greenough.  instead  ol  the
usual  Latin  word  "fecit"  (has  done  it),  wrote
"Horatio  Greenough  faciebat"  (tried  to  do  it).
Edward  Everett  wrote :  "  I  regard  Greenough  s
'  Washington '  as  one  of  the  greatest  works  of
sculpture  of  modern  times.  I  do  not  know  the
work  which  can  justly  be  preferred  to  it,  whether
we  consider  the  purity  of  the  taste,  the  loftiness


Mi


i:\woui  i


of  the  coii,-,|.(k,ii,  Ubi  tmtii  <>f  the  eheraotar,  <t
tii.-  eeouiaoj  "f  an  anatomical  study  end  me-
chanical -kill." Among  Qreenough'l  marble  bu-t-

•In.-*-  of  John Adams. .1  •  >  1 1 1 k  Qulncy Adams.

John  '.>r,  .Iuiik'h  Kcniiiion- C.hi|«t.  Iliiirv

fiit Marshall,  ami  Josiah

Qutngy. Hi- ideal sculptures  include  "  M.dora."

••'I'lir (iuardiaii Angel," •('hauling Chfrubs,"

•hi-  Victrix,"  "Venus  contending  f<>r  tin'
Qolden  Apple,"  "  Lucifer."  ami  "  The  QraCSS."  For
an  extended notice .if his work-, Mt Henry  T.

Tuokermsn'i  "Memorial of  Horatio  Qiwanough"
i  Fork,  1858). Uroenough's  letters  to  Ids  brotb-

it  Henry  have  been  edited  bj  Frances  B.  Greenough

-His  brother,  Henry,  architect,  i>.

in Boston, .Ma—..") <»<t., 1*<>?;  <l.  m  Cambridge,

Mess.,  :n  Oct,  1888,  entered  Harvard  in  1898,  but

Ml  in  his  junior  year,  ami  « 1  i<  1  m»t  receive  hi-  de>
He  studied  painting  and  architec-
tim-al.r..a<l  in  1881-4,  lMl.VVW,  and  1889,  planned
tin-  Camhridgc|H>rt  city  hall,  the  Agassiz  museum,
ami  many  private  houses  in  Cambridge  ami  Boston,
including  those  of  Agassiz,  Gnyot,  ami  Judge  Lor-

ing. In  1S.V2  he  ennui  Intended  the  deeoratton  of

thr  Crv-tal  Palace  in  New  York.  He  published
two  novels,  ••  Krn.st  Carroll "  (Boston,  1886),  ami
"A|K-lles  "(lM(ki),  anil  translated  for  the  "Courier  "
Jules  Sandcau's  -Sacs  et  parehemins." — Another
brother,  Richard  Saltonstall,  sculptor,  b.  in
Jamaica  Plains,  Mass.,  27  April,  1811),  practised
his  art  in  Peris  at  the  beginning  of  his  career,  and
was  particularly  successful  as  a  sculptor  of  portrait

basts.  Retaining  to  the  United  states,  be  lived
for  several  vears  in  Newport,  li.  I.,  during  which
time  he  produced  numerous  works  in  bronze  and
inarhle.  In  HS?4  (ircenough  Ogata  returned  to
Barope,  where  he  has  since  sj»ent  most  of  his  time.
Anions  his  works  are  a  statue  of  Franklin,  placed
in  the  city-hall  square  of  Boston,  the  "  Boy  and
Eagle,"  owned  by  the  Boston  athcmi-um  :  a  "Car-
thegeniaa  Woman":  M Cupid  on  ■  Tortoise":
"Klaine";  "Circe";  and  a  "  Psyche."  which  he
ted  its  a  inointmeiit  t<>  his  wife  in  the  cemetery
at  Koine.  Italy.  His  bu-t  of  Shakesin-are,  founded
on  the  Chandos  portrait,  has  been  highly  praised.
—  Richard  Saltonstall's  wife,  Sarah  Dunn  (Loa>
.  author,  b.  in  Boston,  19  Feb.,  1827;  d.  in
Fran/ensliad,  Austria,  9  Aug.,  1885,  married  Mr.
(ireenough  in  1846.  She  published  "Treason  at
Home,"  a  novel  (1$  vols..  London.  ldB6);  "Ara-
besques." four  stories  of  the  supernatural  (Boston,
1871);  "In  Kxtremis.  a  Story  of  a  Broken  Law"
(1872);  ami  "  Mar v  Magdalene,"  a  poem  (London,
1N.H0;  with  other  "iMK-ms,  Boston,  1HX7).—  Henry's
son.  Francis  Boon,  phvsician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.
24  Dec.  1X57.  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1859.
studied  medicine  in  IM-a  and  Florence.  Italy,  and
took  his  degree  at  Harvard  medical  school  in  1866.
In  1871-5  he  was  an  instructor  there.

QBEBNUP,  Christopher,  governor  of  Ken-
tucky, I),  in  Virginia  in  1750;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky..
M  \pril.  l^ls.  He  served  through  the  Revolution,
attaining  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  at  the  cl«.-e  of
the  war  removed  to  Frankfort.  Ky..  then  the  "dark
and  bloody  ground."  where  he-tinHed  law.  and  prae-
ti-ed  his  profession.  He  was  chosen  to  congress
for  three  successive  terms,  serving  in  1791-7,  WM
mor  of  the  state  iii  lsol  '8,  and  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Madison  ticket  in  1809.

(.Ill  IAN  ILD.  Kinaniiel,  theologian,  b.  near
rick. Md., 18 Jan.. 1811; d. in Lancaster,

I'a..  ji  r>  iiis  father  oonseoreted  hfn  to

the  ministry  when  the  lx»y  was  only  two  years  old.
When  quite  young  he  began  a  private  course  of
study in the  ml theology,  under


it.  r.  at  Frederick,  Md..  end  on  I"

Oct,  1881,  was  licensed  hv  the  Lutheran  Synod  of

land,  at  Cumberland. In  the  same  rear  he

1.,  in  order  to  d<>  mi— ion
work  among  the  nattered  Lutheran-.  He  was
prevailed  on  to  -cttle  at  New  Philadelphia,  Ohio,
where  he  remained  until  tl  -1.  ami  organ-

ized several congregations in the surrounding
country. In 184S he founded the "  Lut !.•
Standard. "  of  which  he  was  editor  for  several  years.

In  lsol  he  lemoTed  to Columbus, Ohio*  when

remained  pa-tor  of  a  small  Knglish  cngregat ion
until 1854 During the latter  year  he  was  called

iston.  Pa,  where  he  remained  until  1hi;7. In
of  I).  I),  was  conferred  on  him  b)

IViiii-vUaiiia  college.  ( iet ly-lmrg. In l*ii7  I
moved  to  Lancaster,  Pa*,  as  poster  Of  Trinitv  Lu-
theran church,  where  he  remained  until  hi-  death.
From  1N«»7  he  was  for  years  a  director  of  the  Lu-
theran theological  scminarv  at  Philadelphia, and  in

i^lo  he  was  elected  prssidanl  of  the  ministerium

of  Pennsylvania,  the  oldest  Lutheran  synod  in
America,  which  ottoshs  held  for  four  vears,  and
then  declined  re-election  on  account  of  old  age  and
failing  health.  For  many  years  he  was  chairman
of the synod's executive committee, examining

committee,  and  frequently  a  delegate  to  the  -

eral  council. In  1878  he  was  president  of  th-
ond  Lutheran diet,  held in  Philadelphia. As  a
preacher.  Dr.  (irceuwald  was  simple,  yet forcible

and  interesting.  His  works  include  "An  Order  of
Family  Prayer"  (Philadelphia,  lH(i7>:  "The  Lu-
theran Reformation "  (1867);  "The  Foreign  Mis-
sion Work  of  Louis  Harms"  (1886):  "Christian
Benevolence,"  ■  sermon  (1870);  "Baptism  of  Chit*
dren"  (1879);  "Meditation-  for  I'a— ion  Week  "
(1873);  "Young  Christian's  Manual  of  Devotion"
(1873);  "Questions  <»n  the  Gospel  for  the  Church
Y.ar"  (Lancaster,  Pa,  1873):  "Questions  on  the
Epistles  for  the  Church  Year "(1874);  "Sprinkling
the  True  Mode  of  Baptism"  (Philadelphia,  1876);
"The  True  Church,  its  Way  of  Justification,  and
it-  Holy  Communion"  (1878);  "Bcmanhan  and
the  Reformation"  (Lancaster,  18S0);  "Jesus  our
Table  Quest"  (Philadelphia,  1883):  and  "Medita-
tion for  the  Closet"  (Lancaster.  18881  For  chil-
dren he  published  "The  Child's  Book."  "The  Lit-
tle Children's  Book."  and  "Sacred  Dimes."
0BBBHW00A  Francis  William  Pitt,  eh*

{yinan.  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  5  Feb.,  17!»7;  d.  in
iorchester,  Mass.,  8  Aug..  1848.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1814,  studied  theology  in  Cam-
bridge  under  Dr. Henry  Ware,  the  elder,  and  on

81  <><-t..  1818.  was  ordained  j»astor  of  the  New
South  church,  Boston.  He  re-igned  iii  1896  on  ac-
count of  failing  health,  and.  after  a  year  in  Eu-
rope, went  to  Baltimore,  where  he  edited  the  "  I'ni-

tarian  Miscellany"  for  two  years. He  returned  to

Boston  in  i*-4.  ami  en  '">  Aug.  became  Dr.  I

man's  colleague  at  King's  chapel,  of  which  he  was
sole  pastor  from  1S-J7  till  his  death.  He  \  lotted
Cuba  for  his  health  in  1887, and  in  that  year  and
the  following  was  associate  editor  of  the  "Chris-
tian Kxamiiicr."  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  Of
D.  I),  in  lXtlt.  Dr.  (Jreeiiwooil  was  fond  of  OOOOhol*
ogy  and  Ixitany.  and  was  an  early  member  of  the
Beaton  SOCiety  <>f  natural  history,  to  whose  journal
he  was  a  contributor.  His  writing-  are  character-
ized by  go.nl  taste.  pootlo  imagination,  and  grac**-

ful  style. They  include  ••  Lives  of  the  Aim.-i
(Boston,  1887):  " History  of  King's  Chapel "(18
••  Sermons  t..  t  !hfldren  "  1 1841 1 :  "  Sermons  of  Con-
solation n  (1848) ;  "Sermons  on  Various  Subjects,"

edited  with  a  memoir  bv  Hon.  Samuel  A.  Rttot
(8 \>>l-.. 1844); and "Miscellaneous Writings,"


GREENWOOD


GREGG


edited  by  his  son  (1846).  He  aleo  rorised  tin-  Kind's
chapel  liturgy  (1*27).  and  published  a  collection  <>f
hymns  (1880;  57th  ei,  1888}

GREENWOOD,  Isaac,  math. mat i.-ian.  t>.  ?  Mav.
MOB;  .1.  in  Ghariestown,  Matt,  22  Oct,  1745. Eta

was  graduated  at  Harvani  in  1721.  and  on  It  Fek.
1788,  mi  oho—a  to  fill  the  chair  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy  founded  there  by  Thomas
Mollis  of  London,  thus  being  the  first  man  in  this
country  to  hold  such  a  professorship.  He  con-
tinued in  office  till  18  Julv,  1738,  and  published  an
arithmetic  (1729),  and  a  philosophical  discourse  on
the  death  of  Thomas  Hoilis  (1731).

GREENWOOD,  James  M.,  educator,  b.  near
Springfield.  111.,  15  Nov.,  1836.  His  early  educa-
tion was  obtained  in  the  common  schools,  lie  re-
moved with  his  parents,  when  he  was  sixteen  years
old,  to  Adair  county.  Mo.,  where  he  worked  on  a
farm,  studied  by  himself,  and  began  to  teach,  also
spending  a  year  in  Canton  seminary.  In  1867-'74
he  taught  mat  hematics,  astronomy,  and  logic  in
the  normal  school  at  Kirksville,  Mo.,  and  in  the
latter  year  became  superintendent  of  schools  in
Kansas  City,  Mo.,  where  he  still  remains  (1887).
He  has  given  much  attention  to  improved  methods
of  instruct  ion,  and.  besides  papers  and  articles  on
education,  has  published  "  Principles  of  Education
Practically  Applied"  (New  York,  1887).

GREENWOOD,  Miles,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Jer-
sey Ci'.y,  N.  J.,  19  March,  1807;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  U  Nov.,  1885.  He  removed  to  Ohio  with  his
father  in  1817,  settled  near  Cincinnati,  and  in  1832
established,  on  the  Miami  canal,  the  Eagle  iron-
works, which  soon  became  the  largest  in  the  west.
His  buildings  were  destroyed  by  fire  in  1852,  but
were  soon  rebuilt.  During  the  civil  war  the  works
were  employed  in  behalf  of  the  government,  all
other  business  being  suspended.  At  the  beginning
of  the  war  Mr.  Greenwood  made  for  (ien.  Fremont
twelve  anchors  for  pontoon-bridges  on  twenty-four
hours'  notice.  He  also  built  machines  that  rifled
3,000  smooth-bore  muskets  a  day,  cast  150  bronze
field  guns  in  a  brief  period,  and  built  a  turret-
monitor  when  other  builders  declined  the  contract.
Southerners  vainly  tried  to  persuade  him  to  cease
aiding  the  government,  and  his  works  were  set  on
fire  three  times,  with  a  loss  of  $100,000.  He  organ-
ized the  first  paid  fire  department  in  Cincinnati  in
1852,  and  in  the  same  year  aided  in  introducing
into  that  city  the  first  steam  fire-engine  in  the
United  States.  He  used  to  boast  that  in  thus  abol-
ishing the  old-fashioned  fire-engine  house  and  its
attendant  vices,  he  had  done  more  for  the  cause  of
morality  than  many  preachers.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Ohio  mechanics'  institute.

GREER,  James  Aiigustin,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28  Feb.,  1833.  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  10  Jan.,  1848,  became  lieu-
tenant, 10  Sept.,  1855,  and  lieutenant-commander,
16  July,  1862.  He  commanded  the  iron-clad  "  Ben-
ton "  and  a  division  of  Admiral  Porter's  squadron
at  the  passage  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries  on  16
April,  1863,  and  in  the  succeeding  engagements  on
the  Mississippi  until  the  fall  of  that  city.  He  also
accompanied  the  Red  river  expedition.  He  was
made  commander,  25  July,  1866,  and  in  1873  com-
manded the  "Tigress"  in  the  "  Polaris " search  ex-
pedition. He  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of  cap-
tain on  20  April,  1876,  in  1880  served  as  president
of  the  examining  board,  and  in  the  same  year  was
made  commodore.

GREEY,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Sandwich,
Kent,  England,  1  Dee.,  1885;  d.  in  New  York  city,
1  Oct.,  1888.  He  was  a  member  of  the  English
naval  expedition  to  Japan  in 1855-'6,  spent six


! 'ears  on  station  and  shore  duty,  and  learned  the
anguage  and  studied  the  history  oi  that  country.
He  came  to  the  I'nited  States  in  1868,  was  natural-
ized, and  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits  in  New
Fork.  He  was  the  author  of  the  following  plav- :
"  Vendome,"  "  Mirah."  "The  Third  Estate,"  "The
College  Belles,"'  and  -  1'iicle  Aimer."  and  of  the
following  works  on  Japanese  history  :  '•  Blue  Jack-
ets'' (1871);  "Loyal  Roiiins"  (New  York,  1880);
1  "Young  Americans  in  Japan"  (Boston,  1881);
'  "The  Wonderful  City  of  Tokio"  (1882);  "The
I  Golden  Lotus"  (1883);  "  Hear- Worshippers  of
Yezo"  (1884);  and  "A  Captive  of  Love''  (1885).
He  was  a  member  of  the  Zoological  and  Anthropo-
logical societies  of  London.

(.It  !<.(..  Alexander,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Society
Hill,  Darlington  district,  S.  C,  8  Oct.,  1819.  He
was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in  1838
with  the  highest  honors  of  his  class.  He  then  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  at
Cheraw,  S.  C,  in  the  northeastern  circuit.  Having
resolved  to  enter  the  ministry,  he  was  baptized  and
confirmed  in  St.  David's  church,  Cheraw,  in  1843,
and  became  a  candidate  for  holy  orders.  He  was  or-
dered deacon  by  Bishop  Gadsden,  10  June,  1846,  and
ordained  priest  in  St.  Philip's  church.  ( 'harleston,  by
the  same  bishop,  19  Dec,  1847.  His  first  and  only
parish  was  that  of  St.  David's,  Cheraw,  of  which
he  became  rector  in  1846.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  South  Carolina  college  in  1859.  Dr.
Gregg  was  active  and  efficient  in  diocesan  and
church  affairs  during  this  period,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  elected  bishop  of  Texas.  He  was  conse-
crated in  the  Monumental  church,  Richmond,  Va.,
13  Oct.,  1859,  and  entered  at  once  on  his  extensive
field  of  labor.  In  1867  he  attended  the  first  Lam-
beth conference  in  England.  At  the  general  con-
vention in  1874  consent  was  given  to  a  division  of
the  diocese  of  Texas,  and  two  missionary  juris-
dictions were  set  off  for  northern  and  western
Texas.  Bishop  Gregg  removed  to  Galveston,  re-
taining the  southern  portion  of  the  state  as  his
diocese.  Between  1852  and  1867  he  made  several
contributions  to  church  literature  in  the  way  of
sermons,  addresses,  and  triennial  charges.  He  has
also  published  a  "  History  of  Old  Cheraw,"  em-
bracing an  account  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  the
valley  of  the  Pedee,  S.  C,  the  first  white  settle-
ments, the  organization  of  St.  David's  parish,  and
the  Revolutionary  history  of  that  region  (1867);
and  a  "  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Church  in  Texas,"  an
article  in  "  The  Church  Encyclopaedia  "  for  1884.

GREGG,  Andrew,  senator,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,
10  June,  1755 ;  d.  in  Bellefonte,  Pa..  20  May,  1835.
His  parents  came  from  Ireland  to  New  Hampshire,
but  removed  to  Delaware  in  1732,  and  to  Pennsyl-
vania in  1733.  The  son  was  educated  in  Carlisle,
and  in  Newark,  Del.,  where  he  served  in  the  militia
during  the  Revolution.  From  177!)  till  1783  he
was  a  tutor  in  the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now  Uni-
versity  of  Pennsylvania).  He  was  a  merchant  at
Middletown,  Pa.,  in  1783-'9,  and  then  became  a
farmer  in  the  wilderness  of  Penn's  valley.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  congress  from  Pennsyl-
vania, and  served  from  24  Oct..  1791.  till  8  March,
1807.  and  was  a  U.  S.  senator  from  the  same  state,
Barring  from  20  Oct.,  1807,  till  3  March,  1813,  for
a  part  of  which  time  he  was  president  pro  tempore
of  the  senate.  In  1814  he  removed  to  Bellefonte,
was  appointed  secretary  of  state  for  Pennsylvania
in  lNlli.  and  in  1823  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  governor.  lie  was  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and
a  man  of  vigorous  constitution.  He  left  an  unfin-
ished sketch  of  his  family  history,  which  has  been
published  in  Dr.  William'  H.  Eglc's  "  IVnns\  lvania


GRE<i«'|;Y


789


burg.  1886).— Andrew's  lt
I  <>li  ii  hi  in.  loldier,  h.  in  Bellefonl
July.  1N26,  was  Um  -"ii  "f  Andrew  <ir.^^'.  an  iron-
neater. He  volunteered  forthe  Mexican  war as a

private  in !>«••  ;il.  In  c  ainc- l*( lieutenant

of  the  11th  regular  infantry  in  February,  1*47.  and

was  appointed  irartnin  on  B  Sept.,  i  —  it.  After
: in;  through  the  wax,  lie  rm  disbanded,  14
1848,  !!.•  then  engaged  in  the  iron  business
in  Centre  OOUnty,  IV  II*-  liecame  a  captain  nf
I'eiiii-shania  reserves  iii  the  early  i.art  <>f  the
civil  war,  and  WSJ  made  captain,  tith  I  .  S.  cavalry.
in  May,  1  Ml.  II.  Inn-amc  colonel,  16th  IVniisxl-
vania  cavalry,  in  October,  1888.  and  commanded  a
oavalrv  brigade  in  the  Annv  of  the  Potomac,  from
April,  186$  till  April.  1865.  He  partici|«ited  in
numerous  battles,  including  Deep  Bottom,  where
he  was  severely  woumled.  For  gallant  and  meri-
torious servicer  during  the  war  he  was  brevetted
Bsalof  f eminl  of  volunteer-,  and  brigadier-general
U.  S.  army  at  its  dose. After  the  war  he  was  in-

rtor-pneral  of  freedtnen  in  Louisiana,  ami  un-
the  establishment  of  88  July.  1880,  htflMM
colonel  of  the  Hth  cavalry.  He  was  with  his  regi-
ment on  the  Pacific  coast  till  retired  for  disability
incurred  in  line  of  duty.  2  April,  1M75». — Another

S-andson,  David  McMiirtrie,  son  of  Matthew  I),
regg,  soldier.  I),  in  Huntingdon,  Pa.,  10  April.
183:1.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1855,  and  was  assigned  to  the  dra-
goons, receiving  his  full  appointment  as  2d
lieutenant  in  September  following.  Afterward  he
served  a  short  time  in  .IclTerson  barracks,  Mo.,
and  was  then  ordered  to  New  Mexico  and  Cali-
fornia, and  served  in  the  campaigns  of  1858-'00
against  the  Indians.  In  March.  1N61,  he  was  ap-
jx.inted  1st  lieutenant,  and  in  May  following  cap-
tain in  the  tith  cavalry.  In  January  he  was  ap-
|>ointed  colonel  of  the  8th  Pennsylvania  cavalry,
ami  was  engaged  at  the  battle!  of  Fair  Oaks,  the
i  dnyr  tight,  and  otherwise  during  the  Vir-
ginia peninsular  campaign  in  1862.  He  became
brigadier-general  of  volunteer-  on  21)  Nov.,  com-
manded a  di\i>ion  of  cavalrv  in  the  Annv  of  the
Potomac  from  December,  1HJI2.  till  June.  1868, and
was  engaged  at  Beverly  Ford.  Aldie.  (iettyshurg,
Rapidan  Station,  and  New  Hope  Church,  lie  com-
manded the  2d  cavalrv  division.  6  April,  1864,  to
8  Feb.,  1865,  in  the  Richmond  campaign,  and  the
Jrj  of  the  Annv  of  the  Potomac  from  1  Aug.,
1864  (when  he  was  brevetted  major-general  of  vol-
untcersi,  till  his  resignation,  -i  Feb.,  1865.  He  was
■ppointed  l'.  S.  consul  at  Prague,  Bohemia,  in
IN, 4,  and  in  1886  became  commander  of  the  Penn-
sylvania Older  of  the  loyal  IsSTJOII

(iKK<t(f,  James  lawver.  b.  in  Marion  district,
.  1  July.  [787;  d.  MOot,  1888.  He  was  edu-
cated at  St.  David's  academy.  Long  Bluff  (now  .So-
ciety Hill),  and  at  the  University  of  Booth  Caro-
lina, where  he  was  graduated  with  the  highest
honors  in  lsns.  He  was  subsequently  a  tutor  in
the  university,  and  was  professor  of  mathematics
pro  tn/i/Kin  in  the  MOM  institution  for  seven  or
eight  months  in  1811.  He  was  admitted  to  the
l»ar  in  Columbia  in  April.  lsb'l.  and  soon  attained
note  in  his  profession.  Mr.  Qregg  WM  ohOMO  in-
tendant  of  Columbia  in  1816,  elected  to  the  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  state  in  1888,  and  served till

'. when  lie  W'a- elected to  the  senate,  of which

he  continued  a  member  until  1*47.  He  was  also
■Olive  in  state  military  matters,  and  hffflana  colo-
nel of  the  88d  militia  regiment  in  November,
—  His  son,  Maxey.  soldier,  b.  in  Columbia,  S.  C.
in  1814;  d.  oeer  Piedethjkeborg,  V*a»,  b>  Dec.,
.'.  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South  Caro-


lina ii  idied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the

Iwr  in  l*:t!». lb-  wee  appointed  maioroftbe  ISth

infantry,  24  March,  1  >*-l 7.  ami  served  till  the  i
of  the  Mexican  war.  He  was  a  mtnrtWT  of  the
Sooth  Carolina  itate  convention  m  imil,  and  of
the  committee  thai  prepared  the  ordinance  of
eeoati'ioii.  In  the  civil  war  he  commanded  th-
South  Carolina  regiment,  and  was  afterward  made
a  brigadier-general.  He  distinguished  himself  in
several  engagements  in  Virginia,  and  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.

QBECrS, William.  Canadian educator, b. in

Killyereen,  County  Donegal,  Ireland.  5  July,  1-

He  whs  graduated  from  (ila-gow  college  in  1848,

and  Edinburgh  university,  when-  he  took the  de-

..f M.  A. in 1844 Sul»e.|iientlv he  studied

theology  in  the  < SoUege  of  the  Free < Ihnrefa  at  Bdnv
burgh,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  February,
lH4(i.  Immediately  afterward  he  was  sent  as  a
missionary  to  Canada,  and  in  June.  1H17,  was  or-
dained minister  of  the  John  street  Presbyterian
church.  Belleville.  He  retained  this  pastorate  till
July,  1H57.  when  he  liecame  pa-tor  of  Cooke's
church. Toronto, and remained there till  July,

1878. In  1864  he  was  appointed  lecturer  in  apolo*

gctics  in Knox  college. Toronto,  and  taught the

tl logical  classes in the Montreal Presbyterian

College  during  part  of  it-  lir-t  session  in  1H67.  In
1*7"J  he  was  appointed  professor  of  apologetJoj  in
Knox  college,  which  cliair  he  still  occupies,  and
also  conducts  the  classes  in  church  history,  He
was  moderator  of  the  Free  Church  of  Canada  in
1881.  when  the  union  wits  effected  between  it  and
the  united  Presbyterian  church  of  that  country.
He  has  edited  "Prayers  for  Family  Worship"
(Toronto,  1S7:{),  and  is  the  author  of  a  "History
of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Canada"  (1885).

GREKOKI,  Lnigl,  artist,  b.  in  Bologna,  Italy,
8  July,  1819.  In  1840  he  went  t,,  Home,  where  M
studied  under  Tomaso  Minardi.  He  received  in  1888
the  grand  gold  medal  of  the  Academy  of  Bologna
for  historical  painting,  and  lived  in  the  Vatican
for  several  years  as  the  friend  of  Monaignor  de
M erode,  engaged  in  restoring  the  old  masters.  He
was  also  placed  at  the  head  of  a  0OUI  mission  ap-

I minted  to  decide  by  whom  certain  old  and  valua-
ble pictures  were  painted.  He  came  to  the  Tinted
States  in  1874,  and  was  made  director  of  the  art
department  of  the  University  of  Notre  Dame,  In-
diana. He  has  decorated  the  church  of  the  uni-
versity, and  painted  religious  pictures  in  the  cathe-
drals of  Baltimore.  Philadelphia.  Duhinpic,  and
Detroit,  In  the  main  corridor  of  the  rni\cr-ity
of  Notre  Dame  he  has  executed  a  series  of  large
histories]  pictures,  twelve  in  Dumber,  representing
scenes  in the life  of  Cnliimlnsi He  has  also

[tainted  |>ortraits  of  Cardinal  (iiblxms.  (ten.  Sheri-
dan, and  Archbishop  Ryan.  Queen  Margarita,  of
Italy,  sent  him  a  watch  set  with  diamonds, and  the
University  of  Notre  I  lame  gave  him  the  grand  gold
medal  for  art  in  1N7K.  While  in  Home  he  cata-
logued the  library  of  the  Maniuis  ('timpani,  and
published  a  work  on  art.  He  lia>  been  lUOOesBfuJ
in  pure  frescos  and  colossal  figures  and  in  minia-
tures, and  also  has  merit  as  a  sculptor.

GRKUORY,  Daniel  Seeley, educator, h.m Oar-

mel.  Putnam  00.  N.  V..  81  Am;.,  1888,  He  was
graduated at Princeton in 1857,  and studied in

the  theological  seminary,  acting  also  as  tutor  in
rhetoric  in  lH51>-'60.  After  holding  jwstorab-  in
Catena.  III..  Troy.  N.  Y.,  New  Haven.  Conn.,  and
South  BeleSB.  N.  Y..  he  became  in  1*71  professor
of metaphysics and logic  in Wooster  university,

Ohio,  ana  in  1875  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of
mental  soienoe  and  Knglish  literature. In  1879  he


760


GREGORY


GREIG


became  president  of  Lake  Forest  university,  111.  I
He  has  published  H  Christian Ktliics"  (Philadel-
phia. 1875):  "Why Four  Gospels!"  (New  York,
Uftritand  ••Practical  Logic"  (Philadelphia,  18*1).

GKKGOHY,  Dudley  Sandford,  philanthropist,
h.  iu  Heading.  Conn..  0  Feb..  1800;  d.  in  Jersey
Citv,  N.  J..  1  Dec,  1H74.  He  removed  with  his
father  to  Albany,  X.  Y.,  in  1808,  rose  to  the  place
of  chief  dark  in  the  canal  department,  then  be-  j
came  identified  with  the  legal  lotteries  carried  on  |
for  the  state,  and  in  1834  removed  to  Jersey
City  and  became  one  of  its  best-known  citizens.
He  aided  in  building  up  the  city,  was  its  first  '
mayor,  serving  three  terms,  and  held  many  other
local  offices.  He  was  also  elected  to  congress  as  |
a  Whig,  and  served  from  1847  till  1849.  .Mr.
Gregory  was  at  one  time  a  director  of  sixteen
different  railroads.  He  was.  a  bountiful  giver
to  churches  of  all  denominations,  and  to  public
schools,  city  parks,  and  benevolent  institutions.
— His  grandson,  Eliot,  artist,  l>.  in  New  York
city.  18  Oct.,  1854,  entered  Yale  in  1871,  but  was
not  graduated.  He  studied  art  in  Rome  and
Paris,  under  Carolus-Duran  and  Cabanel,  and  is
the  only  American  that  has  exhibited  lx>th  paint-
ing and  sculpture  in  the  Paris  salon.  His  pictures
include  "  Soubrette  "  (1883) ;  "  Coauetterie  "  (1884) ;
"  Children,"  for  which  he  received  honorable  men-
tion in  Paris;  and  portraits  of  Gen.  George  W.
Cullum  (1880);  his  uncle.  Admiral  Baldwin  (1882);
Mrs.  John  Sherwood  (1885) ;  and  Ada  Rehan  (1887).

GREGORY,  Francis  Hoyt,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Norwalk,  Conn.,  9  Oct.,  1789;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  4  Oct.,  1806.  He  was  in  the  merchant  ser-
vice in  1807-'9,  but  became  a  midshipman  in  the
navy  in  the  latter  year.  Soon  afterward,  while
serving  on  the  "  Vesuvius,"  and  in  charge  of  one
of  her  barges  near  the  Balize,  he  surprised  and
captured  an  English  slaver.  He  was  made  acting
master  in  1811,  and,  while  in  command  of  gun-
boat No.  162,  captured  a  schooner  fitting  for  pi-
ratical purposes,  disabled  and  drove  away  a  pri-
vateer of  greatly  superior  force,  that  had  been
annoying  our  commerce,  and  took  a  Spanish  pirate
of  fourteen  guns.  He  was  with  Com.  Chauncey  u
all  his  actions  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  on  28  June
was  made  lieutenant.  In  August,  1814,  he  was
taken  prisoner  and  sent  to  England,  where  he  re-
mained eighteen  months.  He  soon  afterward
joined  one  of  the  frigates  cruising  against  the  Al-
gerines,  without  corning  home.  In  1821-'3,  while
in  command  of  the  schooner  "  Grampus,"  he  was
active  in  suppressing  piracy  on  the  coasts  of  Cuba
and  Mexico,  capturing  near  St.  Croix  the  notorious
pirate  brig  "  Pandrita,"  a  vessel  far  superior  to
his  own  in  armament  and  number  of  men.  He
was  promoted  to  commander,  28  April,  1828,  and
to  captain,  18  Jan.,  1838.  and  in  1844  commanded
the  **  Raritan  "  in  the  blockade  of  the  Mexican
coast.  His  last  sea-service  was  in  command  of  the
African  squadron  in  1849-'52.  In  July,  1861.  he
was  ordered  to  superintend  the  construction  of  all
vessels  of  war  built  outside  of  navy-yards,  and  was
engaged  in  this  duty  when  he  died.  He  was  made
rear-admiral  on  the  retired  list,  16  July,  1862.

GREGORY,  Frank  M.,  artist,  b.  in  Mansfield,
Tioga  co.,  Pa.,  21  Oct.,  1848.  He  was  educated  for  a
business  career,  but  abandoned  it  for  the  pursuit  of
art,  He  entered  the  schools  of  the  National  acad-
emy of  design  in  1871, and  subsequently  studied  at
the  Art  student's  league,  and  with  Walter  Shirlaw.
He  also  followed  water-color  painting,  and  acquired
some  note  in  etching  and  designing.  Among  his
paintings  are :  "  The  Truant " ;  "  Waiting  for  Re-
pairs " ;  and  "  First  Snow  of  the  Season."


GREGORY.  John  Milton,  educator,  b.  in  Sand
Lake.  Rensselaer  <■<>..  N.  Y.,  (j  July,  W2'2.  ll>-  was
graduated  at  Union  in  IMS,  ana  spent  two
in  the  study  of  law,  but  preferring  to  enter  the
ministry,  became  a  Baptist  clergyman.  After  a
brief  pastorate  in  the  east  he  went  to  the  w.M  in
1852,  and  was  appointed  principal  of  a  da— ical
school  at  Detroit,  Mich.  Ilis  marked  success  soon
attracted  attention  to  his  ability  as  an  educator,
and  he  was  chosen  superintendent  <>f  public  in-
struction of  the  state,  serving  from  1858  till  1868.
In  the  mean  time,  in  association  with  President
ESnwtna  0.  Haven,  of  the  University  at  Ann  Arbor;
and  Prof.  A.  S.  Welch,  of  the  Normal  school,  he
had  established,  in  1854,  the  "  Michigan  Journal  of
Education,"  taking  the  entire  editorial  charga  1 1  is
reports  as  state  superintendent  were  characterized
by  remarkable  breadth  of  view  and  philosophical
treatment  of  educational  questions.  Declining  a
re-election  after  holding  this  office  for  five  years,
he  accepted  the  presidency  of  the  Kalamazoo  col-
lege, and  in  1867  he  was  called  to  that  of  the  Illi-
nois industrial  university,  then  just  founded  at
Champaign,  where  he  remained  until  1880.  Dur-
ing his  term  of  office  he  also  served  as  U.  S.  com-
missioner to  the  World's  fair  at  Vienna  in  1873,
commissioner  from  the  state  of  Illinois  to  the  Paris
exhibition  of  1878,  and  member  of  the  board  of
judges  in  the  educational  department  of  the  Cen-
tennial exhibition  in  Philadelphia.  From  1882
till  1885  Dr.  Gregory  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.
civil-service  commission.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"  Handbook  of  History  "  and  "  Map  of  Time  "  (Chi-
cago, 1866) ;  M  A  New  Political  Economy  "  (Cincin-
nati, 1882);  and  "Seven  Laws  of  Teaching"  (Chi-
cago, 1883).  During  his  residence  in  Michigan  he
published  a  "Compend  of  School  Laws,"  and  ad-
dresses on  educational  interests  of  that  state.

GREGORY,  Samuel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Guil-
ford, Vt.,  19  April,  1813 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23
March,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Y'ale  in  1840,
and  for  several  years  afterward  engaged  in  teach-
ing, lecturing,  and  writing  on  educational  and
sanitary  subjects.  In  1848  he  founded  in  Boston
the  New  England  female  medical  college,  said  to
have  been  the  first  institution  in  the  world  for  the
exclusive  medical  education  of  women.  Mr.  Greg-
ory was  secretary  of  the  college  till  his  death.  In
1874  it  was  merged  in  the  medical  school  of  Bos-
ton university  (homoeopathic).

GREIG,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Moffat,  Dumfries-
shire, Scotland,  6  Aug.,  1779:  d.  in  Canandaigua,
N.  Y.,  9  April,  1858.  He  was  educated  in  the
schools  of  Edinburgh.  He  came  to  western  New
York  in  1800,  studied  law  with  Nathaniel  W.  How-
ell, and  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  in  1804
formed  a  partnership  with  his  preceptor  that  lasted
till  1820.  Soon  after  entering  on  the  practice  of
his  profession  he  became  the  agent  of  the  great
Hornby  estate.  He  built  for  himself  a  spacious
residence,  and  was  noted  for  his  refined  and  elegant
hospitality.  No  stranger  of  distinction  failed  to
be  entertained  by  him,  and  Lafayette  was  one  of
his  guests  in  18!&4-'5.  Mr.  Greig  bore  a  striking
resemblance  to  Walter  Scott,  and  was  once  mis-
taken for  Scott  on  a  visit  to  Edinburgh.  He  was
elected  a  representative  in  congress  in  1841,  and
did  faithful  service  during  the  long  extra  session
of  that  summer,  but  he  had  no  taste  for  public
life,  and  resigned  at  the  end  of  the  session.  .Mr.
Greig  became  a  regent  of  the  State  university  in
1825  and  its  chancellor  in  1845,  and  held  both
offices  till  his  death.  He  married  a  daughter  of
Cen.  Israel  Chapin,  who  survived  her  husband  for
more  than  twenty  years. They  had  no  children.


II  AM


TGI


U REINER,  John,  journalist,  h.  in  Philadel-
phia. I'....  it  SepL,  i^Ki;  ,i.  in  Toledo,  Ohio,  19
May,  l^li.  He  removed  to  Ohio  when  *  boy,  nod
becalm-  distinguished  as  a  temperance  <>ratoi.  He
was  an  enthusiastic  Whig,  and  in  the
campaign  hrity  by  bin  election

Do  ii."  "The  Wagoner  Boy,"  end
others. Me  was  state  librarian  of  Ohio  from  1H45
till  l h."» l .  when  be  wss  appointed  Indian  agent  for
:  became  governor  of  that
territory. He was afterward rOOOrarirolf local

editor  of  the  "<  >hio  State  .lournal,"  hh<I  editor  and
proprietor  of  the  Cohunbu  "Gazette"  ami  t in-

Zanesville  "Times."  lie  was  receiver  in  the  U,  S.
laml-oili,e  in  Santa  1-V.  N.  M..  in  l*«!l-'2.  ami  suit-
treasurer  there  in  lMiCJ-'O.

G  I ELLET,  Stephen,  missionary,  i».  m  Limogee,

Knim-e.  t Nov., 177:1;  d.  in Burlington, N.  J..  16

known  in  France  M  Ftienne

ile  (irellet  ile  Maliillier. His  parents  were  wealthy

ami  belonged  to  the  nobility. Hie  father,  Gabriel

Mare  Antoine  de  (irellet,  was  comptroller  <>f  tin-
mint,  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Louis  XVI..  and
the  proprietor  of  iron-works  ami  of  extensive  iM.r-
celain  manufactories.  The  son  was  originally  a
Hoinan  (  atholic,  and  was  educated  at  the  military
college  of  Lyons.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  en-
tered the  body-guard  of  Louis  XVI.  During  the
Revolution  his  family  estates  were  confiscated,  ami
he  and  his  brothers  became  prisoners  of  war  and
were  sentenced  to  be  shot.  After  the  execution  of
the  kin;;  he  made  his  escape  to  Demerara.  In  17!»">
he  i  aim-  to  New  Vork,  where  he  shortly  afterward
Joined  the  Society  of  Friends.  Ile  removed  to
Philadelphia,  ami  daring  the  prevalence  of  the  yel-
low fever  in  1786  ministered  to  the  sick  and  afllict-
ed.  In  17SM)  he  returned  to  New  Vork,  where  he
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  afterward
made  a  missionary  tour  in  the  southern  states  as
far  as  Georgia,  ami  in  1S01  travelled  to  New  Film-
land and  Canada.  In  1N04  he  married  RebootO.
the  daughter  of  Isaac  Collins,  the  publisher.  He
riaited  the  south  of  France  in  1H07,  travelled  in
Filmland  and  (iermanv  in  1N12,  preached  in  Ilayti
in  181 ti,  and  during  the  two  following  years  trav-
elled through  Norway.  Sweden.  Russia,  Greece,  and
Italy,  and  preached  before  Pope  Pius  VII.,  who  lis-
tened to  his  exhortations  with  respect  and  cour-
tesy. He  returned  to  New  Vork  in  IN20. and  made
another  missionary  tour  to  Europe  from  1831  till
is.;j.  when  he  reared  to  Burlington.  Bee  ••Me-
moirs of  Stephen  (Jrellet. "edited  I  >v  Ben  jam  in  S-c-
bohm  (I'hiladelphia,  1988).

QBENNELL,  George,  jurist.  1>.  in  Greenfield.
Mass..  ;?.-.  |i,r..  1TSC, ;  «].  there.  20  Nov..  1*77.  II.-
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  with  the  higher!  hon-
ors in  1808,  siudied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  beginning  his  practice  in  Greenfield.  He  was
prosecuting  attorney  of  Franklin  oountyfrom  1890
till  1888,  and  state  eenator  from  is-24  till  is-jt.  In
1886  he  was  ■looted  t"  eongreei  at  a  Whig;  where

he  eenred  until  ls:i!». He  was  a  trustee  of  Amherst

from  1888  till  1868.  In  1848  he  was  made  probate
lodge,  which  ottoe  he  held  until 1*5:1. Sober*

ipn-ntly  he  was  clerk  <if  the  Franklin  OOOntyCOOrtl

until  1880, lb-  was  one  of  the  original  corporator!

of  the  Troy  and Greenfield railroad,  and WM
first president. During  his  term in  Congress  he

Ittopoaod  the  recognition  of  the  mdepeodeni f
layti. The  degree  of  LL.  D.  wm conferred  upon
him  by  Amherst  in  1854

(■III  MILLK,  George,  English  statesman,  b.
in  England.  14  Oct..  1712;  d.  there.  18  Nov..  1770.

lb-  one  educated  at  Btoo  and  at  Christ  church
college,  Oxford,  where  he  was  diatingoiehod  as  a


mathematician.  He  was  admitted  to  the  l>nr  in
and  entered  parliament  in  1741  as  a  member
for  Buckingham,  which  borough  be  n-pn-M
until  his  death.  II,  was  a  lord  of  the  admiral!
1711:  lord  of  the  treasury  in  1747;  treasurer  of  the
navy  and  privy-councillor  in  1754;  leader  of  tie-
nOOn Of  coinnioiis  in  17<d  ;  secretary  of  state  and
first  lonl  of  th.-  admiralty  in  17(12;  and  lir-t
lord  of  the  treasury  ami  chancellor  of  the  exchequer
in  l768-'6.  lb-  introduced  plans  for  taxing  the
colonie>.  and  was  the  author  of  the  famous  "Stamp-
Act,"  which  was  one  of  the  causes  of  the  American
lotion,  lb-  published  '•Considerations  on
Commerce  and  Finances  "  (1707)  and  "The  Pres-
ent Slate  of  the  Nation  "  1 17d!i).- II  I  human,

b,  in  1780;  d.  in  1*4(1,  was  one  of  the  agents  em-
ployed  in  negotiating  the  treaty  of  peace  with  the
United  state-  ..,  i7v

GRENVILLE,  Sir  Richard,  Fnglisl.  navigator.
b.  in  Cornwall,  England,  in  1540;  d.at  sea  in  1591.
At  the  age  Of  sixteen  In-  served  in  the  German  im-
iK-rial  army  as  a  volunteer  against  the  Turks.  On
Ins  return  he  was  appointed  to  a  command  in  Ire-
land, and  was  made  a  sherilT  of  Cork,  lie  repre-
sented Cornwall  in  parliament  in  1571,  and  after-
ward was  made  high  sheriff  of  that  country,  and
knighted  by  (^m-en  Bisebeth. He  entered  actively

into  the  colonization  schemes  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
who  was  hil  cousin,  ami  M  '.'  April.  1680,  sailed
from  Plymouth  in  command  <>f  seven  vessels  Inur-
ing 106  colonists,  which  were  despatched  to  Caro-
lina by  Haleigh.  The  fleet  touched  the  West  In-
dies, where  it  captured  two  Spanish  frigates,  and
on  20  June  reached  the  mainland  of  Carolina,  or
Florida,  as  it  was  then  called.  They  encountered
a  storm,  and  narrowly  escaped  bring  wrecked  on
the  cane,  which  Grenville  named  in  conseqnenoo
Cape  Fear.  They  anchored  at  Woooken  on  88
June,  and  passing  through  the  Ocraookc  inlet  made
their  way  to  Roanoke  island.  Grenville  and  his
party  explored  the  country  for  eight  days,  and  in
revenge  for  the  theft  of  a  silver  cup  burned  an  In-
dian village  and  destroyed  the  Indian  maize  around
it.  Granville  left  the  colony  under  the  govern-
ment of  Robert  Lane,  and  returned  to  England
with  his  ships,  capturing  a  Spanish  galleon  on  his
way.  On  his  second  \isit  to  the  colony  he  found
it  deserted,  as  the  colonists  had  returned  to  Eng-
land with  Sir  Francis  Drake,  owing  to  trouble  with
the  Indians.  In  order  to  keen  ]K>ssession  of  the
country  he  left  fifteen  men  tnere  and  sailed  for
Fngland.  He  wm  made  a  member  of  the  council
that  was  created  in  1588  to  devise  means  of  defence
against  the  Spanish  armada,  and  in  155M  he  was
raised  to  the  rank  of  vice-admiral  and  sent  in  con-
junction with  Lord  Howard  to  cruise  against  the
Spaniards  in  the  Weal  Indies, He  enconn  tared  ofl

the  A/ores  a  Spanish  Meet  consisting  of  fifty-two
ships.  With  only  five  ships  he  attacked  the  ene-
my, and  fought  from  8  P.  M.  until  daybreak.
During  the  action  four  of  the  Spanish  ships  wen-
sunk  ami  a  thousand  men  killed.  Grenville  was
wounded  early  in  the  engagement,  ami  was  finally
shot  throogh  the  body  and  carried  into  the  cabin.
I'pon  this  the  rest  of  the  crew  surrendered.  When
the  vessel  was  about  to  sink  he  was  carried  on
!>oiird  a  Spanish  ship,  when-  he  died  three  days
afterward.  His  name  is  written  Grenville,  Green-
ville, and  Granville. The  voyage  of  Sir  Kichard

Grenville  in  1668  was  related  by  one  of  the  pan

who  accompanied  him.  and  an  account  after  their
arrival  was  written  probably  by  Ralph  ljine.  See
Hakluvt's  ••  \ Lvajfes."

<.i:i  sii  \>i.  Walter  Qointoo.  jurist.  i>.  ..ear

Lanesvillc.  Harrison  oo.,  Ind.,  17  March,  1832. He


GREVYLE


GRIDLEY


was  educated  in  oouulr*  schools  and  spout  one
mr  in  Um  state  university  at  Blooiningion,  Ind.,
I)ut  was  not  graduated.  "lit-  then  studied  law  in
Oorydoo,  I  ml.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  188&
and  became  a  sucuessfii]  lawyer.  Ha  eras  elected
to  Um  legislature  in  1H(M).  but  restated  in  August,
1861,  t<>  Income  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  38th  In-
diana regiment  He  was  promoted  to  colon. 1  «.f
the  58d  Indiana  in  December,  and  on  11  Aug.,  1863,
after  the  fall  of  Vicksburg.  was  mad.-  brigadier-

general  of  volunteers.  He  commanded  the  4th  di-
vision of  Blair's  corps  in  the  fighting  before  At-
lanta, and  received  a  severe  wound  that  disabled
him  for  a  fear,  and  prevented  him  from  seeing
further  service.  On  U  March,  1865,  lie  was  bre-
retted  nrnjor-general  of  volunteers  for  his  gallantry
at  Atlanta.  After  the  war  he  resumed  practice  at
New  Albany,  Ind,  lie  was  an  unsuccessful  Repub-
lican candidate  for
congress  in  1866,
and  in  lS(i7-'8was
financial  agent  of
his  state  in  New
York.  President
Grant,  who  held
him  in  great  es-
teem, made  him
U.  S.  judge  for  the
district  of  Indiana
in  1869,  and  in
1880  he  was  an  un-
successful candi-
date for  U.  S.  sen-
ator. He  resigned
his  judgeship  in
April,  1882,  to  ac-
cept the  place
of  postmaster-gen-
eral in  President
Arthur's  cabinet,
and  in  July,  1884,
on  the  death  of
Secretary  Folger,
was  transferred  to  the  treasury  portfolio.  In  Octo-
ber of  that  year  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the
7th  judicial  circuit,  which  office  he  still  holds  (1887).
Judge  Gresham  was  a  strong  supporter  of  Gen.
Grant  for  a  third  term  in  the  Chicago  convention
of  1880,  but  has  not  been  conspicuous  in  politics.

GREVYLE,  Lord  Charles  Montague,  gov-
ernor of  South  Carolina,  b.  29  May,  1741 :  d.  in
January,  1784.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Robert,
third  Duke  of  Manchester.  He  was  a  knight  of
the  shire  of  Huntingdon,  and  at  one  time  gov-
ernor of  Jamaica.  Prom  1766  till  1773  he  held
the  office  of  governor  of  South  Carolina.  During
his  administration,  in  1769,  the  circuit  court  law
was  passed,  and  courts  of  justice  were  established
at  Ninety-Six,  Orangeburg,  and  Camden.  Mon-
tague street,  in  Charleston,  is  named  for  him.

GREY,  Charles,  British  soldier,  b.  in  England,
23  Oct,,  1729;  d.  14  Nov.,  1807.  In  1757  he  was
aide-de-camp  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  and  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Minden,  in  which  he  was
wounded.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel
in  1761,  and  commanded  the  98th  regiment  at
the  capture  of  Belle  Isle  in  1763.  In  1772  he  re-
ceived the  commission  of  colonel.  He  accompanied
Howe  to  Boston  in  1775,  and  was  raised  by  him  to
the  local  rank  of  major-general.  On  the  night  of
21  Sept.,  1777,  he  surprised  Gen.  Wayne  near  the
Paoli  Tavern  on  the  Lancaster  road,  where  the
latter  was  encamped.  Grey  approached  stealth-
ily, and,  ordering  the  flints  to  be  taken  from  the
guns,  attacked  the  patriots  with  the  bayonet,  de-


feating them  with  great  slaughter. For  this  act

he received the name of "No Flint (iteV." He

took  an  active  part  in  the  battle  of  (Jermantown,
4  Oct..  1777,  and  in  the  following  year  destroyed
the  shipping  and  stores  in  New  Bedford  and  Mar-
tha's Vineyard.  On  7  Sept.,  17?s.  he  surprised
Baylor's  Virginia  regiment,  which  lay  at  Tappan
mi  the  Hudson,  and  massacred  the  entire  corps  of
dragoons.  In  17!»3  he  was  employed  in  Flanders.
At  the  beginning  of  hostilities  between  Great  Brit-
ain and  trance  in  the  following  year,  he  was  ap-
pointed to  command  the  land  forces  that  were  sent,
in  conjunction  with  the  naval  armament  under
Lord  Howe,  to  reduce  the  West  Indies  to  submis-
sion, and  captured  the  islands  of  Martinique  and
St,  Lucie.  In  1795  he  was  made  general.  He  was
raised  to  the  peerage  in  1801,  received  the  title  of
Earl  Grey  in  1807,  and  was  the  father  of  the  cele-
brated English  statesman  of  that  name.

GRIDLEY,  Jeremiah,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  March,  1702;  d.  in  Brookline.  Mass.,  10
Sept.,  1767.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1725,
was  for  several  years  an  assistant  in  a  grammar-
school  in  Boston,  studied  theology,  and  occasion-
ally preached.  lie  then  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  For  a  year  he  edited  n  weekly
newspaper  called  "  The  Rehearsal,"  which  was  es-
tablished in  Boston  in  1731.  He  soon  acquired
reputation,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  general
court  from  Brookline,  and  became  an  opponent  of
the  measures  of  the  British  ministry.  Notwith-
standing this  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  for
the  province  of  Massachusetts  Bay.  In  1761  while
holding  this  office  he  defended  the  "  writs  of  ninrrrl  -
ance  "  which  the  British  custom-house  officers  had
applied  for  to  enable  them  to  enter  the  dwellings
of  suspected  individuals  at  their  discretion,  and  en-
countered the  powerful  opposition  of  his  former
pupil,  James  Otis.  In  addition  to  his  legal  station
he  was  colonel  of  militia,  grand  master  of  free-
masons, and  president  of  the  Marine  society.  He
contributed  manv  articles  of  great  merit  to  the
"Rehearsal." — His  brother,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1711 ;  d.  in  Stoughton.  Mass.,
20  June,  1796,  had  great  reputation  as  an  artillerist.
He  served  as  engineer  in  the  reduction  of  Louis-
burg  in  1745,  became  in  1755  chief  engineer  and
colonel  of  infantry  in  the  British  army,  and  in  the
following  year  took  part  in  the  expedition  to  Crown
Point  under  Winslow,and  constructed  the  fortifica-
tions on  Lake  George.  He  served  under  Amherst
in  1758,  and  subsequently  under  Wolfe  on  the
plains  of  Abraham,  being  at  the  capture  of  Quebec
At  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  as  a  reward  for  his
services,  he  received  Magdalen  island  from  the
British  government,  with  half  pay  for  life.  He  es-
poused the  patriot  cause  in  1775,  and  was  appointed
chief  engineer  and  commander  of  artillery  of  the
colonial  army  at  Cambridge.  He  planned  the
works  of  Bunker  Hill  the  night  before  the  battle
of  17  June,  1775.  Although  sixty-five  years  of  age,
he  fought  during  the  entire  engagement,  and  was
wounded,  being  exposed  to  the  severest  fire  of  the
enemy.  He  was  active  in  constructing  the  fortifi-
cations around  Boston.  On  20  Sept.,  1775,  he  was
commissioned  major-general  by  the  provincial  con-
gress, and  had  command  of  the  Continental  artil-
lery until  November.

GRIDLEY,  Philo,  jurist,  b.  in  Paris,  Oneida
co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,  1796;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  17
Aug.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  col-
lege, Clinton,  with  its  first  class,  in  1*1(1.  Me  then
studied  law  at  Onondaga  and  Waterville.  and  was
admitted  t<>  the  l»ar  in  1S'20.  U'ginning  his  practice
in  Waterville. A  few  years  later  he  removed  to


ORIKR


•  iUII


768


Hamilton.  Madiwn  en.,  where  bl  attained  emim

hi  th<-  bar.  Bt  served  as  dJstrid  attorney  Bar
Madison  ■■■unity,  and  was  appointed  jude*»of  the

5th  judicial  circuit.  Hi-  removed  to  1  tini  in
1889,  mid  >>ii  tin-  adoption  of  a  new  oonatitntion  in
1846  wu  elected  one  of  the  Judges,  of  tie

M  court, which office In- resigned aft.  I

years' service. In  1840  a  Canadian  named  M I <1

was  arrested  fur  psrtJeipatlnf  in  tin-  banting  <>f  the
American  stcamlxmt  "  ('amlinc."  which  carried  tap-
to  ■"><»»)  insurgents  on  Navy  island.  Niagara
river.  The  British  coveruin.-nt  dcinanded  his  re-
lease on  the  ground  that  the  dec«i  whs  done  by

order  nf  Ins  commanding  officer,  and  threatened
war  unless  its  demand  should  bt  OOCnpUsd  with.
Tln-re  was  so  much  excitement  on  the  border  that
Mi  -Lend  was  transferred  ti>  Judge  (iridley-- court
for  trial.  The  prisoner  was  finally  acquitted,  as  an
alibi  was  proved.

BRIER,  David,  soldier.  »>.  in  York  countv.  ra-
in 171J:  d.  m  York.  IV.  :i  .Inn.-.  1  ?!«».  lie  re-
•I  a  classical  education,  studied  law.  and  was
admitted  to  the  York  county  l>ar  in  1771.  He
served  in  the  French  and  Indian  war,  and  when
the  war  for  hnle|>endence  began  he  was  commis-
sioned captain  of  the  (!th  battalion  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania line,  served  in  the  campaign  against  Canada,
was  promoted  to  major  in  October.  177<>.  and  sul>-
sequently  to  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  7th  Pennsyl-
vania line.  He  was  wounded  at  the  Paoli  massa-
cre in  September,  1777.  At  the  close  of  the  war
he  resumed  his  profession  at  York,  was  elected  to
the  assembly  in  17s:},  served  as  a  delegate  to  the
convention  to  ratify  the  Federal  constitution,  and
was  ehoeen  by  the  constitutionalists  one  of  the
first  presidential  electors.

(•It IKK.  Robert  Cooper,  jurist,  b.  in  Cumber-
land county.  Pa.,  5  March,  1  TIM :  d.  in  Philadel-
Iihia.  I'a..  -'»!  Sept..  1*70.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  in  18U,  and  after  teaching  there  one
year  he  returned  to  Northumberland,  I'a..  to  aerial
his  father  in  the  academy,  of  which  he  became
principal  in  1816.  He  devoted  his  leisure  to  the
study  of  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1H17.  and
practised  in  Hlooinsburg.  I'a.  He  then  removed  to
Danville,  where  he  attained  eminence  in  his  pro-
fession. H,.  supported  his  mother,  and  educated  a
family  of  ten  brothers  and  sisters.  lie  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  district  court  of  Alleghany  in
},  and  removed  to  Alleghany  City,  but  went  to
Philadelphia  in  1*4*  and  resided  there  till  his
death.  He  was  appointed  justice  of  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court  by  President  Polk  on  4  Am;.,  is  If..
and  held  that  oflice  until  his  death,  although  In-
had  sent  in  his  resignation  in  1N(K».  He  was  origi-
nally a  Federalist,  but  acted  with  the  Democratic
party  until  the  civil  war,  when  he  supported  tin-
national  cause.

BRIER,  William  Nicholson,  nldier,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1H12 :  d.  at  Napa  Sorbins.  CaL  i»
.1  uly.  isM.">.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.S.  mili-
tary academy  in  ls.Ti.  and  assigned  to  tin-  1st  dra-
goons, lb-  was  on  frontier  duty  in  the  Choctaw
nation  from  1888  till  1840,  when  In-  !>ecame  assist-
ant instructor  of  infantry  and  cavalry  tactics  at
West  Point,  and  held  the  office  one  year,  after
which  In-  was  engaged  in  frontier  duty  in  the
west. He was  ap|Miinted  captain.  '2'A  April,  1H46.

and  entered  on  active  service  at  the  beginning  of

tin-  Mexican  war.  lb-  was  brevetted  major  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  in  tin-  battle  of
Santa  Cruz  ■!■■  Boaalee,  16  March,  lsjs.  aid  was
on  frontier  duty  at  Fernandez  de  Taos  in  ism.
During  the  two  following  years  In- took  part  in  tin-
expedition  against tin- Apache Indians,  and was


1-d  in  the  skirmish  at  Too  ■1MMI  ItUIIW  Huttc,

1849. Subsequently  he  was  in  adiv.

vice  on  the  Pacific  coast  and  in  the  far  northwest,

ng in expeditions against tin- Indians m

aington t.-rritory. In 1861 '•-' li< nerved an

aotmg  ins|M-c|or-e;eiieral  of  the  Army  of  the  PotOx

mac.  and  coinmaii'led th«-  1st  regiment  <>f  <-avalry

in  the  Virginia  peninsular  campaign. He  was  j

i-nt at tin- siege  of Yorklown and the battle of
Williamsburg,  where  In-  was  wounded  and  Off
ted  colonel  for  gallantry, lb-  also  took  part  in  the

battle  of  Gaines*!  Mills  and  in  tin-  ■even  days1
ehange  of  base  to  tin-  .lames  river, li

court-martial  duty  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  from  Septem-
ber, 1861,  till  February.  1886,  and  s,.rve<|  as  mpsf>
intendent  of  volunteer  recruiting  service  and  chief

moatering  and  disbursing  officer  <>f  <  >hi<>. He  also

held  thisolliccin  Iowa  from  Man  h.  1868, till  .lune.

1868,  and  in Pennsylvania  from  .lune.  1866,  till

April, l*<Hi. He  was  brevet  ted brigadier-general,

I'.  S.  army,  for  faithful  service  during  the  war  on
18  March."  1866.  <>n  :n  Aug-  1866,  be  l>-caine
colonel  of  the  8d  cavalry.  At  his  own  request  he
was  placed  on  the  retired  list.  l"i  Dec.  1*70.

GRIKKSON.  Benjamin  Henry,  soldier,  h.  fa

Pittsburg.  Pa..  B  -lulv,  1886,  At  an  early  age  he
removed  to  Trumbull  county.  Ohio,  and  was  subse-
quently engaged  in  the  produce  business  at  Jack-
sonville, 111.  At  the  beguiling  of  the  civil  war  he
became  aide-de-camp  to  (Jen.  Prentiss,  was  made
major  of  the  Oth  Illinois  cavalry  in  August.  I*-'.!.
became  colonel,  2H  March,  1WRJ,  and  commander  of
a  cavalry  brigade  in  December.  He  was  engaged
in  nearly  all  the  cavalry  skirmishes  ami  raids  in
western  Tennessee  and  northern  Mississippi,  and  in
April,  18651.  made  a  successful  cavalry  raid  from
I  .a  Grange  to  Baton  Rouge  to  facilitate  (ten.
Grant's  operations  about  Vicksburg.  He  became
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  :i  .lune,  1868,
major-general.  'J7  Mav,  Ihim.  colonel  of  the  10th
U.  S.  cavalry.  88  July.  1866,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier-  and  major-general.  I'.  S.  army.  2  March,
lv'"'7,  for  his  raid  of  December,  1864,  in  Arkai
He  was  in  command  of  the  district  of  the  Indian
Territory  from  1868  till  187:1.  and  was  engaged  in
active  scouting,  explorations,  campaigns  against
the  Kiowas,  Gomanohes,  Cheyennes,  and  other
tribes,  and  in  removing  intruders  from  the  Indian
territory.  From  is;.")  to  1881  he  was  actively  en-
gaged in  scouting  and  exploring  the  country
throughout  western  Texas.  New  Mexico,  and  in
campaigns  against  hostile  Indians.  Since  18  Nov.,
1886 '"' hsj commanded the district of New

Mexico,  with  headquarters  at  Santa  IV-,  N.  M.

GRIFFIN. Charles, soldier, b. in Licking
county.  <  >hio.  in 1886;  d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  15

Sept..  lsi»7.  He  was  graduate!  1  at  the  17.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1H-1?.  was  assigned  to  the  8d  artil-
lery, ami  was  soon  after  ordered  to  Mexico,  and
commanded a  company  under  Gen. Patterson in

theeaapeign  from  VacaOkastoPueblai In  1848 he

was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,  and  served  in  New
Mexico  against  Navajo  Indians  until  1864  After
other  frontier  service  he  was  instructor  of  artillery
at  West  Point  in  ISbw-'&L  In  command  of  the
"  West  Point  battery  "  he  fought  at  Hull  Kun,  and

on  I  •lune.  i^<i-2.  was  eoaandaasoned  brigadJer-geu-

eral  of  volunteers,  ami  took  part  in  the  Peninsular
campaign,  winning  distinction  at  the  battle  of
Qsinesi  Mill. At  Malvern  Hill.  Gen.  Griffin,  in

command  of the  artillery,  supported  his  brigade

•gains!  the  assault  of  Gen.  Magruder,  drove  back

the  enemy,  and  contributed  signally  to  the  success
of  the  day. He  was  present at the  second battle

of  Hull  Bun,  and  was  charged  by  Pope  in  bl


764


(MUFFIN


GRIFFIN


port  with  refraining  from  taking  part  in  the  action.

while  he  "spent  the  day  in making ill-natured

strictures  BpOB  tin-  OOmiMndtng  general." Sen.

Griffin  was  arrested  for  trial  on  this  charge,  but
was  soon  released.  Having  been  promoted  to  the
command  of  a  division,  he  took  part  in  the  battles
of  Antietam  and  Fredericksburg,  and  in  Hooker's
campaign. On  1  Aug.,  1804,  he  was  brevet  ted

major-general  of  volunteers,  and  on  18  Aug.  he
received  the  brevet  of  colonel  in  the  regular  army.

He  was  present  at  Gettysburg,  and  was  conspicu-
om  in  all  the  engagements  from  the  Wilderness  to

l'i\r  Forks.  As  commander  of  the  5th  corps,  di-
rected by  Gen.  Grant,  he  received  the  arms  and
colors  of' the  Army  of  northern  Virginia,  after  the
surrender  at  Appomattox  Court-House.  On  13
May,  1865,  Gen.  Griffin  was  brevetted  brigadier-
and  major-general  in  the  regular  army,  and  on  10
A  u  lt. .  1888,  wiis  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
district  of  -Maine,  with  headquarters  at  Portland.
(tn  28  July,  1806,  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  35th
infantry,  and  in  1867  commanded  the  Department
of  Texas,  with  headquarters  at  Galveston.  On  5
Sept.,  1867,  while  the  yellow  fever  was  raging  at
Galveston,  he  was  assigned  to  the  temporary  com-
mand of  the  5th  military  district  on  the  removal
of  Gen.  Sheridan,  and  ordered  to  make  his  head-
quarters at  New  Orleans.  He  replied  that  "to
leave  Galveston  at  such  a  time  was  like  deserting
one's  post  in  time  of  battle."  He  remained  and
fell  a  victim  to  the  fever.

GRIFFIN,  Cyrus,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1749 ;
d.  in  Yorktown,  Va.,  14  Dec,  1810.  He  was  edu-
cated in  England,  and  while  there  married  a  lady
belonging  to  a  noble  family.  He  gave  early  adhe-
sion to  the  patriot  cause,  was  a  member  of  the  Vir-
ginia legislature,  a  delegate  to  the  old  congress  in
1 7TH-'81  and  in  1787-8,  and  was  president  in  the
latter  year.  He  was  president  of  the  supreme  court
of  admiralty  from  its  creation  until  its  abolition,
was  commissioner  to  the  Creek  nation  in  1789,  and
was  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  for  the  district  of
Virginia  from  December,  1789,  until  his  death.

GRIFFIN,  Ebenezer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cherry  Val-
I -v,  N.  Y.,  29  July,  1789;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.
When  he  was  quite  young  his  father  removed  to
Clinton,  Oneida  co.,  where  the  boy  received  his
preparatory  education.  He  entered  Union  college,
but,  before  completing  his  course,  began  the  study
of  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Utica  in
1811.  He  engaged  in  practice  in  Clinton,  where
he  remained  for  eight  years,  and  afterward  removed
to  Utica,  but  in  1825  went  to  New  York  city.
Among  the  many  important  cases  in  which  he  was
employed  as  counsel  was  that  of  Mather,  who  was
charged  with  being  a  conspirator  in  the  abduction
of  Morgan.  Mr.  Griffin  was  retained  to  conduct
the  defence,  which  he  did  so  ably  that  Mather  was
acquitted,  notwithstanding  the  state  of  public  feel-
ing. Mr.  Griffin  continued  to  practise  in  New
York  until  1842,  and  then  removed  to  Rochester,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.

GRIFFIN,  Edward  Dorr,  clergyman,  b.  in
East  Haddam,  Conn.,  6  Jan.,  1770;  d.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  8  Nov.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1790,  an«l  studied  theology  under  Jonathan  Ed-
wards, of  New  Haven,  who  was  subsequently  presi-
dent of  Union  college.  He  was  licensed  as  a
Ereachcr  in  October,  1792,  and  in  January,  1793,
egan  his  ministerial  work  at  New  Salem,  Conn.
In  June,  1795,  Mr.  Griffin  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  at  New  Hartford,  and
afterward  held  pastorates  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  and
Boston,  Mas-;.  Union  college  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1808,  and  he  became  professor  of  rheto-


ric in  the  recently  established  Andover  theological
seminary.  81  .lunc,  1809,  which  chair  he  filled  until
1N11.  fn  1K21  he  was  chosen  president  of  Will-
iams, and  remained  than  till  1830.  He  was  .hi
eloquent  and  popular  preacher,  ami  published
••  Lectures  delivered  in  Park  Street  Church,  Bos-
ton "  (Boston,  1813).  and  "Sixty  Sermons  on  Prac-
tical Subjects  "  (New  York,  1844).  A  selection  from
his  works,  with  a  memoir  of  the  author  by  I.
William  B.  Sprague,  D.  D.,  was  published  after  his
death  (2  vols..  1839).  See  also  "  Recollections  of
Rev.  E.  D.  Griffin,"  by  Parsons  Cooke  (1856).— 11 N
brother,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  East  Haddam.  (  onn.,
14  Jan.,  1778;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  May,  1860,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1797,  studied  in  the  Litch-
field law-school,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1799.  He  practised  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  for  six
years,  and  subsequently  in  New  York  city.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Sufferings  of  Our  Saviour,"  "  Evi-
dences of  Christianity,"  and  "  The  Gospel  its  Own
Advocate  "  (New  York,  1850).— George's  son,  Ed-
mund Dorr,  scholar,  b.  in  Wyoming,  Pa.,  10  Sept.,
1804 :  d.  in  New  York,  1  Sept.,  1830,  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1823.  He  studied  law  in  his
father's  office  for  a  short  time,  then  studied  divin-
ity, and  was  ordained  a  deacon  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  August,  1826.  Soon  afterward
he  became  assistant  minister  of  St.  James's  church,
Hamilton  Square,  near  New  York  city,  and  a  little
later  acted  in  the  same  capacity  in  Christ  church,
New  York  city,  but  was  soon  forced  by  failing
health  to  abandon  his  charge.  He  sailed,  for  Eu-
rope in  October,  1828,  and  returned  to  New  York
in  April,  1830.  In  the  following  May  and  June  he
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  upon  Roman,  Italian,
and  English  literature  in  Columbia.  His  brother
Francis  published  his  "  Remains,"  with  a  memoir
by  Rev.  John  MacVicar  (1831).
"  GRIFFIN,  Gilderoy  Wells,  author,  b.  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  6  March,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Louisville,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1861.  After  practising  for  some  years,  he  en-
gaged in  journalism.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  con-
sul at  Copenhagen  in  1871,  at  the  Samoan  islands
in  1876,  at  Auckland,  New  Zealand,  in  1879,  and
at  Sydney,  Australia,  in  1884.  He  has  published  a
biographical  sketch  of  George  D.  Prentice  (1869);
edited  the  subsequent  edition  of  "  Prenticeana "
(Philadelphia,  1871) ;  wrote  for  it  a  "  Life  of  Pren-
tice," which  he  afterward  re-wrote  and  enlarged ;
"  Studies  in  Literature  "  (1871) ;  "  Life  of  Charles
S.  Todd  "  (1873) ;  "  Danish  Days  "  (1874) ;  "  A  Visit
to  Stratford  "  (1875) ;  and  "  New  Zealand,  her  Com-
merce and  Resources  "  (Wellington,  N.  Z.,  1884).

GRIFFIN,  Nathaniel  Herrick,  educator,  b.
in  Southampton,  L.  I.,  28  Dec,  1814;  d.  in  Will-
iamstown,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1876.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1834,  and  afterward  studied  in
Princeton  theological  seminary  for  two  years.  He
was  tutor  for  one  year  in  Williams,  and  in  June,
1839,  was  installed  pastor  of  the  church  at  Delhi,
N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  till  1841.  After  teaching
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  for  two  years,  he  became,  in
1846,  professor  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages
in  Williams,  and  in  1853  he  was  made  profettOf
of  Greek.  He  resigned  in  1857,  opened  a  school,
and  from  1868  till  his  death  was  librarian  of  the
college. — His  son,  Solomon  Bulkley,  b.  in  Will-
iamstown.  18  Aug.,  1888,  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1872.  and  is  now  (1888)  managing  editor  of
the  Springfield  "  Republican."  He  has  published
"  Mexico  of  To-day  "  (New  York,  1886).

GRIFFIN,  Simon  Goodell,  soldier,  b.  in  Nel-
son, Cheshire  co.,  N.  H.,  9  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  a
teacher  for  several  years,  and  represented  his  native


(,i:ii


GRIFFITHS


?.-,;,


town  in  the  legislature. Be  sobesquontly  studied

law.  \\ji-  admitted 1..  the  l.»r  in 1800,  and h

,.  •• Ill  < MM  <'l<l. At the  iKfLTIIIIMHir  •  ►! Ill''  oTvil

war  In-  was  t-iiMiiiii-Mi'ii.-il  captain  in  tin-  M  rcgi-
iii« -lit  t if  Ni-w  Hampshire  volunteers,  iiinl  was
present  at  tin-  tir-t  battle  of  Bull  Bon.  In  Octo-
ber, 1861,  be  wee  promoted  BentaBaat  oolonol,  and
transferred  Go  tbe  6th  Maw  Hampshire  regiment,
ami  theooounand  of  lha  ragfmaot  devolved  upon
lit  111.  on?  April.  1869,  he  commanded  an  i
dition  of  ihmi  men,  assisted  by  Ave  gnHboata,  t"
Blisabetb  city,  N.c.  which  resulted  in  the  capture

i»f  prisoners  ami  many  stands  o|  anus,  ami in  tin-

breaking  up  of  a  Confederate  rendeavoui  at  that

place. He  commanded  his  regiment  at  the  battle

of  Camden,  N.C.  lit  April,  ami  for  its  gallantry
on  this  occasion  was  permitted  t<>  Inscribe  M  Gem-
d.-ii.  1!»  April.  1868,"  n|x.n  i t -^  colors.  <  >n  M  April
In-  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  Oth  regiment.
!!■■  was  in  the  second  liattle  of  Hull  Hun,  at  Chan-
tillv,  and  at  Antiitaui.  where,  with  his  regiment
ami  tin-  '2d  .Maryland,  he  charged  the  stone  bridge
and  carried  it  in  the  face  of  a  heavy  fire.  He  was
present  at  l-'rede  ricksl.iirg,  his  regiment  losing
one  third  its  number,  and  OB  SO  May.  1H08,  he
assigned  ti>  the  command  of  the  1st  brigade,
•Jd  division,  !)th  army  corps.  This  brigade,  early
in  June,  went  t<>  assist  (Jen.  Grant  in  his  opera-
tions against  Yicksburg.  and  participated  in  its
capture,  lb-  was  with  his  command  in  the  Missis-
sippi campaign  of  (Jen.  Slu-niian.  and  in  the  spring
of  ist'it  WM  issigned  to  the  2d  brigade.  9d  divis-
ion, ami  commanded  it  in  the  battles  of  the  Wil-
derness and  S|M>ttsylvania  Court-House,  and  was
commissioned  a  brigadier-general  on  Gen.  Grant's

n mim-ndation. On  the  night  of  10  June  (b-n.

Griffin,  in  command  of  his  own  and  Gen.  Curtin's
brigade,  attacked  the  enemy's  intrenched  lines  in
front  of  Petersburg,  carrying  their  works  and  cap-
turing 1,000  prisoners,  with  arms,  artillery,  and
ammunition.  <>n  8  April.  1865,  be  arranged  and
lad  the  assault  at  '"Fort  Hell,"  and  for  gallant
conduct  was  brevetted  a  major-general,  and  after-
ward participated  in  the  pursuit  and  capture  of  Gen.
Lee's  army.  He  was  mustered  out  in  September,
1865,  and  declined  a  commission  in  the  regular
army.  Subsequently  Gen.  Griffin  settled  in  Beam -.
N.  II..  ami  served  in  the  state  legislature  in  1866-'8,
in  the  last  two  vears  being  speaker  of  the  house.

GRIFFIS,  William  Elliot. author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Be-  17  Sept..  1848.  He  served  in  the  44th
Pennsylvania  regiment  in  1863.  was  graduated  at
Rutgers  in  1869,  and  in  1870  went  to  Japan  to  or-
ganize schi Nils  there  on  the  American  plan.  He
was  superintendent  of  education  in  the  province
of  Kchizen  in  1*71,  ami  in  lH7*2-'4  held  the  chair
of  physics  in  the  Imperial  university  of  Tokto.  Ib-
is the  only  American  living  that  has  made  the  in-
terior of  Japan  his  residence  and  has  seen  tin-
feudal  system  there  in  operation.  On  his  return
to  this  country  Mr.  (iritlis  studied  ttwologj  at  New
Brunswick.  N.  J.,  and  in  Union  theological  semi-
nary. New  York  city,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1  Ic  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Reformed  church
in  Shenectjnly,  N.  V..  in  1877-86,  and  in  the  lat-
ter year  aooapted  a  call  to  the  Shawmut  Congrega-
tional church,  Huston,  Mass.  I'nion  college  gave
him the  degree  of I).  |).  in 1HH4. I>r.  (iritlis  has

Kabliahed  tin-  -New  Japan  Series"  of  reading-
iN>ks  (."»  vols..  Yokohama.  ls?J);  guides  to  Tokio
and Yokohama  (l*?4i :  "The Mikado's Empire"
l  York.  1878;  5th  ed.,  1887);  "Japan.-  Eairv
■  1"  (8cbenectady,  1880);  "Asiatic  History*
i York.  186  ree,  the  H.-nnit  Nation  "

(1882);  "Gorea,  Without  ami Within  "  (Philadel-


phia. 1886);  and  "Life  of  Matthew  Calbraith
Pen  ral  painph.

I.KHIII  II.  H.ni.l.  man.  b.  in  Nee  V-.rk

i  it>  in  1748;  <!.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.. :»  Aug.,  1788.

Ills early education was  obtained at  h
which  he  weiii to  England,  continued hi*  studies,
and was graduated in Londoi  indent of

medicine. On his  return in 17W, In-  enter.

the practii f  his  profession,  but

to  enter  the ministry. Ha went to England in

1770,  and  vaa  ordained  by  the  bishop  of  I /union
on  l'J  Aug. of  that  year.  The  Venerable artoietT an
pointed  him  missionary  to  Qloncaiter county,  S.  ■>.,

ami  at  the.  clow  of  1771  he  took  charge  of  She|-
burne  parish.  Loudon  county.  \'a.  Ibn-  In-  con-
tinued until  May.  177»'».  when  he  entered  the  army

as  chaplain  to  the  Id  Virginia  regiment. At  the

close  of  1770  he  resigned  his  chaplaincy,  and  be-
came rector  of  Christ  church,  Alexandria.  This
position  he  held  until  his  death.  At  tbeelOM  of
the  lb-volution,  Mr.  (iriffith  was  active  in  aid  of
the  movement  to  raise  the  gpieOOpal  church  out
of  its  depressed  condition,  by  proposing  a  conven-
tion for  organization,  etc.  He  was  a  member  of
the  first  Virginia  convention  of  clerical  and  lay
deputies,  which  met  in  Richmond,  Ya.,  in  May,
I  Ts"i.  and  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the  general
convention  held  in  September  of  that  year,  lb-
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  convention,  and
the  following  year  received  the  degree  «>f  I).  1>.
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  At  the  sec-
ond Virginia  convention  of  his  church  in  May,
1786,  I>r.  Qriffltfa  was  chosen  biehop. It  was.

Beted  that  he  would  accompany  Dr.  White  and
r.  Provoost  to  England  for  consecration,  but  ]*-
cuniary  difficulties  rendered  this  impossible.  In
this  state  of  affairs  he  formally  resigned  his  ap-
pointment at  the  opening  of  the  general  conven-
tion in  1789.  He  was  intimate  with  Washington,
who  was  for  years  his  parishioner.  It  is  said  that
on  the  night  before  the  battle  of  Monmouth,  Dr.
( J ritfith  sought  an  interview  with  Washington,  and
bade  him  beware  of  (b-n.  Charles  Lea.

GRIFFITH,  Robert  Fgleslleld.  physician,  b.
in  Philadelphia.  18  I'd...  1798;  d.  88  June.  ls.Vt.
He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  I'nivcisity
of  Pennsylvania  in  1N20,  and  was  physician  to  the
Philadelphia  board  of  health  in  lKU-'ti.  He  U-
came  professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  University
of  Maryland.  Baltimore,  in  the  latter  year,  and  in
1888  accepted  the  chair  of  medicine  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Virginia.  Dr.  Griffith  became  noted  as  a
botanist  and  conchologist,  and  gave  a  large  collec-
tion of  shells  to  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natu-
ral sciences,  of which he was vice-president in

l840-".'»(». lb-  was  a  member  of  many  other  learned

siN-ieties.  wrote  many  articles  on  Uitany.  oonoholo*
gv,  and  medicine,  and  published  "  Medical  Botany  "

(Philadelphia,  1847). and  "Universal  Formulary"
(1848;  9d  ed..  edited  by  Ro»>ert  P.  Thomas.  M.l)..
1856). He  edited Ohrietiaon's "Dispensatory,

with  annotations;  Taylor  OB  "Medical  Jurispru-
dence" ami  on  "Poisons";  Mil  Iter's  "Principles
Of  Physic"  (1S47):  Ryan's  ami  Chit ty's  works  on
"  Medical  Jurisprudence";  ami  Hallard  and  Gar-
rod's  "  Materia  Medi'-a."  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  had  begun  an  extensive  work  00  OOnohol
ami  had  planned  one  on  "The  H<>tanv  of  the
Bible,"  which  he  was  urged  to  write  by  Prof.  Asa
Grav  and  other  noted  bocanietB.

GRIFFITHS.  John  Willis,  naval  anhit.vt.
b.  in  New  York  city,  <•  Oct,  1868;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y..  -2U  April,  1889.  His  father.  John  Griffiths,
was  a  shipwright  in  New  York.  After  working  at
various  iK-ciipations,  the  1h>v  was  apprenticed  tc


700


GRIFFITTS


GRUALVA


his  father'-  trade,  an<l  when nfawtBM  pMII  of  lgfl

laid  the  lines  of  the  MnU  "Macedonia." In

1888  be  published  in  the  Port-mouth.  Vu..  ••  Advo-

i  nriee  ol  art  id.-  giving  his  ideas  <>n  oara]

architecture,  and  in 1841  gave  in  New  York  and

other  cities  the  Aral  lectures  mi  that  subject  ever

delivered  in  the United  Btatas,  also  opening  »

i  boo!  f<>r  inst ruction  in  ihip-bnildlng. Be

htored  miinv  improvements,  suggested  the  clipper
iii. ..1.1  <>f  the  fast  ships  built  for  the  China  trade,
and.  on  the  <li->  <>v.rv  of  fold  in  California,  and  as
early  M  1835  pn»posed  the  nun  for  the  bow  of
war-ships.  He  made  the  calculations  for  the  Col-
lin- steamers,  and  in  1850  sent  to  the  World's  ex-
hibition in  London  a  steamship  model  that  at-
tra.i.d  much  attention.  In  \HV.S  he  began  t.>  build
f..r  William  Norris.  of  Philadelphia,  a  steamer  in-
tended t<>  cross  the  Atlantic  in  seven  days,  and
though,  from  the  failure  of  Norris,  it  was  not  com-

filete.l  according  to  his  designs,  it  made  the  fastest
ime  on  record  between  Havana  and  New  Orleans.
In  1868  Mr.  Griffith*  l)ecame  part  proprietor  and
co-editor  of  the  "Nautical  Magazine  and  Naval
.Journal,"  but  it  was  suspended  in  1858  on  his  ac-
ceptance of  an  appointment  from  the  government
as  special  naval-constructor  to  build  the  U.  S.  gun-
boat "  Pawnee,"  which  he  fitted  with  twin  screws,
a  drop  bilge,  to  increase  the  stability  at  the  least
expenditure  of  propulsion-power,  and  other  new
features.  The  "  Pawnee  "  was  the  widest  and  light-
est-draught  vessel  of  her  displacement  that  was
ever  built,  and,  although  drawing  only  ten  feet  of
water,  carried  a  frigate's  battery.  In  1864  he  in-
vented a  timber-bending  machine,  which  he  first
used  in  building  the  ship  "  New  Era"  in  Boston  in
1870.  Every  frame  timber  that  required  curvature
was  bent  from  the  straight  log,  and  the  futtocks
were  extended  in  one  stick  from  the  keel  to  the
rail.  The  use  of  iron  in  ship-building  supplanted
this  method.  In  1871-'2  he  erected  improved  tim-
ber-bending machinery  for  the  government,  and  in
1872  built  the  U.  S.  ship  "  Enterprise  "  at  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.  His  machines  received  two  prize
in.  dais  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  1876.  He
was  the  originator  of  the  idea  of  life-boat  steamers,
and  also  showed  a  model  and  plans  for  such  steam-
ers at  the  Centennial.  In  1879-82  Mr.  Griffiths
edited  in  New  York  city  a  weekly  journal  entitled
the  "American  Ship."  Although  many  of  Mr.
Griffiths's  innovations  in ship-building  were  op-

Eosed  by  more  conservative  architects,  experience
as  usually  proved  the  wisdom  of  his  views,  and
no  architect  in  the  United  States  has  been  as  gen-
erally followed  by  young  ship-builders.  Other
inventions  by  him  are  iron  keelsons  for  wooden
ships  (1848) ;  bilge  keels,  to  prevent  rolling  (1863) ;
triple  screws  for  great  speed  (1866);  and  improved
rivets  (1880).  His  most  important  work  is  his
"Treatise  on  Marine  and  Naval  Architecture"
(New  York,  1850 ;  4th  ed.,  2  vols.,  1854),  which  was
republished  in  England,  and  had  a  wide  sale
through  Europe.  Its  publication  did  more  to  ad-
vance American  ship-building  than  any  other  sin-
gle influence,  and  it  brought  its  author  orders  for
models  and  drawings  from  nearly  every  maritime
nation.  He  also  published  "The  Ship-Builder's
Manual"  (2  vols.,  1853);  and  "The  Progressive
Ship- Builder"  (2  vols.,  1875-'6).

GRIFFITTS,  Samuel  Powell,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21  July,  1759 :  d.  there,  12  May,
1826.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1780,  and  after  studying  medicine
abroad  for  three  vears  began  practice  in  Philadel-
phia in  1784.  He  founded  the  Philadelphia  dis-
pensary in  1786,  was  its  physician  for  seven  years,


and  in  1798-1  held  the  chair  of  materia  medica  in
the  I'niver.-ity  of  Pennsylvania.  In  the  pe-tilcnee
..f 1  7'.K!. and the epidemics of l?'.l?-'!>.  [808, and

1805,  he  remained  at  his  post  regardless  of  personal
danger,  and  was  of  great  service.  In  1793-'4  he
was  active  in  relieving  the  destitute  French  emi-
grants from  St.  Domingo,  and  collected  $12,000  to
aid  them.  From  1817  till  his  death  Dr.  (niflitts
was  vice-president  of  the  College  of  physicians,  and
was  also  active  in  establishing,  under  the  auspices
of  the  Philadelphia  yearly  meeting  of  Friend-,  an
institution  for  the  relief  of  mentally  deranged  per-
sons. He  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "Eclectic
Repertory,"  and  on  1  June,  1820,  read  before  a  con-
vention for  the  formation  of  a  pharmacopoeia,
held  in  Washington,  an  "Essay  of  a  Pharmaco-
poeia," of  which  he  was  the  principal  author.

GRIGG,  John,  publisher,  b.  in  Cornwall,  Eng-
land, in  1792;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  2  Aug.,  1864.
He  was  left  an  orphan  at  six,  and  at  twelve  went
to  sea.  After  making  several  voyages  he  spent  a
year  with  relatives  in  Richmond.  Va.  He  removed
to  Warren,  Ohio,  about  1810,  and  was  clerk  of  the
court  there,  but  resigned  in  1815  and  became  super-
intendent of  a  woollen-factory  in  Scott  county.  Ky.
He  entered  a  publishing-house  in  Philadelphia  in
1816,  and  in  1823  began  business  on  his  own  ac-
count, and  was  very  successful.  After  taking  vari-
ous partners  he  retired  in  1850,  with  a  large  for-
tune, and  afterward  became  a  private  banker.  He
gave  constantly  and  largely,  though  without  osten-
tation.— His  son,  John  Warner,  b.  about  1819;  d.
in  Philadelphia  in  August,  1869,  left  $117,000  to
various  charities  in  that  city.

GRIGGS,  Samuel  Chapman,  publisher,  b.  in
Tolland,  Conn.,  20  July,  1819.  He  began  business
as  a  bookseller  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  but  in  1848  went
to  Chicago,  where  he  continued  in  the  same  calling,
and  in  a  few  years  was  at  the  head  of  the  largest
bookselling  business  in  the  northwest.  In  the
great  fire  of  1871  Mr.  Griggs  was  a  heavy  loser,
both  the  bookstore,  with  its  large  stock,  and  his
dwelling-house  on  Michigan  avenue,  being  de-
stroyed. In  1872  he  sold  his  interest  in  the  busi-
ness to  his  partners,  and,  with  John  C.  Buckbee  as
junior  partner,  established  another  publishing-
house.  In  April,  1887,  Mr.  Buckbee  retired  from
the  firm  of  S.  C.  Griggs  &  Co.  The  publications  of
the  house  comprise  more  than  70  works,  literary,
scientific,  and  academical,  some  of  which  have  met
with  a  very  extended  sale,  and  a  large  proportion
of  which  reflect  credit  on  the  publishers.

GRIGSBY,  Hugh  Blair,  historical  scholar,  b.
in  Norfolk,  Va.,  22  Nov.,  1806;  d.  in  Charlotte
county,  Va.,  28  April,  1881.  He  represented  Nor-
folk in  the  legislature  when  scarcely  more  than  a
boy,  and  in  1829-'30  was  a  member  of  the  State  con-
vention with  Thomas  Jefferson,  James  Madison,
and  other  noted  men.  He  subsequently  devoted
himself  to  literature  and  agriculture,  and  was  an
authority  on  the  history  of  Virginia.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Virginia  historical  society,  and  became
in  1871  chancellor  of  William  and  Mary  college,
which  had  given  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1855.
He  contributed  to  the  "Southern  Literary  Messen-
ger," and  wrote  numerous  historical  discourse-,  in-
cluding one  on  the  Virginia  convention  of  1^
delivered  before  the  historical  society  in  1853,  an-
other on  that  of  1776  delivered  at  "William  and
Ma rv  in  1855,  and  "Discourse  on  Hon.  Littleton
W.  Tazewell  "  (Norfolk,  I860).

GRIJALVA,  Juan  de  (gre-hahl'-bah),  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Cuellar,  Spain,  in  the  latter  part
of  the  15th  century ;  d.  in  Nicaragua,  21  Jan..  1087.
Diego  de  Velazquez,  the  governor  of  Cuba,  gave


ORILLKT


GBJ1CKB


him  command  of  a  floti  f  four  ves-

\ ,  atan,  whi(
dors  bad  jiul  d,  and  In-  sailed  fmin  ll.i

May.  1518. Ai'.r  ■  successful  tight  with
Indians  at  the  place  where  Cordova  had  do  i

•  uiui-.l  hit  route  westward,  hasping
njoas  I"  the  land.  The  further  he  advanced  t hi-
more  cultivated  ami populous  t hi- html  ap|ieared,

iiml.  .•mimic  uiif  having  exclaimed  thai  ha  seemed  t"
hi  in  a  nea  Spain,  thai  name  was  given  to  tin-  ru-
tin- oountry.  He  afterward  i  into  the
country  fur  11  short  < i stance,  sacem line  tin-  river
df  Tabasco,  which  is  still  called  after  his  name,
ami  then  continued  his  course  along  the  roust,  lb-
ill  with  the  inhabitants,  ami  learncil  that  In-
was  indebted  for  his  friendly  reception  to  the  or-
n  of  a  |M>werful  monarch,  Hamad  Montezuma.
The  sight  of  such  rich  countries  had  ins|iirc«l  (Jri-

{"alwi  with  tin-  desire  of  taking  pooooOBIOli  of  them,
nit  he  was  restrained  by  the  orders  of  Velasquez,
who  had  expressly  enjoined  him  not  to  make  any
lament.  Nevertheless  he  decided  to  despatch  a
Teasel  to  Culia,  with  an  account  of  his  discoveries
and  with  the  precious  metals  he  had  collected.  Af-
ter rifling  still  farther  to  the  north,  he  returned  to
Havana,  where  he  arrived  on  10  Nov.  Noticing
preparations  in  |  neighboring  barbot  for  a  new  ex-
|M-i|itioii,  he  though]  that  he  was  to  be  given  com-
mand: hut  Velasquez  reproached  him  bitterly  for
not  planting  colonics.  The  command  of  the  new
expedition  waa given  to  Cortes.  (Jrijalva  afterwartl
settled  in  Nicaragua,  and  was  slain  during  an  up-
rising of  the  Indians  in  the  valley  of  I'lancha.

BULLET,  Jean,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France  alNiut  1W0  :  d.  in  (iuiana  atx>ut  lo75.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Jesuit  society,  and  was  su-
|K-rior  of  the  Jamil  house  in  Cayenne  in  1660  when
the  English  Iteeame  masters  of  that  colony,  lb-
did  not  take  refuse  among  the  savages,  like  many
of  his  brethren.  In  1679  a  father-visitor  of  the  so-
ciety arrived  in  Cayenne,  and  appointed  Grillet  to
go  on  a  mission  Hnong  the  Indian  tribes  that  were
most  distant  from  the  sea,  in  order  to  collect  in-
formation about  their  habits  and  state  of  civiliza-
tion, as  well  as  about  the  geography  of  the  coun-
try. (Jrillet  asked  that  Father  Francois  Beobemel
should  lie  hi-  companion,  as  the  latter  thoroughly
understood  the  (Jalibi  language.  The  two  mission-
aries supplied  themselves  with  the  instruments
'necessary  for  taking  observations,  as  well  as  all  the
requisites  for  drawing  a  map  of  their  route,  and  set  I
out,  8B  Jan..  1474  After  many  fatigues,  which
ultimately  ruined  their  health,  they  reached  a  point
4,.'()  miles  southwest  of  Cayenne,  and  found  them-
selves among  a  people  who  had  never  before  seen  a  >
European.  They  returned  on  IT  June.  Father
(Jrillet  sent  a  narrative  of  his  jourtn-y  to  Prance,
accompanied  by  a  letter  dated  |  Sept..  1674.  It
was  published  under  the  title  ••  Journal  du  voy-
age qu'ont  fait  les  iieres  Jean  (Jrillet  el  Francois
heme)  dans  la  (tuyane.  Tan  1674."  It  was  in-
serted in  the  second1  volume  of  OomlKTville's  "  Re-
lation dc  la  riviere  dis  Amazones"  (Paris,  1682).
and  afterward  in  tin-  "  Voyage  around  the  World  "

of  VV 1-  Bogan Amsterdam.  171<»). It contains

the  first  account  of  the  savages  of  (iuiana.

BRIME8,  Bryan,  soldier,  l>.  in Pitt  countv,

•  |  .1.  near  Hear  Creek.  Pitt  00,
N.  C.  It  An-..  iSBft  Bis  grandfather.  William.
was  a  patriot  of  the  Revolution,  Bryan  was
graduated  at  the  Fiiiversity  of  North  Carolina  in
1848, and  engaged  In  planting  until  he  entered  the
Confederate  army  in  1861  as  major  of  the  4th
North  Carolina  regiment,  lb-  served  throughout
the war,  and  attained  the  rank  of  senior  major-


general  in  "  Stonewall  "  Jackson's  corps,  his  divis-
ion making  tan  la-t  charge  al  Appomattox. After

the  war  he  returned  to  agricultural  pun
While  driving  at  nightfall  along  the  public  nMul,
two  null-  from  Ins  residence,  Be  was  fir.. I  npon
and  kilieil.  The  assassin  was  BOVi
but  was  sappoeed  to  be  a  syinitathizcr  with  the
■eansad  ■  a  criminal  suit  in  which  (>.  n.  Crimea
was  an  Iniliiwmnl  witness.

GKI.MhS,  James  Wilson,  statesman, b,ia  I  Jeer-
ing. BJlhmorougfa  oo~  N.  II..  10  <>  i.  in
Burlington,  Iou He  was  irradii..
at  Dartmouth  in  1888,  and  in  tin same  year  went
w«>st  and  licgan  to  practise  law  in  Hurlington.  I
then  in  what  was  known  as  the  "Black  Hawk  Pur-
."  in  the  territory  of  Michigan. From  4  Julv,
till 12  June.  1886,  it  was part of ?<
territory,  and  in IX',7-"*  Mr.  Crimes  was  assistant
librarian  of  the  territorial  library. After  the  for-
mation of  Iowa  territory  he  was  a  delegal
assembly  in  JKW  and 184J1,  and  in 1K.V2.  after  it-
admission  to  the  I'nioii.  was  a  member  Of  the  legis-
lature. He  was  governor  of  the  state  in 1884
having  Wen  sieoted  by  Wblgaand  Free-soil  Damn*

crat-.  and  while  holding  the  office  did  much  to  fos-
ter IV soil  sentiment in  his  state. On  28  Aug.,

1808,  In-  wrote  an  official  letter  to  President  P
protesting  against  the  treatment  of  Iowa  settlers
m  Kansas.  He  was  elected  to  the  I'.  S.  senate  as
a  Republican  in  1808.  and  re-elected  in  1885.  Hi-
first  speech,  delivered  on  HO  Jan.,  1N60,  was  a  reply
to  KoL-rt  Toomlts,  who  had  accused  Iowa  of  pass-
ing laws  in  violation  of  the  rights  of  sfstat  states,
and  after  this  he  s]»oke  frequently,  and  was  known
as  a  hard-working  member  of  the  senate.  In  1861
he  was  a  delegate  to  the  |»eace convention.  He  was
a  member  of  the  committee  on  naval  affairs  from
24  Jan.,  1861,  till  the  end  of  his  service,  and  was  its
chairman  from  December,  1864.  He  strongly  ad-
vocated the  building  of  iron-clads,  and  tin-  aban-
donment of  stone  fortifications  for  harlior defence,
Mr.  (J  rimes  was  noted  forhis  indcix-ndcnceof  char-
acter, which  frequently  brougM  aim  into  conflict
with  his  party  associates  in  the  senate.  Thus,  al-
though he  favored  a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the
war,  he  considered  President  Lincoln's  enlarge-
ment of  the  regular  army  in  lstil  g  danger. .11-
precedent,  and  later  he  opj>osed  a  high  protective
tariff.  In  the  impeachment  trial  of  Andrew  John-
son. Mr.  Crimes  was  one  of  the  few  Republican
senators  who  voted  "not  guilty."  and  this  act
brought  upon  him  a  storm  of  condemnation  which
lasted  but  a  short  time,  owing  SO  the  evident  fact
that  his  vote  had  U-cii  strictly  in  accordance  with
what  he  considered  his  duty.  Mr.  Crimes  had  a
stroke  of  paralysis  in  1869,  and  in  April  of  that
year  went  abroad,  resigning  his  seat  in  the  senate
OB  0  Dec He  returned  m  S-ptemU-r.  l*71.at>par-

entry  Improved,  bul  died  soon  afterward  of  heart

disease.  Mr.  Crimes  bunded  a  professorship  at
Iowa  college,  at  Grinnell.  and  gave  money  for
scholarship-" then  and at Dartmouth, receiving

thedegn f  LL.D.  from  both  ooUegea He  also

established  a  free  public  librarv  in  Burlington,
Iowa. See"  Life  of  James  W.  (J rimes,"  bv  William

Salter  fWewYork,  181

MtlMKK. John Faucheraud, jurist, b. in

South  Carolina.  10  Dec.,  1788:  d.  in  Long  Branch,
N.  .1.,  !•  Aug..  1818.  He  studied  law  in  London,
and  was  one  of  the  Americans  there  who  petitioned
George  III.  against  the  measures  that  infringed
on  colonial  rights. He  returned  hoine  at  the  ne-

S  lining of hostilities, and fought through the
■  volution  as  lieutenant -colonel  of  artillery, lb-
waa  elected  a  judge  of  the  superior  court in !.


708


i.lil.MKK


GKIMSIIAW


ami  in  1799  la-came  senior  associate.  an<l  thus  vir-
tually chief  justice.  B*  WUI  *h»  frequently  a
member  of  the  legislature,  maker  of  1 1*«-  doom
,n  i?^">  '<'..  end  ■  member  <»f  the  oonvantion  of
1788  thai  adopted  the  Federal constitution.  Judge
Grimke,  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  liecame
involv.il  in  much  litigation,  which  made  him  un-
popular. Owing  to  this,  and  to  some  batty  action

00  his  part,  he  was  impeached  before  the  legisla-
ture in  1X11,  but  the  charges  were  not  sustained.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  LI*  D.  in  1789.
He  published  "  Kevised  Kdition  of  the  Laws  of
South  Carolina  to  1789,"  "  Law  of  Kxecutors  for
Soiit  h  ( "arolina,"  "  I 'robite  Directory,"  "  Public  Law
of  South  Carolina"  (Philadelphia,  1TOM,  and  "Duty
of  Jnatioeeof  the  Peace" (2d  ecL,  1 71)0). — His  son,
Thomas  Smith,  reformer,  b.  in  Charleston.  S.  C,
86  Sept.,  1786;  d.  near  Columbus,  Ohio.  11  Oct.,
I8M,  was  graduated  in  1807  at  Yale,  and  dur-
ing one  of  his  vacations  travelled  with  President
Timothy  Dwight.  Abandoning  his  intention  of
studying  for  the  ministry,  he  became  a  lawyer  in
deference  to  his  father's" wishes,  and  attained  dis-
tinction at  the  bar  and  in  politics.  On  17  March,
1827,  he  advocated,  in  an  address  before  the  Bar
association  of  South  Carolina,  the  codification  of
the  laws  of  that  state.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1820-'30,  and  in  1828  made  a  speech
in  support  of  the  general  government  on  the  tariff
question.  One  of  his  finest  efforts  was  his  argu-
ment on  the  South  Carolina  test-oath  question  in
March,  1834.  He  was  a  pioneer  in  the  temperance
cause,  standing  at  first  almost  alone  in  that  work,
and  one  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  the
American  peace  society.  He  aided  these  and  other
reforms  both  pecuniarily  and  by  his  writings,  and
his  public  addresses  in  their  favor  won  him  much
respect  and  sympathy.  He  advocated  absolute
non-resistance,  holding  that  even  defensive  warfare
is  wicked,  and  his  ideas  met  with  much  ridicule.
When  asked  what  he  would  do  if  he  were  mayor
of  Charleston,  and  a  piratical  vessel  should  at-
tack the  city,  he  is  said  to  have  replied  that  he
would  marshal  the  Sunday-school  children  in  pro-
cession, and  lead  them  to  meet  the  invader.  Though
a  fine  classical  scholar,  he  opposed  both  classics
and  mathematics  as  elements  of  an  education,  and
urged  the  adoption  of  more  extensive  religious
teaching.  He  was  also  one  of  the  earliest  advo-
cates of  reform  in  spelling,  which  he  practically
carried  out  in  his  later  writings,  making  not  only
the  changes  advocated  by  Noah  Webster,  but
others  since  advised  by  the  Spelling-reform  associa-
tion, though  not  generally  adopted,  such  as  the
omission  of  final  silent  e.  In  October,  1834.  he
delivered  an  address  on  "  American  Education  "
before  the  Western  literary  institute  at  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  and  died  suddenly  while  on  his  way  home.
He  was  much  beloved,  even  by  those  who  did  not
agree  with  his  ideas. He  published  "  Addresses  on


Science.  Kducatioii.  and  Literature  "  (New  Haven.
1881).  See  ■  -  Eulogy"  of  him. by Jamee  II.  Smith
(Charleston,  lSoo). — Another  son.  Frederick,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  1  Sept'.,  1791;  d.  in  Chilli-
cot  he.  Ohio,  8  March.  lsu;j,  was  graduated  at  Vale
in  1810,  and  removed  to  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  lsis.
He  was  for  some  time  presiding  Judge  of  tin  Ohio
court  of  common  pleas,  and  in  1886-'4S  ana  I
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  resigning,  in  the
latter  year,  to  devote  his  time  to  philosophical
-indies.  He  published  an  essay  on  "  Ancient  and
Modern  Literature  "  and  a  work  on  the  "Nature
and  Tendencies  of  Free  Institutions  "  (Cincinnati,
1848).  His  works,  with  his  latest  revisions,  w .•re-
published collectively  after  his  death  (1*71). — A
daughter,  Sarah  Moore,  reformer,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  6  Nov.,  1792:  d.  in  Hyde  Park.  N.  V.,
88  Dec,  1873.  After  the  death  o'f  her  father,  she
and  her  sister  Angelina,  afterward  Mrs.  Theodore
D.  Weld  (g.  v.),  having  long  been  convinced  of  the
evils  of  slavery,  emancipated  their  negroes  and
left  their  home.  In  her  own  account  of  the  event.
Miss  Grimke  says:  "As  I  left  my  native  state
on  account  of  slavery,  deserted  the  home  of  my
fathers  to  escape  the  sound  of  the  driver's  lana
and  the  shrieks  of  the  tortured  victims,  I  would
gladly  bury  in  oblivion  the  recollections  of  those
scenes  with  which  I  have  been  familiar.  But  it
may  not,  can  not  be  ;  they  come  over  my  memory
like  gory  spectres,  and  implore  me  with  resistless

j  power  in  the  name  of  humanity,  for  the  sake  of
the  slave-holder  as  well  as  the  slave,  to  bear  witness

I  to  the  horrors  of  the  southern  prison-house."  Miss
Grimke  went  to  Philadelphia  in  1821,  and  became
one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  Anti-slavery
society,  also  advocating  women's  rights.  She  lec-
tured in  New  England,  and  afterward  made  her
home  with  the  Weld  family,  teaching  in  their
school,  which  was  established  in  Belleville,  N.  J.,
in  1840. She  published  in  1827  an  "  Epistle  to

j  the  Clergy  of  the  Southern  States  " — an  effective
anti-slavery  document — and  afterward  wrote  "  Let-
ters on  the  Condition  of  Woman  and  the  Equality
of  the  Sexes  "  (Boston,  1838).  She  also  translated
Lamartine's  "Joan  of  Arc"  (1867).
I.KI  MSII A  W.  William,  author,  b.  in  Green-

i  castle,  Ireland,  in  1782;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
1852.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1815,
and  lived  many  years  in  Philadelphia.  Among  his
works  were  an  "  Etymological  Dictionary  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1821) ;  "  Gentlemen's  Lexicon,"  and  "  La-
dies' Lexicon  "  (1829) :  "  Merchants'  Law  Book,"
"  Form  Book,"  "American  Chesterfield,"  "  Life  of
Napoleon,"  and  school  histories  of  England,  France,
Greece,  the  United  States,  Rome,  South  America,
and  Mexico,  with  questions  and  keys.  He  also
published  revised  editions  of  Goldsmith's  histories
of  Rome  and  Greece,  of  Ramsay's  "  Life  of  Wash-
ington," and  of  Baine's  "History  of  the  Wars
Growing  out  of  the  French  Revolution."


END  OK VOLUME  II.
